IIMIH  I  illiuillui"tU I U" 


(WWJWwwtKgtJ^^-jwffiitmga^^^ 


-Mum 


mmmtmmmmmmtmnmm]  \msmsf  as? 


1 


M*MHM«M*M»M**WM«*«MtMM 


\ 

\ 

\ 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2008  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


http://www.archive.org/details/antenicenefather07robe 


THE 


ANTE-NICENE  FATHERS. 


TRANSLATIONS    OF 


The   Writings  of  the  Fa  titers  down  to  A.D.  J  2^. 
THE     REV.    ALEXANDER     ROBERTS,     D.D., 

AND 

JAMES    DONALDSON,    LL.D., 

EDITORS. 

AMERICAN  REPRINT  OF  THE  EDINBURGH  EDITION. 


REVISED    AND    CHRONOLOGICALLY    ARRANGED,    WITH    BRIEF    PREFACES    AND 

OCCASIONAL    NOTES, 

BY 

A.   CLEVELAND    COXE,   D.D. 


VOLUME    VII. 

LACTANT/US,  VENANTIUS,  ASTERIUS,   VICTORINUS,  DIONYSIUS,  APOSTOLIC  TEACHING 
AND  CONSTITUTIONS,  HOMILY,  AND  LITURGIES. 


AUTHORIZED    EDITION. 


BUFFALO: 
THE    CHRISTIAN    LITERATURE    COMPANY. 

1886. 


Copyright,  i8S6,  by 
THE   CHRISTIAN   LITERATURE   COMPANY. 


ELECTROTYPED    AND     PRINTED 

BY    RANU,    AVERY,    ANU    COMTANY, 

BOSTON. 


FATHERS  OF  THE  THIRD  AND  FOURTH  CENTURIES: 


LACTANTIUS,  VENANTIUS,  ASTERIUS,  VICTORINUS,  DIONYSIUS,  APOSTOLIC  TEACHING 
AND  CONSTITUTIONS,  HOMILY,  AND  LITURGIES. 


AMERICAN  EDITION. 

CHRONOLOGICALLY   ARRANGED,  WITH    NOTES,   PREFACES,   AND   ELUCIDATIONS, 

BY 

A.  CLEVELAND   COXE,  D.D. 


The  NicENE  Council. 


43?4S0 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE. 


The  genius  of  Lactantius  suffers  a  sad  transformation  when  unclothed  of  his  vernacular  and 
stripped  of  the  idiomatic  graces  of  his  style.  But  the  intelligent  reader  will  be  sure  to  compare 
this  translation  with  the  Latinity  of  the  original,  and  to  recur  to  it  often  for  the  enjoyment  of  its 
charming  rhetoric,  and  of  the  high  sentiment  it  so  nobly  enforces  and  adorns.  This  volume  will  be 
the  favourite  of  the  series  with  many.  The  writings  of  the  Christian  Tully  alone  make  up  more 
than  half  of  its  contents  ;  and  it  is  supremely  refreshing  to  reach,  at  last,  an  author  who  chroni- 
cles the  triumph  of  the  Gospel '  over  "  Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate ;  "  over  the  heathen  in  their 
"rage,"  and  the  people  in  their  "vain  imaginings ;  "  over  "the  kings  of  the  earth  who  stood  up, 
and  the  rulers  who  were  gathered  together  against  the  Lord  and  against  His  Christ." 

I  love  the  writings  of  Lactantius,  and  two  of  his  sayings  are  always  uppermost  when  I  recall 
his  name.     They  touch  me  like  plaintive  but  inspiring  music.     Let  me  quote  them  entire  :  ^  — 

1.  "Si  vita  est  optanda  sapienti  profecto  nullam  aliam  ob  causam  vivere  optaverim,  quam  ut 
aliquid  efficiam  quod  vita  dignum  sit." 

2.  "Satis  me  vixisse  arbitrabor,  et  ofificium  hominis  implesse,  si  labor  meus  aliquos  homines 
ab  erroribus  liberatos,  ad  iter  coeleste  direxerit." 

The  Minor  Writers  to  be  found  in  this  volume  are  not  unworthy  of  their  place.  They  are 
chiefly  valuable  as  an  appendix  to  preceding  volumes,^  and  illustrative  of  their  contents. 

But  this  series  is  enriched  beyond  its  original  by  the  Brycnnios  Mayiuscripf  and  the  com- 
pleted form  of  the  pseudo-  Clementine  Epistle,  edited  by  Professor  Riddle.  The  same  hand  has 
annotated  the  Apostolic  Constitutions,  so  called ;  and  the  student  has  in  his  brief  but  learned 
notes  all  the  light  which  has  been  shed  by  modern  scholarship  on  these  invaluable  relics  of 
antiquity,  since  the  days  of  the  truly  illustrious  Bishop  Beveridge.  These,  and  tlie  liturgical 
pseudepigraphic  treasures  of  early  Christianity  I  have  gathered  here,  to  distinguish  them  from  tlie 
mere  Apocrypha,  which  will  largely  make  up  the  one  remaining  volume  of  the  series. 

Of  the  Liturgies,  I  have  said  what  seemed  necessary  as  an  introduction,  in  the  proper  place.* 
They  are  debased  by  mediaeval  alloy.  In  their  English  dress,  and  in  the  nudity  of  their  appear- 
ance, without  adequate  notes  and  elucidations,  they  are  therefore  far  from  attractive  specimens  of 
liturgical  literature.  But  it  would  have  been  beyond  my  province  to  say  much  where  the 
original  editors  have  said  nothing,  and  I  have  contented  myself  with  such  comments  only  as 
seemed  requisite  to  remind  the  student  how  to  "take  forth  the  jDrecious  from  the  vile." 

June,  1886.  ^'   ^-   ^' 

'  Compare  Merivale,  Convcrsio7i  of  the  Roman  Empire,  p.  8,  ed.  New  York,  1866. 

-  De  Opificio  Dei,  cap.  xxi.  p.  395,  ed.  Basil,  1521. 

3  Thus  the  Apocalyptic  comments  of  Victorinus  must  be  compared  with  those  of  Commodian  and  Hippolytiis,  Dior.ysius  with  his 
namesake  of  Alexandria,  Asterius  with  Caius,  etc. 

*  Compare  Canon  Wescott,  The  Historic  Faith,  Short  Lectures,  etc.,  pp.  185-202,  237  (and  same  author's  Risen  Lord,  etc.,  p.  28), 
London,  1883. 


CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  VII. 


PAGE 


I.     LACTANTIUS.     The  Divine  Institutes 9 

The  Epitome  of  the  Divine  Institutes 224 

A  Treatise  on  the  Anger  of  God 259 

On  the  Workmanship  of  God,  or  the  Formation  of  Man      .        .         .  281 

Of  the  Manner  in  which  the  Persecutors  died 301 

Fragments  of  Lactantius. 323 

The  Phcenix 324 

A  Poem  on  the  Passion  of  the  Lord 327 

II.    VENANTIUS.     Poem  on  Easter 329 

III.  ASTERIUS  URBANUS.     Extant  Writings 335 

IV.  VICTORINUS.     On  the  Creation  of  the  World 341 

Commentary  on  the  Apocalypse  of  the  Blessed  John     .         .         .         .  344 

V.     DIONYSIUS   OF   ROME.     Against  the  Sabellians 365 

VI.     THE   TEACHING   OF  THE   TWELVE   APOSTLES 369 

VII.     CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES 3S5 

VIII.     THE    HOMILY   ASCRIBED   TO    CLEMENT 509 

IX.     EARLY   LITURGIES.     The  Liturgy  of  James 537 

The  Liturgy  of  Mark 551 

The  Liturgy  of  the  Blessed  Apostles 561 


Vll 


LACTANTIUS. 


[TRANSLATED   BY    THE   REV.    WILLIAM    FLETCHER,   D.D.] 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE 

TO 

LACTANTIUS. 


[a.d.  260-330.]  Reaching,  at  last,  the  epoch  of  Constantine,  perhaps  the  reader  will  share 
my  own  feelings,  as  those  of — 

"  One  who  long,  in  thickets  and  in  brakes 
Entangled,  winds  now  this  way,  and  now  that, 
His  devious  course  uncertain,  seeking  home, 
But  finds  at  last  a  greensward  smooth  and  large, 
Courageous,  and  refreshed  for  future  toil." 

How  strange  it  seems,  after  three  centuries  since  John  the  Baptist  suffered,  to  gain  a  moment 
when  kings  are  not  actually  persecuting  Christ  in  His  servants  ! 

How  marvellous  the  change  must  have  been  in  the  experience  of  the  primitive  faithful ;  the 
Roman  Emperor  not  ashamed  of  Jesus,  and  setting  up  the  cross  on  the  standards  of  his  legions  ! 
TertuUian,  De  Fuga,  and  the  troubles  of  Cyprian  about  The  Lapsed,  are  matters  of  the  past.  As 
in  a  moment,  God  has  changed  the  world  for  His  people,  and  their  perils  become  as  suddenly 
reversed.  The  world's  favour  begins  to  be  the  trial  of  faith,  as  its  hatred  before.  The  mild  con- 
templative attitude  of  the  Church  at  this  period  is  something  surprising.  It  accepts  with  little 
exultation  this  miracle  of  the  Master ;  but  so  long  has  it  been  habituated  to  persecution,  that  it 
finds  much  of  its  discipline,  and  not  less  of  its  prevailing  spirit,  neutralized  by  its  very  triumph. 
No  more  the  martyr's  heroic  testimony  and  his  crown  beyond  this  life ;  no  such  call  for  the 
celibate  as  had  been  enforced  before  in  tomes  of  the  Christian  literature ;  and  what  need  now  of 
Antony's  invitation  to  the  desert  and  the  cell  ?  But,  on  the  other  hand,  these  ascetic  forms  of 
heroic  faith  were  all  that  were  now  left  to  minister  to  the  martyr-spirit,  and  to  perpetuate  the 
habits  enforced  upon  the  early  believers.  The  hermitage  and  the  monastery  assumed  a  new 
attractiveness,  and  became  dear  to  sentiment,  as  to  principle  before.  We  must  not  be  surprised, 
then,  at  the  tendencies  of  the  age  now  rapidly  developed ;  but  let  us  rejoice  for  a  moment  in  the 
times  of  refreshing  from  the  Lord  now  at  last  vouchsafed  to  that  "  little  flock  "  to  which  He  had 
promised  the  kingdom. 

The  "  conversion  of  Constantine,"  as  it  is  called,  introduced  the  most  marvellous  revolution  in 
human  empire,  in  practical  thought,  and  in  the  laws  and  manners  of  mankind,  ever  known  in  the 
history  of  the  world.  It  is  amazing  how  little  the  men  of  the  epoch  itself  glorified  their  own 
introduction  to  "  marvellous  light,"  and  how  very  little  the  Church  has  left  us,  to  tell  the  story  of 
its  emotions  when  first  it  found  itself  at  rest  from  fiery  persecutions,  or  when  came  forth  from  the 
Emperor  the  Edict  of  Milan  for  the  legal  observance  of  "  the  Day  of  the  Sun."  '  What  a  day 
that  Easter  was,  when,  emerging  from  the  catacombs  and  other  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth,  the 

Church  herself  seemed  as  one  risen  from  the  dead  ! 

— — — 1 

'  He  borrows  from  Justin,  vol.  i.  note  i,  p.  186. 


INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE. 


We  may  be  sure  there  were  tears  of  joy  and  warm  embraces  among  kindred  long  torn  asunder 
by  their  common  exposures  to  fire  and  sword.  We  cannot  imagine,  indeed,  all  that  was  in  the 
hearts  of  those  Christian  families  that  now  kept  holyday  together  in  the  face  of  the  world,  and 
sang  fearlessly  in  holy  places  their  anthem,  "  Christ  is  risen  from  the  dead."  But  a  moment's 
thought  we  ought  to  give,  as  we  pass  into  a  stage  of  history  entirely  fresh  and  new,  to  the  power 
of  God  thus  manifested.  The  miracle  thus  wrought  by  the  ascended  Christ  needs  no  aid  from 
the  supposed  "  vision  of  Constantine  "  to  make  it  a  supernatural  exhibition  of  His  glory  who  is 
"  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords." 

Arnobius  wrote  to  the  minds  of  perplexed  Pilates  asking  "  What  is  truth  "  in  a  new  spirit,  and 
not  indisposed  to  wash  their  own  hands  of  the  blood  of  Jesus,  though  not  prepared  to  believe  and 
be  baptized.  His  pupil  finds  a  better  sort  of  Pilate  in  the  Emperor  and  in  his  period.  Constan- 
tine is  a  pagan  still  at  heart,  but  he  is  convinced  of  the  truth  that  Christ  has  a  kingdom  "  not  of 
this  world ;  "  and  he  must  have  this  credit,  above  the  Antonines,  that  he  recognised  in  the  Chris- 
tians not  only  his  best  and  most  loyal  subjects,  but  men  of  a  character  altogether  superior '  to 
that  of  the  heathen,  who  had  so  long  been  the  councillors  of  the  empire.  He  was  one,  also, 
w-ho  accepted  "  the  logic  of  events,"  and  who  came  to  terms  with  the  inevitable  in  time  to  turn 
it  to  his  own  advantage. 

I  think  Constantine  had  read  the  Apologies  addressed  to  the  Antonines  ^  by  Justin  Martyr, 
and  was  at  first  disposed  only  to  accept  the  plea  for  Christians  so  far  forth  as  Justin  had  urged  it. 
Going  so  far,  he  was  led  beyond  his  positive  convictions  to  measures  of  policy  which  identified 
him  with  the  Church.  That  the  Church  was  distrustful  of  him,  and  doubted  how  long  the  impe- 
rial favour  might  be  relied  upon,  is  also  apparent.  This  doubt  accounts,  in  some  degree,  for  the 
great  moderation  of  the  Church  in  accepting  benefits  from  him,  and  in  withholding  notes  of 
triumph.  She  instinctively  foresaw  Julians  in  the  way,  and  expected  reactionary  periods.  She 
forbore  to  baptize  the  Emperor,  and  encouraged  his  disposition  to  postpone.  It  was  as  when 
"  the  wolf  of  Benjamin  "  was  introduced  to  the  disciples  :  "  they  were  afraid  of  him,  and  believed 
not  that  he  was  a  disciple." 

Lactantius,  moved,  perhaps,  by  Hosius  or  Eusebius,  undertakes  the  instruction  of  the 
Emperor,  while  seeming  only  to  copy  the  example  of  Justin  writing  to  Antoninus  Pius.  The 
Institutes,  it  is  true,  had  been  begun  at  an  earlier  date ;  but  he  economizes,  for  a  new  purpose, 
the  material,  in  which,  perhaps,  he  had  only  purposed  to  follow  up  the  work  of  his  teacher,  in 
language  better  fitted  to  the  polite,  for  refuting  heathenism.  I  cannot  doubt  that  he  aimed,  in 
pure  Latinity,  to  win  the  Emperor  and  his  court  to  a  deeper  and  purer  conviction  of  divine  truth  : 
to  more  than  a  feeble  and  possibly  superstitious  idea  that  it  was  useless  to  contend  with  it,  and 
that  the  gods  of  the  empire  were  impotent  to  protect  themselves  against  Christian  progress  and 
its  masterly  exposures  of  their  shame  and  nothingness. 

In  language  which  has  given  him  the  title  of  the  Christian  Cicero,  Lactantius  employs  Cicero 
himself  as  a  defender  of  the  truth ;  correcting  him,  indeed,  and  overruling  his  mistakes,  rebuking 
his  pusillanimity,  and  justly  censuring  him,  ( i )  in  philosophy,  for  declaring  it  no  rule  of  action, 
however  ennobling  its  precepts ;  and  (2)  in  religion,  for  not  venturing  to  profess  conclusions  to 
which  his  reasonings  necessarily  tend.  All  this  is  admirably  adapted  to  carry  on  the  work  of 
Christian  Fathers  and  Apologists  under  the  change  of  times.  He  and  Arnobius  furnish  but  a 
supplement  to  the  real  teachers  of  the  Church,  and  are  not  to  be  always  depended  on  in  state- 
ments of  doctrine.  They  write  like  earnest  converts,  but  not  like  theologians ;  yet,  although  their 
loose  expressions  are  often  inconsistent  one  with  another,  it  is  manifest  that  their  design  is  to 
support  orthodoxy  as  it  had  been  defined  by  abler  expounders.  I  think  the  large  respect  which 
Lactantius  pays  to  the  testimony  of  the  Sibyls  was  addressed  to  the  class  with  which  he  had  to 
deal.     Constantine  was  greatly  influenced  by  such  testimonies,  if  we  may  judge  from  his  own 

'  e.g.,  Theonas,  vol.  vi.  p.  158.  *  While  Lactantius  was  tutor  to  his  son. 


INTRODUCTORY    NOTICE. 


liberal  quotations '  and  his  comments  on  the  Pollio  of  Virgil,  to  which,  as  a  Christian  oracle,  our 
author  may  have  introduced  him.  In  short,  the  day  had  come  in  which  it  could  no  longer  be 
said  with  strict  propriety  of  phrase,  "Not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  are  called;  "  and  Lac- 
tantius  accepted,  as  his  mission,  the  enforcement,  before  such  a  class,  of  despised  truths  which 
the  great  had  persecuted  in  vain  for  centuries.  He  drew  them  thus  to  the  conclusion  that  God 
had  indeed  "  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  wise,  and  the  weak  things  of 
the  world  to  confound  the  things  which  are  mighty ;  and  base  things  of  the  world,  and  things 
which  are  despised,  hath  God  chosen,  yea,  and  things  which  are  not,  to  bring  to  nought  things 
that  are."  Such  was  the  prophecy  of  St.  Paul,  and  the  Labarum  uplifted  by  Caesar's  legions 
proclaimed  the  fulfilment. 

I  have  little  doubt  that  Lactantius  was  of  heathen  parentage,  and  was  converted  late  in  life. 
To  his  eternal  honour  he  was  not  a  "  fair-weather  Christian,"  but  boldly  confessed  the  faith  amid 
the  fires  of  the  last  and  most  terrible  of  the  great  persecutions.  Its  probable  date  suggests  that 
his  treatise  on  the  persecutors  may  have  been  a  far-reaching  effort  to  dissuade  the  Caesars  of  a 
later  age  from  trying  to  restore  "  the  gods  to  Latium."  I  confess  my  own  partiality  to  our  author, 
and  the  interest  with  which  his  writings  continue  to  impress  me,  even  now.  In  youth  ( Consule 
Planco)  I  brought  to  his  pages  an  enthusiastic  appreciation  of  the  genius  which  had  adorned  the 
very  dawn  of  Christian  civilization  by  works  of  literary  merit  not  inferior  to  those  of  the  Augustan 
age.  The  crabbed  Latinity  of  Tertullian  has  charms,  indeed,  of  its  own  sort :  it  was  the  shaggy 
raiment  of  the  ascetic  and  the  confessor,  "  always  bearing  about  in  his  own  body  the  dying  of  the 
Lord  Jesus."  It  befitted  the  age  and  the  man,  and  those  awful  realities  with  which  Christians  had 
then  to  deal.  Not  words,  but  things,  were  their  one  concern.  It  is  pleasant  to  find,  however, 
that  Christianity  is  not  incapable  of  meeting  all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men ;  and  Lactantius  was 
doubtless  the  instrument  of  Providence  in  bearing  the  testimony  of  Jesus,  "  even  before  kings," 
in  language  which  promised  to  Roman  letters  the  new  and  commanding  development  imparted  to 
its  language  by  Christianity,  which  has  made  it  imperishable,  and  more  truly  "  eternal "  than 
Rome  itself. 

The  following  is  the  Introductory  Notice  of  the  reverend  translator :  ^  — 

Lactantius  has  always  held  a  very  high  place  among  the  Christian  Fathers,  not  only  on 
account  of  the  subject-matter  of  his  writings,  but  also  on  account  of  the  varied  erudition,  the 
sweetness  of  expression,  and  the  grace  and  elegance  of  style,  by  which  they  are  characterized. 
It  appears,  therefore,  more  remarkable  that  so  little  is  known  with  certainty  respecting  his  personal 
history.  We  are  unable  to  fix  with  precision  either  the  place  or  time  of  his  birth,  and  even  his 
name  has  been  the  subject  of  much  discussion.  It  is  known  that  he  was  a  pupil  of  Arnobius, 
who  gave  lectures  in  rhetoric  at  Sicca  in  Africa.  Hence  it  has  been  supposed  that  Lactantius  was 
a  native  of  Africa,  while  others  have  maintained  that  he  was  born  in  Italy,  and  that  his  birthplace 
probably  was  Firmium,  on  the  Adriatic.  He  was  probably  born  about  the  middle  of  the  third 
century,  since  he  is  spoken  of  as  far  advanced  in  life  about  a.d.  315.  He  is  usually  denominated 
"  Lucius  Caelius  Firmianus  Lactantius ;  "  but  the  name  Cscilius  is  sometimes  substituted  for 
Cselius,  and  it  is  uncertain  whether  Firmianus  is  a  family  name  or  a  local  ^  designation.  Some 
have  even  supposed  that  he  received  the  name  of  Lactantius  from  the  milky  softness  of  his  style. 

He  attained  to  great  eminence  as  a  teacher  of  rhetoric,  and  his  fame  far  outstripped  the 
reputation  of  his  master  Arnobius.  Such,  indeed,  was  his  celebrity,  that  he  was  invited  by 
the  Emperor  Diocletian  to  settle  at  Nicomedia,  and  there  practise  his  art.  H^  appears,  however, 
to  have  met  with  so  little  success  in  that  city,  as  to  have  been  reduced  to  extreme  indigence. 
Abandoning   his   profession  as  a  pleader,  he  devoted  himself  to  literary  composition.     It  was 

'  See  his  Address  to  the  Assembly  of  ike  Saints,  preserved  by  Eusebius. 

2  William  Fletcher,  D.D.,  head  master  of  Queen  Elizabeth's  School,  Wimborne,  Dorset. 

3  i.e.,  of  Firmium. 


INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE. 


probably  at  this  period  that  he  embraced  the  Christian  faith,  and  we  may  perhaps  be  justified  in 
supposing  some  connection  between  his  poverty  and  his  change  of  rehgion/  He  was  afterwards 
called  to  settle  in  Gaul,  probably  about  a.d.  315,  and  the  Emperor  Constantine  entrusted  to  him 
the  education  of  his  son  Crispus.     He  is  beheved  to  have  died  at  Treves  about  a.d.  325. 

His  principal  work  is  The  Christian  Institutions,  or  an  Introduction  to  True  Religion,  in 
seven  books,  designed  to  supersede  ^  the  less  complete  treatises  of  Minucius  Felix,  Tertullian,  and 
Cj'prian.  In  these  books,  each  of  which  has  a  distinct  title,  and  constitutes  a  separate  essay,  he 
demonstrates  the  falsehood  of  the  pagan  religion,  shows  the  vanity  of  the  heathen  philosophy, 
and  undertakes  the  defence  of  the  Christian  religion  against  its  adversaries.  He  also  sets  forth 
the  nature  of  righteousness,  gives  instructions  concerning  the  true  worship  of  God,  and  treats 
of  the  punishment  of  the  wicked,  and  the  reward  of  the  righteous  in  everlasting  happiness. 

To  the  Institutions  is  appended  an  epitome  dedicated  to  Pentadius.  The  authorship  of  this 
abridgment  has  been  questioned  in  modern  times ;  but  it  is  expressly  assigned  to  Lactantius  by 
Hieronymus.  The  greater  part  of  the  work  was  wanting  in  the  earlier  editions,  and  it  was  not 
until  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  that  it  was  discovered  nearly  entire.^ 

The  treatise  on  The  Anger  of  God  is  directed  mainly  against  the  tenets  of  the  Epicureans  and 
Stoics,  who  maintained  that  the  deeds  of  men  could  prcfduce  no  emotions  of  pleasure  or  anger  in 
the  Deity.  Lactantius  holds  that  the  love  of  the  good  necessarily  implies  the  hatred  of  evil ;  and 
that  the  tenets  of  these  philosophers,  as  tending  to  overthrow  the  doctrine  of  future  rewards 
and  punishments,  are  subversive  of  the  principles  of  true  religion. 

In  the  treatise  on  The  Workmanship  of  God,  or  The  Formation  of  Man,  the  author  dwells 
upon  the  wonderful  construction  of  the  human  frame,  and  the  adaptation  of  means  to  ends  therein 
displayed,  as  proofs  of  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God.  The  latter  part  of  the  book  contains 
speculations  concerning  the  nature  and  origin  of  the  soul. 

In  the  treatise  ^  on  the  Deaths  of  Persecutors,  an  argument  for  the  truth  of  the  Christian 
religion  is  derived  from  the  fact,  that  those  emperors  who  had  been  most  distinguished  as  perse- 
cutors of  the  Christians,  were  special  objects  of  divine  vengeance. 

To  these  treatises  are  usually  appended  some  poetical  works  which  have  been  attributed  to 
Lactantius,  but  it  is  very  questionable  whether  any  of  them  were  really  written  by  him. 

The  poem  on  the  Phoenix  appears  to  be  of  a  comparatively  modern  date. 

That  on  Easter^  is  beheved  to  have  been  composed  by  Venantius  Honorianus  Clementianus 
Fortunatus  in  the  sixth  century. 

The  poem  on  the  Passion  of  the  Lord,  though  much  admired  both  in  its  language  and  stj'le 
of  thought,  bears  the  impress  of  a  later  age.^ 

There  is  also  a  collection  of  A  Hundred  Enigmas,''  which  has  been  attributed  to  Lactantius ; 
but  there  is  good  reason  to  suppose  that  they  are  not  the  production  of  his  pen.  Heumann 
endeavoured  to  prove  that  Symposium  is  the  title  of  the  work,  and  that  no  such  person  as 
Symposius  ^  ever  existed.  But  this  opinion  is  untenable.  It  is  true  that  Hieronymus  speaks  of 
Lactantius  as  the  author  of  a  Symposium,  but  there  are  no  grounds  for  supposing  that  the  work 
was  of  a  light  and  trifling  character :  it  was  probably  a  serious  dialogue. 

The  style  of  Lactantius  has  been  deservedly  praised  for  the  dignity,  elegance,  and  clearness 

'  [I  see  no  force  in  this  suggestion.     Quite  the  reverse.     He  could  not  then  anticipate  anything  but  worse  sufferings.] 

*  [To  supplement,  rather.] 

3  In  an  ancient  MS.  at  Turin. 

*  Lord  Hailes'  translation  has  been  adopted  in  the  present  edition, 
J  Dt  Paschd. 

*  It  has  an  allusion  to  the  adoration  of  the  cross.  [Hence  must  be  referred  to  a  period  subsequent  to  the  pseudo-council  called 
Deutero-Nicene.  Comp.  vol.  iv.  note  6,  p.  igi;  and  see  Smith's  History  of  the  Christian  Church  in  the  First  Ten  Centuries,  vol.  i. 
p.  451,  ed.  Harpers,  New  York.] 

">  The  Enigmas  have  not  been  included  in  the  present  translation,  for  the  reason  mentioned. 

8  The  title  prefixed  to  them  in  the  mss.  is  Firmianus  Symposius  (written  also  Symphosius)  Caelius.  See  Dr.  Smith's  Dictionary  of 
Biography,  under  the  names  Firmianus  and  Lactantius, 


INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE. 


of  expression  by  which  it  is  characterized,  and  which  have  gained  for  him  the  appellation  of  the 
Christian  Cicero.  His  writings  everywhere  give  evidence  of  his  varied  and  extensive  erudition, 
and  contain  much  valuable  information  respecting  the  systems  of  the  ancient  philosophers.  But 
his  claims  as  a  theologian  are  open  to  question ;  for  he  holds  peculiar  opinions  on  many  points, 
and  he  appears  more  successful  as  an  opponent  of  error  than  as  a  maintainer  of  the  truth. 
Lactantius  has  been  charged  with  a  leaning  to  Manicheism,'  but  the  charge  appears  to  be 
unfounded. 

The  translation  has  been  made  from  Migne's  edition,  from  which  most  of  the  notes  have  been 
taken.  The  quotations  from  Virgil  have  been  given  in  the  words  of  Conington's  translation,^  and 
those  from  Lucretius  in  the  words  of  Munro. 

*  This  question  is  fully  discussed  by  Dr.  Lardner  in  his  Credibility  of  the  Gospel  History,  Works,  vol.  iii.  [p.  516.  The  whole 
chapter  (Ixv.)  on  Lactantius  deserves  study]. 

2  [Which  reduces  many  of  Virgil's  finest  and  most  Homeric  passages  to  mere  song  and  ballad,  and  sacrifices  all  their  epic  dignity.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 
Book  i. 


OF  THE   FALSE   WORSHIP   OF   THE   GODS. 


PREFACE. OF  WHAT  GREAT   VALUE   THE    KNOWL- 
EDGE OF  THE  TRUTH   IS  AND  ALWAYS  HAS  BEEN. 

Men  of  great  and  distinguished  talent,  Avhen 
they  had  entirely  devoted  themselves  to  learn- 
ing, holding  in  contempt  all  actions  both  private 
and  public,  applied  to  the  pursuit  of  investigat- 
ing the  truth  whatever  labour  could  be  bestowed 
upon  it ;  thinking  it  much  more  excellent  to  in- 
vestigate and  know  the  method  of  human  and 
divine  things,  than  to  be  entirely  occupied  with 
the  heaping  up  of  riches  or  the  accumulation 
of  honours.     For  no  one  can  be  made  better  or 
more  just  by  these  things,  since  they  are  frail 
and  earthly,  and  pertain  to  the  adorning  of  the 
body  only.     Those  men  were  indeed  most  de- 
serving of  the  knowledge  of  the   truth,  which 
they  so  greatly  desired  to  know,  that  they  even 
preferred  it  to  all  things.     For  it  is  plain  that 
some    gave    up    their   property,  and    altogether 
abandoned  the  pursuit  of  pleasures,  that,  being 
disengaged  and  without  impediment,  they  might 
follow  the  simple  truth,  and  it  alone.     And  so 
greatly  did  the  name  and  authority  of  the  truth 
prevail  with  them,  that  they  proclaimed  that  the 
reward  of  the  greatest  good  was  contained  in  it. 
But  they  did  not  obtain  the  object  of  their  wish, 
and  at  the  same  time  lost  their  labour  and  in- 
dustry ;  because  the  truth,  that  is  the  secret  of 
the  Most  High    God,  who    created    all    things, 
cannot  be  attained  by  our  own  ability  and  per- 
ceptions.    Otherwise  there  would  be  no  differ- 
ence between  God  and  man,  if  human  thought 
could  reach  to  the  counsels  and  arrangements 
of  that  eternal  majesty.     And   because   it  was 
impossible  that  the  divine  method  of  procedure 
should  become  known  to  man  by  his  own  efforts, 
God  did  not  suffer  man   any  longer  to    err  in 
search  of  the  light  of  wisdom,  and  to  wander 
through  inextricable  darkness  without  any  result 
of  his  labour,  but  at  length  opened  his  eyes,  and 
made    the    investigation   of  the   truth  His  own 
gift,  so  that  He  might  show  the  nothingness  of 


human  wisdom,  and  point  out  to  man  wandering 
in  error  the  way  of  obtaining  immortality. 

But   since   few   make   use   of    this   heavenly 
benefit  and  gift,  because  the  truth  lies  hidden 
veiled  in  obscurity ;  and  it  is  either  an  object 
of  contempt  to  the  learned  because  it  has  not 
suitable  defenders,  or  is  hated  by  the  unlearned 
on    account   of  its    natural    severity,  which  the 
nature  of  men  inclined  to  vices  cannot  endure  : 
for  because  there  is  a  bitterness  mingled  with 
virtues,  while  vices  are  seasoned  with  pleasure, 
offended  by  the  former  and  soothed  by  the  lat- 
ter, they  are  borne  headlong,  and  deceived  by 
the  appearance  of  good   things,  they  embrace 
evils  for  goods,  — I    have   believed   that   these 
errors   should   be   encountered,   that   both   the 
learned  may  be  directed  to   true  wisdom,  and 
the  unlearned  to  true  religion.     And  this  pro- 
fession is  to  be  thought  much  better,  more  use- 
ful and  glorious,  than  that  of  oratory,  in  which 
being  long  engaged,  we  trained  young  men  not 
to  virtue,  but  ahogether  to  cunning  wickedness.' 
Certainly  we  shall  now  much  more  rightly  discuss 
respecting  the  heavenly  precepts,  by  which  we 
may  be  able  to  instruct  the  minds  of  men  to  the 
worship  of  the  true  majesty.     Nor  does  he  de- 
serve so  well  respecting  the  affairs  of  men,  who 
imparts  the  knowledge  of  speaking  well,  as  he 
who  teaches  men   to   live   in   piety   and   inno- 
cence ;  on  which  account  the  philosophers  were 
in  greater   glory  among   the    Greeks   than   the 
orators.     For  they,  the  pJiilosophers,  were  con- 
sidered teachers  of  right  living,  which  is  far  more 
excellent,  since  to  speak  well  belongs  only  to  a 
i^w,  but  to  live  well  belongs  to  all.     Yet  that 
practice  in  fictitious  suits  has  been  of  great  ad- 
vantage to  us,  so  that  we  are  now  able  to  plead 
the  cause  of  truth  with  greater  copiousness  and 
ability  of  speaking ;  for  although  the  truth  may 
be  defended  without  eloquence,  as  it  often  has 


,.     '..[This,  St.  Augustine  powerfully  illustrates.     Sec  Confessions, 
hb.  lu.  cap  3,     Note  also  lb.,  lib.  ix.  cap  5.] 

9 


lO 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  I. 


been  defended  bv  many,  yet  it  needs  to  be  ex- 
plained, and  in  a  measure  discussed,  with  dis- 
tinctness and  elegance  of  speech,  in  order  that  it 
may  flow  with  greater  power  into  the  minds  of 
men,  being  both  provided  with  its  own  force, 
and  'adorned  with  the  brilliancy  of  speech. 

CHAP.    I. OF   RELIGION    AND    WISDOM. 

We  undertake,  therefore,  to  discuss   religion 
and  divine  things.     For  if  some  of  the  greatest 
orators,  veterans  as  it  were  of  their  profession, 
having  completed  the  works  of  their  pleadings, 
at  las^gave  themselves  up  to  philosophy,  and  re- 
garded that  as  a  most  just  rest  from  their  labours,  i 
if  they  tortured  their  minds  in  the  investigation 
of  those  things  which  could  not  be  found  out,  so 
that  they  appear  to  have  sought  for  themselves 
not  so  nuich  leisure  as  occupation,  and  that  in- 
deed with  much  greater  trouble  than   in   their 
former  pursuit;    how  much  more  justly  shall  I 
betake  myself  as  to  a  most  safe  harbour,  to  that 
pious,  true,  and  divine  wisdom,  in  which  all  things 
are  ready  for  utterance,  pleasant  to  the  hearing, 
easy  to  be  understood,  honourable  to  be  under- 
taken !     And  if  some  skilful  men  and  arbiters 
of  justice  composed  and  published  Institutions  of 
civil  law,  by  which  they  might  lull  the  strifes  and 
contentions   of  discordant   citizens,  how  much 
better  and  more   rightly  shall  we  follow  up  in 
writing  the  divine  Institutions,  in  which  we  shall 
not  speak  about  rain-droppings,  or  the  turning 
of  waters,  or  the  preferring  of  claims,  but  we 
shall  speak  of  hope,  of  life,  of  salvation,  of  im- 
mortality, and  of  God,  that  we  may  put  an  end 
to   deadly   superstitions   and    most    disgraceful 
errors. 

And  we  now  commence  this  work  under  the 
auspices  of  your  name,  O  mighty  Emperor  Con- 
stantine,  who  were  the  first  of  the  Roman  princes 
to  repudiate  errors,  and  to   acknowledge    and 
honour  the  majesty  of  the  one  and  only  true 
God.'     For  when  that  most  happy  day  had  shone 
upon  the  world,  in  which  the  Most  High  God 
raised  you  to  the  prosperous  height  of  power, 
you  entered  upon  a  dominion  which  was  salutary 
and  desirable  for  all,  with  an  excellent  beginning, 
when,  restoring  justice  which   had    been  over- 
thrown and  taken  away,  you  expiated  the  most 
shameful  deed  of  others.     In  return  for  which 
action  God  will  grant  to  you  happiness,  virtue, 
and  length  of  days,  that  even  when  old  you  may 
govern  the  state  with  the  same  justice  with  which 
you  began  in  youth,  and  may  hand  down  to  your 
children  the  guardianship  of  the  Roman  name,  as 
you  yourself  received  it  from  your  father.     For 
to  the  wicked,  who  still  rage  against  the  righteous 
in  other  parts  of  the  world,  the  Omnipotent  will 


also  repay  the  reward  of  their  wickedness  with  a 
severity  proportioned  to  its  tardiness  ;  for  as  He 
is  a  most  indulgent  Father  towards  the  godly,  so 
is  He  a  most  upright  Judge  against  the  ungodly. 
And  in  my  desire  to  defend  His  religion  and 
divine  worship,  to  whom  can  I  rather  appeal, 
whom  can  I  address,  but  him  by  whom  justice 
and  wisdom  have  been  restored  to  the  affairs  of 
men? 

Therefore,  leaving  the  authors  of  this  earthly 
philosophy,  who  bring  fonvard  nothing  certain, 
let  us  approach  the  right  path  ;  for  if  I  considered 
these  to  be  sufficiently  suitable  guides  to  a  good 
life,  I  would  both  follow  them  myself,  and  exhort 
others  to  follow  them.     But  since  they  disagree 
among  one  another  with  great  contention,  and  are 
for  the  most  part  at  variance  with  themselves,  it 
is  evident  that  their  path  is  by  no  means  straight- 
forward ;  since  they  have  severally  marked  out 
distinct  ways  for  themselves  according  to  their 
own  will,  and  have  left  great  confusion  to  those 
who  are  seeking  for  the  truth.     But  since  the 
truth  is  revealed  from  heaven  to  us  who  have 
received  the  mystery  of  true  religion,  and  since 
we  follow  God,  the  teacher  of  wisdom  and  the 
guide  to  truth,  we  call  together  all,  without  any 
distinction  either  of  sex  or  of  age,  to  heavenly  pas- 
ture.    For  there  is  no  more  pleasant  food  for  the 
soul  than  the  knowledge  of  truth,^  to  the  main- 
taining and  explaining  of  which  we  have  destined 
seven  books,  although  the  subject  is  one  of  al- 
most boundless  and  immeasurable  labour  ;  so  that 
if  any  one  should  wish  to  dilate  upon  and  follow 
up  these  things  to  their  full  extent,  he  would 
have  such  an  exuberant  supply  of  subjects,  that 
neither  books  would  find  any  limit,  nor  speech 
any  end.     But  on  this  account  we  will  put  to- 
gether all  things  briefly,  because    those   things 
which  we  are  about  to  bring  forward  are  so  plain 
and  lucid,  that  it  seems  to  be  more  wonderful 
that  the  truth  appears  so  obscure  to  men,  and 
to  those  especially  who  are  commonly  esteemed 
wise,  or  because  men  will  only  need  to  be  trained 
by  us,  —  that  is,  to  be  recalled  from  the  error  in 
which  they  are  entangled  to  a  better  course  of  life. 
And  if,  as  I  hope,  we  shall  attain  to  this,  we 
will  send  them  to  the  very  fountain  of  learning, 
which  is  most  rich  and   abundant,  by  copious 
draughts  of  which  they  may  appease  the  thirst 
conceived  within,  and  quench  their  ardour.     And 
all  things  will  be  easy,  ready  of  accomplishment, 
and  clear  to  them,  if  only  they  are  not  annoyed 
at  applying  patience  in  reading  or  hearing  to  the 
perception  of  the  discipline  of  wisdom.^     For 
many,  pertinaciously  adhering  to  vain  supersti- 
tions, harden   themselves   agaiftst   the   manifest 


J  [It  thrills  me  to  compare  this  modest  tribute  of  Christian  confi- 
dence, with  Justin's  unheeded  appeal  to  the  Stoical  Anlonine.] 


2  [Pilate  is  answered  at  last  out  of  the  Roman  court  itself.] 
3  ["  How  charming  is  divine  philosophy! 

Not  harsh  and  crabbed,  as  dull  fools  suppose. 

—  Milton,  Cowus.] 


Chap.  III.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


II 


truth,  not  so  much  deserving  well  of  their  re- 
ligions, which  they  wrongly  maintain,  as  they 
deserve  ill  of  themselves ;  who,  when  they  have 
a  straight  path,  seek  devious  windings  ;  who  leave 
the  level  ground  that  they  may  glide  over  a 
precipice  ;  who  leave  the  light,  that,  blind  and 
enfeebled,  they  may  lie  in  darkness.  We  must 
provide  for  these,  that  they  may  not  fight  against 
themselves,  and  that  they  may  be  willing  at 
length  to  be  freed  from  inveterate  errors.  And 
this  they  will  assuredly  do  if  they  shall  at  any 
time  see  for  what  purpose  they  were  born ;  for 
this  is  the  cause  of  their  perverseness,  —  namely, 
ignorance  of  themselves  :  and  if  any  one,  having 
gained  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  shall  have 
shaken  olf  this  ignorance,  he  will  know  to  what 
object  his  life  is  to  be  directed,  and  how  it  is  to 
be  spent.  And  I  thus  briefly  define  the  sum  of 
this  knowledge,  that  neither  is  any  religion  to  be 
undertaken  without  wisdom,  nor  any  wisdom  to 
be  approved  of  without  religion. 

CHAP.  n.  —  TH.-VT  THERE  IS   A   PROVIDENCE   IN  THE 
AFFAIRS    OF   MEN. 

Having  therefore  undertaken  the  office  of  ex- 
plaining the  truth,  I  did  not  think  it  so  necessary 
to  take  my  commencement  from  tliat  inquiry 
which  naturally  seems  the  first,  whether  there  is 
a  providence  which  consults  for  all  things,  or  all 
things  were  either  made  or  are  governed  by 
chance  ;  which  sentiment  was  introduced  by  De- 
mocritus,  and  confirmed  by  Epicurus.  But  be- 
fore them,  what  did  Protagoras  effect,  who  raised 
doubts  respecting  the  gods ;  or  Diagoras  after- 
wards, who  excluded  them ;  and  some  others, 
who  did  not  hold  the  existence  of  gods,  except 
that  there  was  supposed  to  be  no  providence  ? 
These,  however,  were  most  vigorously  opposed 
by  the  other  philosophers,  and  especially  by  the 
Stoics,  who  taught  that  the  universe  could  neither 
have  been  made  without  divine  intelligence,  nor 
continue  to  exist  unless  it  were  governed  by  the 
highest  intelligence.  But  even  Marcus  TuUius, 
although  he  was  a  defender  of  the  Academic 
system,  discussed  at  length  and  on  many  occa- 
sions respecting  the  providence  which  governs 
affairs,  confirming  the  arguments  of  the  Stoics,  and 
himself  adducing  many  new  ones ;  and  this  he 
does  both  in  all  the  books  of  his  own  philosophy, 
and  especially  in  those  which  treat  of  the  nature 
of  the  gods.' 

And  it  was  no  difficult  task,  indeed,  to  refute 
the  falsehoods  of  a  few  men  who  entertained  per- 
verse sentiments  by  the  testimony  of  communi- 
ties and  tribes,  who  on  this  one  point  had  no 
disagreement.  For  there  is  no  one  so  uncivil- 
ized, and  of  such  an  uncultivated  disposition, 


'  [Ingeniously  introduced,  and  afterward  very  forcibly  expanded.] 


who,  when  he  raises  his  eyes  to  heaven,  although 
he  knows  not  by  the  providence  of  what  God 
all  this  visible  universe  is  governed,  does  not 
understand  from  the  very  magnitude  of  the 
objects,  from  their  motion,  arrangement,  con- 
stancy, usefulness,  beauty,  and  temperament,  that 
there  is  some  providence,  and  that  that  which 
exists  with  wonderful  method  must  have  been 
prepared  by  some  greater  intelligence.  And  for 
us,  assuredly,  it  is  very  easy  to  follow  up  this  part 
as  copiously  as  it  may  please  us.  But  because 
the  subject  has  been  much  agitated  among  phi- 
losophers, and  they  who  take  away  providence 
appear  to  have  been  sufficiently  answered  by 
men  of  sagacity  and  eloquence,  and  because  it  is 
necessary  to  speak,  in  different  places  throughout 
this  work  which  we  have  undertaken,  respecting 
the  skill  of  the  divine  providence,  let  us  for  the 
present  omit  this  inquiry,  which  is  so  closely  con- 
nected with  the  other  questions,  that  it  seems  pos- 
sible for  us  to  discuss  no  subject,  without  at  the 
same  time  discussing  the  subject  of  providence. 


CHAP.    Ill, 


■  WHETHER  THE  UNIVERSE  IS  GOVERNED 


BY    THE    POWER    OF    ONE    GOD    OR    OF    MANY. 

Let  the  commencement  of  our  work  therefore 
be  that  inquiry  which  closely  follows  and  is  con- 
nected with  the  first :  Whether  the  universe  is 
governed  by  the  power  of  one  God  or  of  many. 
There  is  no  one,  who  possesses  intelligence  and 
uses  reflection,  who  does  not  understand  that  it 
is  one  Being  who  both  created  all  things  and 
governs  them  with  the  same  energy  by  which 
He  created  them.  For  what  need  is  there  of 
many  to  sustain  the  government  of  the  universe  ? 
unless  we  should  happen  to  think  that,  if  there 
were  more  than  one,  each  would  possess  less 
might  and  strength.  And  they  who  hold  that 
there  are  many  gods,  do  indeed  effect  this  ;  for 
those  gods  must  of  necessity  be  weak,  since  in- 
dividually, without  the  aid  of  the  others,  they 
would  be  unable  to  sustain  the  government  of  so 
vast  a  mass.  But  God,  who  is  the  Eternal  Mind, 
is  undoubtedly  of  excellence,  complete  and  per- 
fect in  ev^ery  part.  And  if  this  is  true.  He  must 
of  necessity  be  one.  For  power  or  excellence, 
which  is  complete,  retains  its  own  peculiar  sta- 
bility. But  that  is  to  be  regarded  as  solid  from 
which  nothing  can  be  taken  away,  that  as  per- 
fect to  which  nothing  can  be  added. 

Who  can  doubt  that  he  would  be  a  most  pow- 
erful king  who  should  have  the  government  of 
the  whole  world?  And  not  without  reason, 
since  all  things  which  everywhere  exist  would 
belong  to  him,  since  all  resources  from  all  quar- 
ters would  be  centred  in  him  alone.  But  if 
more  than  one  divide  the  government  of  the 
world,  undoubtedly  each  will  have  less  power 
and  strength,  since  every  one  must  confine  him- 


12 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  I. 


self  within  his  prescribed  portion.'  In  the  same 
manner  also,  if  there  are  more  gods  than  one, 
they  will  be  of  less  weight,  others  having  in 
themselves  the  same  power.  But  the  nature  of 
excellence  admits  of  greater  perfection  in  him 
in  whom  the  whole  is,  than  in  him  in  whom 
there  is  only  a  small  part  of  the  whole.  But 
God,  if  He  is  perfect,  as  He  ought  to  be,  cannot 
but  be  one,  because  He  is  perfect,  so  that  all 
things  may  be  in  Him.  Therefore  the  excel- 
lences and  powers  of  the  gods  must  necessarily 
be  weaker,  because  so  much  will  be  wanting  to 
each  as  shall  be  in  the  others ;  and  so  the  more 
there  are,  so  much  the  less  powerful  will  they 
be.  Why  should  I  mention  that  this  highest 
power  and  divine  energy  is  altogether  incapable 
of  division  ?  For  whatever  is  capable  of  divis- 
ion must  of  necessity  be  liable  to  destruction 
also.  But  if  destruction  is  far  removed  from 
God,  because  He  is  incorruptible  and  eternal,  it 
follows  that  the  divine  power  is  incapable  of 
division.  Therefore  God  is  one,  if  that  which 
admits  of  so  great  power  can  be  nothing  else  : 
and  yet  those  who  deem  that  there  are  many 
gods,  say  that  they  have  divided  their  functions 
among  themselves  ;  but  we  will  discuss  all  these 
matters  at  their  proper  places.  In  the  mean- 
time, I  affirm  this,  which  belongs  to  the  present 
subject.  If  they  have  divided  their  functions 
among  themselves,  the  matter  comes  back  to 
the  same  point,  that  any  one  of  them  is  unable 
to  supply  the  place  of  all.  He  cannot,  then,  be 
perfect  who  is  unable  to  govern  all  things  while 
the  others  are  unemployed.  And  so  is  comes 
to  pass,  that  for  the  government  of  the  universe 
there  is  more  need  of  the  perfect  excellence  of 
one  than  of  the  imperfect  powers  of  many.  But 
he  who  imagines  that  so  great  a  magnitude  as 
this  cannot  be  governed  by  one  Being,  is  de- 
ceived. For  he  does  not  comprehend  how 
great  are  the  might  and  power  of  the  divine 
majesty,  if  he  thinks  that  the  one  God,  who  had 
power  to  create  the  universe,  is  also  unable  to 
govern  that  which  He  has  created.  But  if  he 
conceives  in  his  mind  how  great  is  the  immen- 
sity of  that  divine  work,  when  before  it  was 
nothing,  yet  that  by  the  power  and  wisdom  of 
God  it  was  made  out  of  nothing  —  a  work  which 
could  only  be  commenced  and  accomplished  by 
one  —  he  will  now  understand  that  that  which 
has  been  established  by  one  is  much  more  easily 
governed  by  one. 

Some  one  may  perhaps  say  that  so  immense 
a  work  as  that  of  the  universe  could  not  even 
have  been  fabricated  except  by  many.  But 
however  many  and  however  great  he  may  con- 
sider them,  —  whatever  magnitude,  power,  ex- 
cellence, and  majesty  he  may  attribute  to  the 

"  r  ^  hint  to  Caesar  himself,  the  force  of  which  began  soon  after 
very  soiely  to  be  felt  in  the  empire.] 


many,  —  the  whole  of  that  I  assign  to  one, 
and  say  that  it  exists  in  one  :  so  that  there  is 
in  Him  such  an  amount  of  these  properties  as 
can  neither  be  conceived  nor  expressed.  And 
since  we  fail  in  this  subject,  both  in  perception 
and  in  words  —  for  neither  does  the  human 
breast  admit  the  light  of  so  great  understanding, 
nor  is  the  mortal  tongue  capable  of  explaining 
such  great  subjects  —  it  is  right  that  we  should 
understand  and  say  this  very  same  thing.  I  see, 
again,  what  can  be  alleged  on  the  other  hand, 
that  those  many  gods  are  such  as  we  hold  the  one 
God  to  be.  But  this  cannot  possibly  be  so, 
because  the  power  of  these  gods  individually 
will  not  be  able  to  proceed  further,  the  power  of 
the  others  meeting  and  hindering  them.  For 
either  each  must  be  unable  to  pass  beyond  his 
own  limits,  or,  if  he  shall  have  passed  beyond 
them,  he  must  drive  another  from  his  bound- 
aries. They  who  believe  that  there  are  many 
gods,  do  not  see  that  it  may  happen  that  some 
may  be  opposed  to  others  in  their  wishes,  from 
which  circumstance  disputing  and  contention 
would  arise  among  them ;  as  Homer  repre- 
sented the  gods  at  war  among  themselves,  since 
some  desired  that  Troy  should  be  taken,  others 
opposed  it.  The  universe,  therefore,  must  be 
ruled  by  the  will  of  one.  For  unless  the  power 
over  the  separate  parts  be  refeired  to  one  and 
the  same  providence,  the  whole  itself  will  not  be 
able  to  exist ;  since  each  takes  care  of  nothing 
beyond  that  which  belongs  peculiarly  to  him, 
just  as  warfare  could  not  be  carried  on  without 
one  general  and  commander.  But  if  there  were 
in  one  army  as  many  generals  as  there  are 
legions,  cohorts,  divisions,^  and  squadrons,  first 
of  all  it  would  not  be  possible  for  the  army  to 
be  drawn  out  in  battle  array,  since  each  would 
refuse  the  peril ;  nor  could  it  easily  be  governed 
or  controlled,  because  all  would  use  their  own 
peculiar  counsels,  by  the  diversity  of  which  they 
would  inflict  more  injury  than  they  would  con- 
fer advantage.  So,  in  this  government  of  the 
affairs  of  nature,  unless  there  shall  be  one  to 
whom  the  care  of  the  whole  is  referred,  all 
things  will  be  dissolved  and  fall  to  decay. 

But  to  say  that  the  universe  is  governed  by 
the  will  of  many,  is  equivalent  to  a  declaration 
that  there  are  many  minds  in  one  body,  since 
there  are  many  and  various  offices  of  the  mem- 
bers, so  that  separate  minds  may  be  supposed  to 
govern  separate  senses ;  and  also  the  many  affec- 
tions, by  which  we  are  accustomed  to  be  moved 
either  to  anger,  or  to  desire,  or  to  joy,  or  to  fear, 
or  to  pity,  so  that  in  all  these  affections  as  many 
minds  may  be  supposed  to  operate  ;  and  if  any 
one  should  say  this,  he  would  appear  to  be  des- 
titute even  of  that  very  mind,  which  is  one.    But 

2  Cunei;  properly,  soldiers  arranged  in  the  shape  of  a  wedge. 


Chap.  V.] 


THE    DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


13 


if  in  one  body  one  mind  possesses  the  govern- 
ment of  so  many  things,  and  is  at  the  same 
time  occupied  with  the  whole,  why  should  any 
one  suppose  that  the  universe  cannot  be  gov- 
erned by  one,  but  that  it  can  be  governed  by 
more  than  one?  And  because  those  maintain- 
ers  of  many  gods  are  aware  of  this,  they  say 
that  they  so  preside  over  separate  offices  and 
parts,  that  there  is  still  one  chief  ruler.  The 
others,  therefore,  on  this  principle,  will  not  be 
gods,  but  attendants  and  ministers,  whom  that 
one  most  mighty  and  omnipotent  appointed  to 
these  offices,  and  they  themselves  will  be  sub- 
servient to  his  authority  and  command.  If, 
therefore,  all  are  not  equal  to  one  another,  all  are 
not  gods  ;  for  that  which  serves  and  that  which 
rules  cannot  be  the  same.  For  if  God  is  a  title 
of  the  highest  power.  He  must  be  incorruptible, 
perfect,  incapable  of  suffering,  and  subject  to  no 
other  being ;  therefore  they  are  not  gods  whom 
necessity  compels  to  obey  the  one  greatest  God. 
But  because  they  who  hold  this  opinion  are  not 
deceived  without  cause,  we  will  presently  lay 
open  the  cause  of  this  error.  Now,  let  us  prove 
by  testimonies  the  unity  of  the  divine  power. 

CHAP.  IV.  —  THAT  THE  ONE  GOD  WAS  FORETOLD 
EVEN  BY  THE  PROPHETS. 

The  prophets,  who  were  very  many,  proclaim 
and  declare  the  one  God ;  for,  being  filled  with 
the  inspiration  of  the  one  God,  they  predicted 
things  to  come,  with  agreeing  and  harmonious 
voice.  But  those  who  are  ignorant  of  the  truth 
do  not  think  that  these  prophets  are  to  be  be- 
lieved ;  for  they  say  that  those  voices  are  not 
divine,  but  human.  Forsooth,  because  they  pro- 
claim one  God,  they  were  either  madmen  or 
deceivers.  But  truly  we  see  that  their  predic- 
tions have  been  fulfilled,  and  are  in  course  of 
fulfilment  daily ;  and  their  foresight,  agreeing  as 
it  does  to  one  opinion,  teaches  that  they  were 
not  under  the  impulse  of  madness.  For  who 
possessed  of  a  frenzied  mind  would  be  able,  I 
do  not  say  to  predict  the  future,  but  even  to 
speak  coherently?  Were  they,  therefore,  who 
spoke  such  things  deceitful?  What  was  so  ut- 
terly foreign  to  their  nature  as  a  system  of  deceit, 
when  they  themselves  restrained  others  from  all 
fraud  ?  For  to  this  end  were  they  sent  by  God, 
that  they  should  both  be  heralds  of  His  majesty, 
and  correctors  of  the  wickedness  of  man. 

Moreover,  the  inclination  to  feign  and  speak 
falsely  belongs  to  those  who  covet  riches,  and 
eagerly  desire  gains,  —  a  disposition  which  was 
far  removed  from  those  holy  men.  For  they 
so  discharged  the  office  entrusted  to  them,  that, 
disregarding  all  things  necessary  for  the  main- 
tenance of  life,  they  were  so  far  from  laying  up 
store  for  the  future,  that  they  did  not  even  la- 


bour for  the  day,  content  with  the  unstored  food 
which  God  had  supplied ;  and  these  not  only 
had  no  gains,  but  even  endured  torments  and 
death.  For  the  precepts  of  righteousness  are 
distasteful  to  the  wicked,  and  to  those  who  lead 
an  unholy  life.  Wherefore  they,  whose  sins  were 
brought  to  light  and  forbidden,  most  cruelly  tor- 
tured and  slew  them.  They,  therefore,  who  had 
no  desire  for  gain,  had  neither  the  inclination 
nor  the  motive  for  deceit.  Why  should  I  say 
that  some  of  them  were  princes,  or  even  kings,' 
upon  whom  the  suspicion  of  covetousness  and 
fraud  could  not  possibly  fall,  and  yet  they  pro- 
claimed the  one  God  with  the  same  prophetic 
foresight  as  the  others? 

CHAP.    V. OF   THE    TESTIMONIES     OF    POETS    AND 

PHILOSOPHERS. 

But  let  us  leave  the  testimony  of  prophets, 
lest  a  proof  derived  from  those  who  are  univer- 
sally disbelieved  should  appear  insufficient.  Let 
us  come  to  authors,  and  for  the  demonstration 
of  the  truth  let  us  cite  as  witnesses  those  very 
persons  whom  they  are  accustomed  to  make  use 
of  against  us,  —  I  mean  poets  and  philosophers. 
From  these  we  cannot  fail  in  proving  the  unity 
of  God  ;  not  that  they  had  ascertained  the  truth, 
but  that  the  force  of  the  truth  itself  is  so  great, 
that  no  one  can  be  so  blind  as  not  to  see  the 
divine  brightness  presenting  itself  to  his  eyes. 
The  poets,  therefore,  however  much  they  adorned 
the  gods  in  their  poems,  and  amplified  their  ex- 
ploits with  the  highest  praises,  yet  very  frequently 
confess  that  all  things  are  held  together  and 
governed  by  one  spirit  or  mind.  Orpheus,  who 
is  the  most  ancient  of  the  poets,  and  coeval  with 
the  gods  themselves,  —  since  it  is  reported  that 
he  sailed  among  the  Argonauts  together  with  the 
sons  of  Tyndarus  and  Hercules,  —  speaks  of  the 
true  and  great  God  as  the  first-born,^  because 
nothing  was  produced  before  Him,  but  all  things 
sprung  from  Him.  He  also  calls  Him  Phanes  ^ 
because  when  as  yet  there  was  nothing  He  first 
appeared  and  came  forth  from  the  infinite.  And 
since  he  was  unable  to  conceive  in  his  mind  the 
origin  and  nature  of  this  Being,  he  said  that  He 
was  born  from  the  boundless  air :  "  The  first- 
born, Phaethon,  son  of  the  extended  air ;  "  for 
he  had  nothing  more  to  say.  He  affirms  that 
this  Being  is  the  Parent  of  all  the  gods,  o\\  whose 
account  He  framed  the  heaven,  and  provided 
for  His  children  that  they  might  have  a  habita- 
tion and  place  of  abode  in  common  :  "  He  built 
for  immortals  an  imperishable  home."  Thus, 
under  the  guidance  of  nature  and  reason,  he 
understood  that  there  was  a  power  of  surpassing 


'  [Not   David   merely,  nor  only  other   kings  of  the   Hebrews. 
Elucidation  I.] 

2  TrpiuToyo^oi', 

3  <|)ai/7jTo,  the  appealer. 


H 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  I. 


greatness  which  framed  lieaven  and  earth.  For 
he  could  not  say  that  Jupiter  was  the  author  of 
all  things,  since  he  was  born  from  Saturn ;  nor 
could  he  say  that  Saturn  himself  was  their 
author,  since  it  was  reported  that  he  was  pro- 
duced from  the  heaven  ;  but  he  did  not  venture 
to  set  up  the  heaven  as  the  primeval  god,  be- 
cause he  saw  that  it  was  an  element  of  the  uni- 
verse, and  must  itself  have  had  an  author.  This 
consideration  led  him  to  that  first-born  god,  to 
whom  he  assigns  and  gives  the  first  place. 

Homer  was  able  to  give  us  no  information 
relating  to  the  truth,  for  he  wrote  of  human 
rather  than  divine  things.  Hesiod  was  able,  for 
he  comprised  in  the  work  of  one  book  the  gen- 
eration of  the  gods ;  but  yet  he  gave  us  no  in- 
formation, for  he  took  his  commencement  not 
from  God  the  Creator,  but  from  chaos,  which 
is  a  confused  mass  of  rude  and  unarranged 
matter ;  whereas  he  ought  first  to  have  explained 
from  what  source,  at  what  time,  and  in  what 
manner,  chaos  itself  had  begun  to  exist  or  to 
have  consistency.  Without  doubt,  as  all  things 
were  placed  in  order,  arranged,  and  made  by 
some  artificer,  so  matter  itself  must  of  necessity 
have  been  formed  by  some  being.  Who,  then, 
made  it  except  God,  to  whose  power  all  things 
are  subject?  But  he  shrinks  from  admitting 
this,  while  he  dreads  the  unknown  truth.  For, 
as  he  wished  it  to  appear,  it  was  by  the  inspi- 
ration of  the  Muses  that  he  poured  forth  that 
song  on  Helicon  ;  but  he  had  come  after  previous 
meditation  and  preparation. 

Maro  was  the  first  of  our  poets  to  approach 
the  truth,  who  thus  speaks  respecting  the  highest 
God,  whom  he  calls  Mind  and  Spirit : '  — 

"  Know  first,  the  heaven,  the  earth,  the  main, 
The  moon's  pale  orb,  the  starry  train. 

Are  nourished  by  a  Soul, 
A  Spirit,  whose  celestial  flame 
Glows  in  each  member  of  the  frame, 

And  stirs  the  mighty  whole." 

And  lest  any  one  should  happen  to  be  ignorant 
what  that  Spirit  was  which  had  so  much  power, 
he  has  declared  it  in  another  place,  saying :  ^ 
"  For  the  Deity  pervades  all  lands,  the  tracts  of 
sea  and  depth  of  heaven ;  the  flocks,  the  herds, 
and  men,  and  all  the  race  of  beasts,  each  at  its 
birth,  derive  their  slender  lives  from  Him." 

Ovid  also,  in  the  beginning  of  his  remarkable 
work,  without  any  disguising  of  the  name,  admits 
that  the  universe  was  arranged  by  God,  whom 
he  calls  the  Framer  of  the  world,  the  Artificer 
of  all  things.3  But  if  either  Orpheus  or  these 
poets  of  our  country  had  always  maintained  what 
they  perceived   under  the  guidance  of  nature, 


'  /E«.,  vi   724. 

'  Georg.,  iv.  221.     [These  passages  seem  borrowed  from  the  Oc- 
tavius  of  Minucius,  cap.  19,  vol.  iv.  p.  183.] 
^  [Fabricatorem  mundi,  rerum  opificem.j 


they  would  have  comprehended  the  truth,  and 
gained  the  same  learning  which  we  follow."* 

But  thus  far  of  the  poets.  Let  us  come  to  the 
philosophers,  whose  authority  is  of  greater  weight, 
and  their  judgment  more  to  be  relied  on,  be- 
cause they  are  believed  to  have  paid  attention, 
not  to  matters  of  fiction,  but  to  the  investigation 
of  the  truth.  Thales  of  Miletus,  who  was  one  of 
the  number  of  the  seven  wise  men,  and  who  is 
said  to  have  been  the  first  of  all  to  inquire  re- 
specting natural  causes,  said  that  water  was  the 
element  from  which  all  things  were  produced, 
and  that  God  was  the  mind  which  formed  all 
things  from  water.  Thus  he  placed  the  mate- 
rial of  all  things  in  moisture  ;  he  fixed  the  begin- 
ning and  cause  of  their  production  in  God. 
Pythagoras  thus  defined  the  being  of  God,  "  as 
a  soul  passing  to  and  fro,  and  diffused  through 
all  parts  of  the  universe,  and  through  all  nature, 
from  which  all  living  creatures  which  are  pro- 
duced derive  their  life."  Anaxagoras  said  that 
God  was  an  infinite  mind,  which  moves  by  its 
own  power.  Antisthenes  maintained  that  the 
gods  of  the  people  were  many,  but  that  the  God 
of  nature  was  one  only ;  that  is,  the  Fabricator 
of  the  whole  universe.  Cleanthes  and  Anaxim- 
enes  assert  that  the  air  is  the  chief  deity ;  and 
to  this  opinion  our  poet  has  assented  :  s  "  Then 
almighty  father  ^ther  descends  in  fertile  showers 
into  the  bosom  of  his  joyous  spouse  ;  and  great 
himself,  mingling  with  her  great  body,  nourishes 
all  her  offspring."  Chrysippus  speaks  of  God 
as  a  natural  power  endowed  with  divine  reason, 
and  sometimes  as  a  divine  necessity.  Zeno  also 
speaks  of  Him  as  a  divine  and  natural  law.  The 
opinion  of  all  these,  however  uncertain  it  is,  has 
reference  to  one  point,  —  to  their  agreement  in 
the  existence  of  one  providence.  For  whether 
it  be  nature,  or  rether,  or  reason,  or  mind,  or  a 
fatal  necessity,  or  a  divine  law,  or  if  you  term  it 
anything  else,  it  is  the  same  which  is  called  by 
us  God.  Nor  does  the  diversity  of  titles  prove 
an  obstacle,  since  by  their  very  signification  they 
all  refer  to  one  object.  Aristotle,  although  he  is 
at  variance  with  himself,  and  both  utters  and 
holds  sentiments  opposed  to  one  another,  yet 
upon  the  whole  bears  witness  that  one  Mind  pre- 
sides over  the  universe.  Plato,  who  is  judged 
the  wisest  of  all,  plainly  and  openly  maintains 
the  rule  of  one  God ;  nor  does  he  name  Him 
^ther,  or  Reason,  or  Nature,  but,  as  He  truly  is, 
God,  and  that  this  universe,  so  perfect  and  won- 
derful, was  fabricated  by  Him.  And  Cicero, 
following  and  imitating  him  in  many  instances, 
frequently  acknowledges  God,  and  calls  Him  su- 
preme, in  those  books  which  he  wrote  on  the 


<  [Concerning  the  Orfihica,  see  vol.  i.  p.  178,  note  i,  and  pp. 
279,  290.  For  Sibyllina,  Ihid.,  p.  169,  note  9,  and  pp.  280-289.  Note 
also  vol    ii.  p.  194,  note  2,  and  T.  Lewis,  Plato  cont.  Ath.,  p.  99.] 

5  Virg.,  Georg.,  ii.  325-327. 


Chap.  VI.] 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


15 


subject  of  laws ;  and  he  adduces  proof  that  the 
universe  is  governed  by  Him,  when  he  argues 
respecting  the  nature  of  the  gods  in  this  way : 
"  Nothing  is  superior  to  God  :  the  world  must 
therefore  be  governed  by  Him.  Therefore  God 
is  obedient  or  subject  to  no  nature ;  conse- 
quently He  Himself  governs  all  nature."  But 
what  God  Himself  is  he  defines  in  his  Consola- 
tion: '  "  Nor  can  God  Himself,  as  He  is  compre- 
hended by  us,  be  comprehended  in  any  other 
way  than  as  a  mind  free  and  unrestrained,  far  re- 
moved from  all  mortal  materiality,  perceiving  and 
moving  all  things." 

How  often,  also,  does  Annseus  Seneca,  who 
was  the  keenest  Stoic  of  the  Romans,  follow  up 
with  deserved  praise  the  supreme  Deity  !  For 
when  he  was  discussing  the  subject  of  premature 
death,  he  said  :  "  You  do  not  understand  the 
authority  and  majesty  of  your  Judge,  the  Ruler 
of  the  world,  and  the  God  of  heaven  and  of  all 
gods,  on  whom  those  deities  which  we  separately 
worship  and  honour  are  dependent."  Also  in 
his  Exhortations:  "This  Being,  when  He  was 
laying  the  first  foundations  of  the  most  beautiful 
fabric,  and  was  commencing  this  work,  than  which 
nature  has  known  nothing  greater  or  better,  that 
all  things  might  serve  their  own  rulers,  although 
He  had  spread  Himself  out  through  the  whole 
body,  yet  He  produced  gods  as  ministers  of  His 
kingdom."  And  how  many  other  things  like  to 
our  own  writers  did  he  speak  on  the  subject  of 
God  !  But  these  things  I  put  off  for  the  present, 
because  they  are  more  suited  to  other  parts  of 
the  subject.  At  present  it  is  enough  to  demon- 
strate that  men  of  the  highest  genius  touched 
upon  the  truth,  and  almost  grasped  it,  had  not 
custom,  infatuated  by  false  opinions,  carried  them 
back ;  by  which  custom  they  both  deemed  that 
there  were  other  gods,  and  believed  that  those 
things  which  God  made  for  the  use  of  man,  as 
though  they  were  endowed  with  perception,  were 
to  be  held  and  worshipped  as  gods. 

CHAP.   VI.  —  OF  DIVINE   TESTIMONIES,  AND   OF  THE 
SIBYLS   AND   THEIR   PREDICTIONS. 

Now  let  US  pass  to  divine  testimonies ;  but  I 
will  previously  bring  forward  one  which  resem- 
bles a  divine  testimony,  both  on  account  of  its 
very  great  antiquity,  and  because  he  whom  I 
shall  name  was  taken  from  men  and  placed 
among  the  gods.  According  to  Cicero,  Caius 
Gotta  the  pontiff,  while  disputing  against  the  Stoics 
concerning  superstitions,  and  the  variety  of  opin- 
ions which  prevail  respecting  the  gods,  in  order 
that  he  might,  after  the  custom  of  the  Academics, 
make  everything  uncertain,  says  that  there  were 
five  Mercuries ;  and  having  enumerated  four  in 
order,  says  that  the  fifth  was  he  by  whom  Argus 


'  [See  (Sigonius)  p.  144,  ed.  Paris,  i8i8.] 


was  slain,  and  that  on  this  account  he  fled  into 
Egypt,  and  gave  laws  and  letters  to  the  Egyp- 
tians. The  Egyptians  call  him  Thoth  ;  and  from 
him  the  first  month  of  their  year,  that  is,  Septem- 
ber, received  its  name  among  them.  He  also 
built  a  town,  which  is  even  now  called  in  Greek 
Hermopolis  (the  town  of  Mercury),  and  the  in- 
habitants of  Phense  honour  him  with  religious 
worship.  And  although  he  was  a  man,  yet  he 
was  of  great  antiquity,  and  most  fully  imbued  with 
every  kind  of  learning,  so  that  the  knowledge  of 
many  subjects  and  arts  acquired  for  him  the 
name  of  Trismegistus.^  He  wrote  books,  and 
those  in  great  numbers,  relating  to  the  knowledge 
of  divine  things,  in  which  he  asserts  the  majesty 
of  the  supreme  and  only  God,  and  makes  men- 
tion of  Him  by  the  same  names  which  we  use  — 
God  and  Father.  And  that  no  one  might  in- 
quire His  name,  he  said  that  He  was  without 
name,  and  that  on  account  of  His  very  unity  He 
does  not  require  the  peculiarity  of  a  name. 
These  are  his  own  words  :  "  God  is  one,  but  He 
who  is  one  only  does  not  need  a  name ;  for  He 
who  is  self-existent  is  without  a  name."  God, 
therefore,  has  no  name,  because  He  is  alone ; 
nor  is  there  any  need  of  a  proper  name,  except 
in  cases  where  a  multitude  of  persons  requires  a 
distinguishing  mark,  so  that  you  may  designate 
each  person  by  his  own  mark  and  appellation. 
But  God,  because  He  is  always  one,  has  no 
peculiar  name. 

It  remains  for  me  to  bring  forward  testimo- 
nies respecting  the  sacred  responses  and  predic- 
tions, which  are  much  more  to  be  relied  upon. 
For  perhaps  they  against  whom  we  are  argu- 
ing may  think  that  no  credence  is  to  be  given 
to  poets,  as  though  they  invented  fictions,  nor  to 
philosophers,  inasmuch  as  they  were  liable  to 
err,  being  themselves  but  men.  Marcus  Varro, 
than  whom  no  man  of  greater  learning  ever 
lived,  even  among  the  Greeks,  much  less  among 
the  Latins,  in  those  books  respecting  divine  sub- 
jects which  he  addressed  to  Caius  Caesar  the 
chief  pontiff,  when  he  was  speaking  of  the  Quin- 
decemviri,5  says  that  the  Sibylline  books  were 
not  the  production  of  one  Sibyl  only,  but  that 
they  were  called  by  one  name  Sibylline,  because 
all  prophetesses  were  called  by  the  ancients 
Sibyls,  either  from  the  name  of  one,  the  Del- 
phian priestess,  or  from  their  proclaiming  the 
counsels  of  the  gods.  For  in  the  ^olic  dialect 
they  used  to  call  the  gods  by  the  word  Sioi,  not 
Theoi;  and  for  counsel  they  used  the  word  bule, 
not  boule  ;  —  and  so  the  Sibyl  received  her  name 
as  though  SiobuleJ^     But  he  says  that  the  Sibyls 


2  [See  vol.  i.  p.  289,  note  2,  this  series.] 

3  The  Quindecemviri  were  the  fifteen  men  to  whom  the  care  of 
the  Sibylline  books  was  entrusted.  At  first  two  (Duumviri)  were  ap- 
pointed. The  ntnnber  was  afterwards  increased  to  ten,  and  subse- 
quently to  fifteen.  It  appears  probable  that  this  last  change  was 
made  by  Sulla. 

<  [i.e.,  Counsel  of  God.     Sec  p.  14  supra,  and  16  ittjra.\ 


i6 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  I. 


were  ten  in  number,  and  he  enumerated  them 
all  under  the  writers,  who  wrote  an  account 
of  each  :  that  the  first  was  from  the  Persians, 
and  of  her  Nicanor  made  mention,  who  wrote 
the  exploits  of  Alexander  of  Macedon ;  —  the 
second  of  Libya,  and  of  her  Euripides  makes 
mention  in  the  prologue  of  the  Lamia ;  —  the 
third  of  Delphi,  concerning  whom  Chrysippus 
speaks  in  that  book  which  he  composed  con- 
cerning divination  ;  —  \ht  fourth  a  Cimmerian  in 
Italy,  whom  Ni^vius  mentions  in  his  books  of 
the  Punic  war,  and  Piso  in  his  annals ;  —  the 
fifth  of  Erythrsea,  whom  ApoUodorus  of  Ery- 
thrcea  affirms  to  have  been  his  own  country- 
woman, and  that  she  foretold  to  the  Greeks 
when  they  were  setting  but  for  Ilium,  both  that 
Troy  was  doomed  to  destruction,  and  that  Homer 
would  write  falsehoods ;  —  the  sixth  of  Samos, 
respecting  whom  Eratosthenes  writes  that  he 
had  found  a  written  notice  in  the  ancient  annals 
of  the  Samians,  The  sevetith  was  of  Cumoe,  by 
name  Amalthaea,  who  is  termed  by  some  He- 
rophile,  or  Demophile  and  they  say  that  she 
brought  nine  books  to  the  king  Tarquinius  Pris- 
cus,  and  asked  for  them  three  hundred  philip- 
pics, and  that  the  king  refused  so  great  a  price, 
and  derided  the  madness  of  the  woman ;  that 
she,  in  the  sight  of  the  king,  burnt  three  of  the 
books,  and  demanded  the  same  price  for  those 
which  were  left ;  that  Tarquinius  much  more 
considered  the  woman  to  be  mad ;  and  that 
when  she  again,  having  burnt  three  other  books, 
per^sted  in  asking  the  same  price,  the  king  was 
moved,  and  bought  the  remaining  books  for  the 
three  hundred  pieces  of  gold  :  and  the  number 
of  these  books  was  afterwards  increased,  after  the 
rebuilding  of  the  Capitol ;  because  they  were 
collected  from  all  cities  of  Italy  and  Greece,  and 
especially  from  those  of  Erythroea,  and  were 
brought  to  Rome,  under  the  name  of  whatever 
Sibyl  they  were.  Further,  that  the  eighth  was 
from  the  Hellespont,  born  in  the  Trojan  terri- 
tory, in  the  village  of  Marpessus,  about  the  town 
of  Gergithus ;  and  Heraclides  of  Pontus  writes 
that  she  lived  in  the  times  of  Solon  and  Cyrus ; 
—  the  ninth  of  Phrygia,  who  gave  oracles  at 
Ancyra  ;  —  the  tenth  of  Tibur,  by  name  Albunea, 
who  is  worshipped  at  Tibur  as  a  goddess,  near  the 
banks  of  the  river  Anio,  in  the  depths  of  which 
her  statue  is  said  to  have  been  found,  holding  in 
her  hand  a  book.  The  senate  transferred  her 
oracles  into  the  Capitol. 

The  predictions  of  all  these  Sibyls '  are  both 
brought  forward  and  esteemed  as  such,  except 
those  of  the  Cumsean  Sibyl,  whose  books  are 
concealed  by  the  Romans ;  nor  do  they  con- 
sider it  lawful  for  them  to  be  inspected  by  any 


'  [Concerning  the  Sibyls,  see  also,  fully,  Lardner,  Credib.,  ii. 
258.  334,  etc.  On  the  use  here  and  elsewhere  made  of  them  by 
our  author,  Ibid.,  p.  343,  and  iii.  544;  also  pp.  14  and  15,  jw/ra.] 


one  but  the  Quindecemviri.  And  there  are  sep- 
arate books  the  production  of  each,  but  because 
these  are  inscribed  with  the  name  of  the  Sibyl 
they  are  believed  to  be  the  work  of  one ;  and 
they  are  confused,  nor  can  the  productions  of 
each  be  distinguished  and  assigned  to  their  own 
authors,  except  in  the  case  of  the  Erythraean 
Sibyl,  for  she  both  inserted  her  own  true  name 
in  her  verse,  and  predicted  that  she  would  be 
called  Erythraean,  though  she  was  born  at  Baby- 
lon. But  we  also  shall  speak  of  the  Sibyl  with- 
out any  distinction,  wherever  we  shall  have 
occasion  to  use  their  testimonies.  All  these 
Sibyls,  then,  proclaim  one  God,  and  especially 
the  Erythraean,  who  is  regarded  among  the 
others  as  more  celebrated  and  noble ;  since 
Fenestella,  a  most  diligent  writer,  speaking  of 
the  Quindecemviri,  says  that,  after  the  rebuild- 
ing of  the  Capitol,  Caius  Curio  the  consul  pro- 
posed to  the  senate  that  ambassadors  should  be 
sent  to  Erythrae  to  search  out  and  bring  to 
Rome  the  writings  of  the  Sibyl ;  and  that,  ac- 
cordingly, Publius  Gabinius,  Marcus  Otacilius, 
and  Lucius  Valerius  were  sent,  who  conveyed  co 
Rome  about  a  thousand  verses  written  out  by 
private  persons.  We  have  shown  before  that 
Varro  made  the  same  statement.  Now  in  these 
verses  which  the  ambassadors  brought  to  Rome, 
are  these  testimonies  respecting  the  one  God  :  — 

1.  "One  God,  who  is  alone, most  mighty,  uncreated." 

This  is  the  only  supreme  God,  who  made  the 
heaven,  and  decked  it  with  lights. 

2.  "  But  there  is  one  only  God  of  pre-eminent  power, 

who  made  the  heaven,  and  sun,  and  stars,  and 
moon,  and  fruitful  earth,  and  waves  of  the 
water  of  the  sea." 

And  since  He  alone  is  the  framer  of  the  uni- 
verse, and  the  artificer  of  all  things  of  which  it 
consists  or  which  are  contained  in  it,  it  testifies 
that  He  alone  ought  to  be  worshipped  :  — 

3.  "  Worship    Him  who   is   alone    the   ruler  of  the 

world,  who  alone  was  and  is  from  age  to  age." 

Also  another  Sibyl,  whoever  she  is,  when  she 
said  that  she  conveyed  the  voice  of  God  to  men, 
thus  spoke  :  — 

4.  "  I  am  the  one  only  God,  and  there  is  no  other 

God." 

I  would  now  follow  up  the  testimonies  of  the 
others,  were  it  not  that  these  are  sufficient,  and 
that  I  reserve  others  for  more  befitting  oppor- 
tunities. But  since  we  are  defending  the  cause 
of  truth  before  those  who  err  from  the  truth  and 
serve  false  religions,  what  kind  of  proof  oughl 
we  to  bring  forward  ^  against  them,  rather  than 
to  refute  them  by  the  testimonies  of  their  own 
gods  ? 


2  [Vol.  ii.  cap.  28,  p.  143.] 


Chap.  VIII.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


17 


CH.AP.     VII. CONCERNING     THE     TESTIMONIES     OF 

APOLLO    AND    THE    GODS. 

Apollo,  indeed,  whom  they  think  divine  above 
all  others,  and  especially  prophetic,  giving  re- 
sponses at  Colophon,  —  I  suppose  because,  in- 
duced by  the  pleasantness  of  Asia,  he  had 
removed  from  Delphi,  —  to  some  one  who  asked 
who  He  was,  or  what  God  was  at  all,  replied  iti 
twenty-one  verses,  of  which  this  is  the  begin- 
ning :  — 

"  Self-produced,  untaught,  without  a  mother,  unshaken, 
A  name  not  even  to  be  comprised  in  word,  dwelling  in 

fire, 
This  is  God;  and  we  His  messengers  are  a  slight  por- 
tion of  God." 

Can  any  one  suspect  that  this  is  spoken  of  Jupi- 
ter, who  had  both  a  mother  and  a  name  ?  Why 
should  I  say  that  Mercury,  that  thrice  greatest, 
of  whom  I  have  made  mention  above,  not  only 
speaks  of  God  as  "  without  a  mother,"  as  Apollo 
does,  but  also  as  "  without  a  father,"  because  He 
has  no  origin  from  any  other  source  but  Him- 
self? For  He  cannot  be  produced  from  any 
one,  who  Himself  produced  all  things,  I  have, 
as  I  think,  sufficiently  taught  by  arguments,  and 
confirmed  by  witnesses,  that  which  is  suffi- 
ciently plain  by  itself,  that  there  is  one  only 
King  of  the  universe,  one  Father,  one  God. 

But  perchance  some  one  may  ask  of  us  the 
same  question  which  Hortensius  asks  in  Cicero  : 
If  God  is  one  only,'  what  solitude  can  be  happy? 
As  though  we,  in  asserting  that  He  is  one,  say 
that  He  is  desolate  and  solitary.  Undoubtedly 
He  has  ministers,  whom  we  call  messengers.  And 
that  is  true,  which  I  have  before  related,  that 
Seneca  said  in  his  Exhortations  that  God  pro- 
duced ministers  of  His  kingdom.  But  these  are 
neither  gods,  nor  do  they  wish  to  be  called  gods 
or  to  be  worshipped,  inasmuch  as  they  do  noth- 
ing but  execute  the  command  and  will  of  God. 
Nor,  however,  are  they  gods  who  are  worshipped 
in  common,  whose  number  is  small  and  fixed. 
But  if  the  worshippers  of  the  gods  think  that 
they  worship  those  beings  whom  we  call  the 
ministers  of  the  Supreme  God,  there  is  no  rea- 
son why  they  should  envy  us  who  say  that  there 
is  one  God,  and  deny  that  there  are  many.  If 
a  multitude  of  gods  delights  them,  we  do  not 
speak  of  twelve,  or  three  hundred  and  sixty-five, 
as  Orpheus  did  ;  but  we  convict  them  of  innu- 
merable errors  on  the  other  side,  in  thinking  that 
they  are  so  kw.  Let  them  know,  however,  by 
what  name  they  ought  to  be  called,  lest  they  do 
injury  to  the  true  God,  whose  name  they  set  forth, 
while  they  assign  it  to  more  than  one.  Let  them 
believe  their  own  Apollo,  who  in  that  same  re- 
sponse took  away  from  the  other  gods  their  name, 
as  he  took  away  the  dominion  from  Jupiter.     For 

'  [i  John  iv.  8.     The  Divine  Triad  "  is  Love."] 


the  third  verse  shows  that  the  ministers  of  God 
ought  not  to  be  called  gods,  but  angels.  He 
spoke  falsely  respecting  himself,  indeed ;  for 
though  he  was  of  the  number  of  demons,  he 
reckoned  himself  among  the  angels  of  God,  and 
then  in  other  responses  he  confessed  himself  a 
demon.  For  when  he  was  asked  how  he  wished 
to  be  supplicated,  he  thus  answered  :  — 

"O  all-wise,  all-learned,  versed  in  many  pursuits,  hear, 
O  demon." 

And  SO,  again,  when  at  the  entreaty  of  some  one 
he  uttered  an  imprecation  against  the  Sminthian 
Apollo,  he  began  with  this  verse  :  — 

"  O  harmony  of  the  world,  bearing  light,  all-wise  demon." 

What  therefore  remains,  except  that  by  his  own 
confession  he  is  subject  to  the  scourge  of  the 
true  God  and  to  everlasting  punishment?  For 
in  another  response  he  also  said  :  — 

"  The  demons  who  go  about  the  earth  and  about  the  sea 
Without  weariness,  are  subdued  beneath  the  scourge 
of  God." 

We  speak  on  the  subject  of  both  in  the  second 
book.  In  the  meantime  it  is  enough  for  us,  that 
while  he  wishes  to  honour  and  place  himself  in 
heaven,  he  has  confessed,  as  the  nature  of  the 
matter  is,  in  what  manner  they  are  to  be  named 
who  always  stand  beside  God. 

Therefore  let  men  withdraw  themselves  from 
errors  ;  and  laying  aside  corrupt  superstitions,  let 
them  acknowledge  their  Father  and  Lord,  whose 
excellence  cannot  be  estimated,  nor  His  great- 
ness perceived,  nor  His  beginning  comprehended. 
When  the  earnest  attention  of  the  human  mind 
and  its  acute  sagacity  and  memory  has  reached 
Him,  all  ways  being,  as  it  were,  summed  up  and 
exhausted,^  it  stops,  it  is  at  a  loss,  it  fails ;  nor  is 
there  anything  beyond  to  which  it  can  proceed. 
But  because  that  which  exists  must  of  necessity 
have  had  a  beginning,  it  follows  that  since  there 
was  nothing  before  Him,  He  was  produced  from 
Himself  before  all  things.  Therefore  He  is  called 
by  Apollo  "  self-produced,"  by  the  Sibyl  "  self- 
created,"  "uncreated,"  and  "unmade."  And 
Seneca,  an  acute  man,  saw  and  expressed  this  in 
his  Exhortations.  "  We,"  he  said,  "  are  depend- 
ent upon  another."  Therefore  we  look  to  some 
one  to  whom  we  owe  that  which  is  most  excel- 
lent in  us.  Another  brought  us  into  being,  an- 
other formed  us;  but  God  of  His  own  power 
made  Himself. 

CHAP.  VI?I.  —  THA't  GOD  IS  WfTHOlTr  A  BODY,  NOR 
DOES  HE  NEED  DIFFERENCE  OF  SEX  FOR  PRO- 
CREATION. 

It  is  proved,  therefore,  by  these  witnesses,  so 
numerous  and  of  such  authority,  that  the  universe 


^  Subductis  et  consuramatis. 


iS 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  I. 


is  governed  by  the  power  and  providence  of 
one  God,  whose  energy  and  majesty  Plato  in  the 
Timczus  asserts  to  be  so  great,  that  no  one  can 
either  conceive  it  in  his  mind,  or  give  utterance 
to  it  in  words,  on  account  of  His  surpassing  and 
incalculable  power.  And  then  can  any  one  doubt 
whether  any  thing  can  be  difficult  or  impossible 
for  God,  who  by  His  providence  designed,  by 
His  energy  established,  and  by  His  judgment 
completed  those  works  so  great  and  wonderful, 
and  even  now  sustains  them  by  His  spirit,  and 
governs  them  by  His  power,  being  incomprehen- 
sible and  unspeakable,  and  fully  known  to  no 
other  than  Himself?  Wherefore,  as  I  often  re- 
flect on  the  subject  of  such  great  majesty,  they 
who  worship  the  gods  sometimes  appear  so  blind, 
so  incapable  of  reflection,  so  senseless,  so  little 
removed  from  the  mute  animals,  as  to  believe 
that  those  who  are  born  from  the  natural  inter- 
course of  the  sexes  could  have  had  anything  of 
majesty  and  divine  influence ;  since  the  Ery- 
thraean Sibyl  says  :  "  It  is  impossible  for  a  God 
to  be  fashioned  from  the  loins  of  a  man  and  the 
womb  of  a  woman."  And  if  this  is  true,  as  it 
really  is,  it  is  evident  that  Hercules,  Apollo, 
Bacchus,  Mercury,  and  Jupiter,  with  the  rest, 
were  but  men,  since  they  were  born  from  the  two 
sexes.  But  what  is  so  far  removed  from  the  na- 
ture of  God  as  that  operation  which  He  Himself 
assigned  to  mortals  for  the  propagation  of  their 
race,  and  which  cannot  be  affected  without  cor- 
poreal substance  ? 

Therefore,  if  the  gods  are  immortal  and  eter- 
nal, what  need  is  there  of  the  other  sex,  when 
they  themselves  do  not  require  succession,  since 
they  are  always  about  to  exist  ?  For  assuredly 
in  the  case  of  mankind  and  the  other  animals, 
there  is  no  other  reason  for  difference  of  sex  and 
procreation  and  bringing  forth,  except  that  all 
classes  of  living  creatures,  inasmuch  as  they  are 
doomed  to  death  by  the  condition  of  their  mor- 
tality, may  be  preserved  by  mutual  succession. 
But  God,  who  is  immortal,  has  no  need  of  differ- 
ence of  sex,  nor  of  succession.  Some  one  will 
say  that  this  arrajtgement  is  Jtecessary,  in  order 
that  He  may  have  some  ,to  minister  to  Him,  or 
over  whom  He  inwy:be^r  ^rule.  What  need  is 
there  of  the  female  sex,  since  God,  who  is  al- 
mighty, is  able  to  produce  sons  without  the 
agency  of  the  female  ?  For  if  He  has  granted 
to  certain  minute  creatures '  that  they 

"  Should  gather  offspring  for  themselves  with  their  mouth 
from  leaves  and  sweet  herbs," 

why  should  any  one  think  it  impossible  for  God 
Himself  to  have  offspring  except  by  union  with 
the  other  sex?  No  one,  therefore,  is  so  thought- 
less as  not  to  understand  that  those  were  mere 


'  [The  bees,  according  to  Virgil,  Ceorg.,  hi.  199.] 


mortals,  whom  the  ignorant  and  foolish  regard 
and  worship  as  gods.  Why,  then,  some  one  will 
say,  were  they  believed  to  be  gods  ?  Doubtless 
because  they  were  very  great  and  powerful  kings  ; 
and  since,  on  account  of  the  merits  of  their  vir- 
tues, or  offices,  or  the  arts  which  they  discovered, 
they  were  beloved  by  those  over  whom  they  had 
ruled,  they  were  consecrated  to  lasting  memory. 
And  if  any  one  doubts  this,  let  him  consider  their 
exploits  and  deeds,  the  whole  of  which  both 
ancient  poets  and  historians  have  handed  down. 

CHAP.     IX.  —  OF     HERCULES     AND     HIS     LIFE     AND 
DEATH.^ 

Did  not  Hercules,  who  is  most  renowned  for 
his  valour,  and  who  is  regarded  as  an  Africanus 
among  the  gods,  by  his  debaucheries,  lusts,  and 
adulteries,  pollute  the  world,  which  he  is  related 
to  have  traversed  and  purified  ?  And  no  wonder, 
since  he  was  born  from  an  adulterous  intercourse 
with  Alcmena. 

What  divinity  could  there  have  been  in  him, 
who,  enslaved  to  his  own  vices,  against  all  laws, 
treated  with  infamy,  disgrace,  and  outrage,  both 
males  and  females?  Nor,  indeed,  are  those 
great  and  wonderful  actions  which  he  performed 
to  be  judged  such  as  to  be  thought  worthy  of 
being  attributed  to  divine  excellence.  For  what ! 
is  it  so  magnificent  if  he  overcame  a  lion  and 
a  boar ;  if  he  shot  down  birds  with  arrows ;  if 
he  cleansed  a  royal  stable  ;  if  he  conquered  a 
virago,  and  deprived  her  of  her  belt ;  if  he  slew 
savage  horses  together  with  their  master?  These 
are  the  deeds  of  a  brave  and  heroic  man,  but 
still  a  man  ;  for  those  things  which  he  overcame 
were  frail  and  mortal.  For  there  is  no  power  so 
great,  as  the  orator  says,  which  cannot  be  weak- 
ened and  broken  by  iron  and  strength.  But  to 
conquer  the  mind,  and  to  restrain  anger,  is  the 
part  of  the  bravest  man  ;  and  these  things  he 
never  did  or  could  do  :  for  one  who  does  these 
things  I  do  not  compare  with  excellent  men,  but 
I  judge  liim  to  be  most  like  to  a  god. 

I  could  wish  that  he  had  added  something  on 
the  subject  of  lust,  luxury,  desire,  and  arrogance, 
so  as  to  complete  the  excellence  of  him  whom 
he  judged  to  be  like  to  a  god.  For  he  is  not  to 
be  thought  braver  who  overcomes  a  lion,  than 
he  who  overcomes  the  violent  wild  beast  shut  up 
within  himself,  viz.  anger  ;  or  he  who  has  brought 
down  most  rapacious  birds,  than  he  who  restrains 
most  covetous  desires ;  or  he  who  subdues  a 
warlike  Amazon,  than  he  who  subdues  lust,  the 
vanquisher  ^  of  modesty  and  fame  ;  or  he  who 
cleanses  a  stable  from  dung,  than  he  who  cleanses 
his  heart  from  vices,  which  are  more  destructive 


2  [Vol.  ii.  p.  179.  It  is  interesting  to  observe  the  influence  of 
Justin  and  Clement  on  the  reasoning  ot  the  later  Fathers,  not  except- 
ing St.  Augustine.] 

i  Debellatncem. 


Chap.  X.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


19 


evils  because  they  are  peculiarly  his  own,  than 
those  which  might  have  been  avoided  and  guarded 
against.  From  this  it  comes  to  pass,  that  he 
alone  ought  to  be  judged  a  brave  man  who  is 
temperate,  moderate,  and  just.  But  if  any  one 
considers  what  the  works  of  God  are,  he  will  at 
once  judge  all  these  things,  which  most  trifling 
men  admire,  to  be  ridiculous.  For  they  meas- 
ure them  not  by  the  divine  power  of  which  they 
are  ignorant,  but  by  the  weakness  of  their  own 
strength.  For  no  one  will  deny  this,  that  Her- 
cules was  not  only  a  servant  to  Eurystheus,  a 
king,  which  to  a  certain  extent  may  appear  hon- 
ourable, but  also  to  an  unchaste  woman,  Om- 
phale,  who  used  to  order  him  to  sit  at  her  feet, 
clothed  with  her  garments,  and  executing  an  ap- 
pointed task.  Detestable  baseness !  But  such 
was  the  price  at  which  pleasure  was  valued. 
What !  some  one  will  say,  do  you  think  that  the 
poets  are  to  be  believed?  Why  should  I  not 
think  so?  For  it  is  not  Lucilius  who  relates 
these  things,  or  Lucian,  who  spared  not  men 
nor  gods,  but  these  especially  who  sung  the 
praises  of  the  gods. 

Whom,  then,  shall  we  believe,  if  we  do  not 
credit  those  who  praise  them  ?  Let  him  who 
thinks  that  these  speak  falsely  produce  other 
authors  on  whom  we  may  rely,  who  may  teach 
us  who  these  gods  are,  in  what  manner  and  from 
what  source  they  had  their  origin,  what  is  their 
strength,  what  their  number,  what  their  power, 
what  there  is  in  them  which  is  admirable  and 
worthy  of  adoration  —  what  mystery,  in  short, 
more  to  be  relied  on,  and  more  true.  He  will 
produce  no  such  authorities.  Let  us,  then,  give 
credence  to  those  who  did  not  speak  for  the 
purpose  of  censure,  but  to  proclaim  their  praise. 
He  sailed,  then,  with  the  Argonauts,  and  sacked 
Troy,  being  enraged  with  Laomedon  on  account 
of  the  reward  refused  to  him,  by  Laomedon,  for 
the  preservation  of  his  daughter,  from  which 
circumstance  it  is  evident  at  what  time  he  lived. 
He  also,  excited  by  rage  and  madness,  slew  his 
wife,  together  with  his  children.  Is  this  he 
whom  men  consider  a  god?  But  his  heir  Phil- 
octetes  did  not  so  regard  him,  who  applied  a 
torch  to  him  when  about  to  be  burnt,  who  wit- 
nessed the  burning  and  wasting  of  his  limbs  and 
sinews,  who  buried  his  bones  and  ashes  on 
Mount  CEta,  in  return  for  which  office  he  re- 
ceived his  arrows. 

CHAP.    X. OF   THE    LIFE    AND    ACTIONS    OF   JESCV- 

LAPiaS,    APOLLO,    NEPTUNE,     MARS,     CASTOR     AND 
POLLUX,    MERCURY    AND    BACCHUS. 

What  Other  action  worthy  of  divine  honours, 
except  the  healing  of  Hippolytus,  did  ^'t^scula- 
pius  perform,  whose  birth  also  was  not  without 
disgrace   to  Apollo?     His    death  was    certainly 


more  renowned,  because  he  earned  the  distinc- 
tion of  being  struck  with  lightning  by  a  god. 
Tarquitius,  in  a  dissertation  concerning  illustri- 
ous men,  says  that  he  was  born  of  uncertain 
parents,  exposed,  and  found  by  some  hunters ; 
that  he  was  nourished  by  a  dog,  and  that,  being 
delivered  to  Chiron,  he  learned  the  art  of  medi- 
cine. He  says,  moreover,  that  he  was  a  Mes- 
senian,  but  that  he  spent  some  time  at  Epidaurus. 
Tully  also  says  that  he  was  buried  at  Cynosurse. 
What  was  the  conduct  of  Apollo,  his  father? 
Did  he  not,  on  account  of  his  impassioned  love, 
most  disgracefully  tend  the  flock  of  another,  and 
build  walls  for  Laomedon,  having  been  hired 
together  with  Neptune  for  a  reward,  which  could 
with  impunity  be  withheld  from  him?  And 
from  him  first  the  perfidious  king  learned  to 
refuse  A?  carry  out  whatever  contract  he  had 
made  with  gods.  And  he  also,  while  in  love 
with  a  beautiful  boy,  offered  violence  to  him, 
and  while  engaged  in  play,  slew  him. 

Mars,  when  guilty  of  homicide,  and  set  free 
from  the  charge  of  murder  by  the  Athenians 
through  favour,  lest  he  should  appear  to  be  too 
fierce  and  savage,  committed  adultery  with 
Venus.  Castor  and  Pollux,  while  they  are  en- 
gaged in  carrying  off  the  wives  of  others,  ceased 
to  be  twin-brothers.  For  Idas,  being  excited 
with  jealousy  on  account  of  the  injury,  transfixed 
one  of  the  brothers  with  his  sword.  And  the 
poets  relate  that  they  live  and  die  alternately : 
so  that  they  are  now  the  most  wretched  not  only 
of  the  gods,  but  also  of  all  mortals,  inasmuch  as 
they  are  not  permitted  to  die  once  only.  And 
yet  Homer,  differing  from  the  other  poets,  sim- 
ply records  that  they  both  died.  For  when  he 
represented  Helen  as  sitting  by  the  side  of  Priam 
on  the  walls  of  Troy,  and  recognising  all  the 
chieftains  of  Greece,  but  as  looking  in  vain  for 
her  brothers  only,  he  added  to  his  speech  a 
verse  of  this  kind  :  — 

"  Thus  she  ;  unconscious  that  in  Sparta  they, 
Their  native  land,  beneath  the  sod  were  laid." 

What  did  Mercury,  a  thief  and  spendthrift,  leave 
to  contribute  to  his  fame,  except  the  memory 
of  his  frauds?  Doubtless  he  was  deserving  of 
heaven,  because  he  taught  the  exercises  of  the 
patestra,  and  was  the  first  who  invented  the  lyre.' 
It  is  necessary  that  Father  Liber  should  be  of 
chief  authority,  and  of  the  first  rank  in  the  sen- 
ate of  the  gods,  because  he  was  the  only  one  of 
them  all,  exce]:)t  Jupiter,  who  triumphed,  led  an 
army,  and  subdued  the  Indians.  But  that  very 
great  and  unconquered  Indian  commander  was 
most  shamefully  overpowered  by  love  and  lust. 
For,  being  conveyed  to  Crete  with  his  effeminate 
retinue,  he  met  with  an  unchaste  woman  on  the 
shore  ;    and  in  the  confidence    inspired   by  his 


I   [See  vol.  V.  p.  43,  .ind  note,  p.  46,  this  series.] 


20 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  I. 


Indian  victory,  he  wished  to  give  proof  of  his 
manliness,  lest  he  should  appear  too  effeminate. 
And  so  he  took  to  himself  in  marriage  that 
woman,  the  betrayer  of  her  father,  and  the 
murderer  of  her  brother,  after  that  she  had  been 
deserted  and  repudiated  by  another  husband  ; 
and  he  made  her  Libera,  and  with  her  ascended 
into  heaven. 

What  was  the  conduct  of  Jupiter,  the  father 
of  all  these,  who  in  the  customary  prayer  is 
styled '  Most  Excellent  and  Great  ?  Is  he  not, 
from  his  earhest  childhood,  proved  to  be  impi- 
ous, and  almost  a  parricide,  since  he  expelled 
his  father  from  his  kingdom,  and  banished  him, 
and  (lid  not  await  his  death  though  he  was  aged 
and  worn  out,  such  was  his  eagerness  for  rule  ? 
And  when  he  had  taken  his  father's  throne  by 
violence  and  arms,  he  was  attacked  with  war  by 
the  Titans,  \Vhich  was  the  beginning  of  evils  to 
the  human  race  ;  and  when  these  had  been  over- 
come and  lasting  peace  procured,  he  spent  the 
rest  of  his  life  in  debaucheries  and  adulteries. 
I  forbear  to  mention  the  virgins  whom  he  dis- 
honoured. For  that  is  wont  to  be  judged 
endurable.  I  cannot  pass  by  the  cases  of  Am- 
phitryon and  Tyndarus,  whose  houses  he  filled 
to  overflowing  with  disgrace  and  infamy.  But 
he  reached  the  height  of  impiety  and  guilt  in 
carrying  off  the  royal  boy.  For  it  did  not  appear 
enough  to  cover  himself  with  infamy  in  offering 
violence  to  women,  unless  he  also  outraged  his 
own  sex.  This  is  true  adultery,  which  is  done 
against  nature.  Whether  he  who  committed 
these  crimes  can  be  called  Greatest  is  a  matter 
of  question,  undoubtedly  he  is  not  the  Best ;  to 
which  name  corrupters,  adulterers,  and  incestu- 
ous persons  have  no  claim ;  unless  it  happens 
that  we  men  are  mistaken  in  terming  those  who 
do  such  things  wicked  and  abandoned,  and  in 
judging  them  most  deserving  of  every  kind  of 
punishment.  But  Marcus  Tullius  was  foolish  in 
upbraiding  Caius  Verres  with  adulteries,  for  Ju- 
piter, whom  he  worshipped,  committed  the 
same ;  and  in  upbraiding  Publius  Clodius  with 
incest  with  his  sister,  for  he  who  was  Best  and 
Greatest  had  the  same  person  both  as  sister  and 
wife. 

CHAP.  XI.  —  OF  THE  ORIGIN,  LIFE,  REIGN,  NAME, 
AND  DEATH  OF  JUPITER,  AND  OF  SATURN  AND 
URANUS.^ 

Who,  then,  is  so  senseless  as  to  imagine  that 
he  reigns  in  heaven  who  ought  not  even  to  have 
reigned  on  earth  ?  It  was  not  without  humour 
that  a  certain  poet  wrote  of  the  triumph  of  Cu- 
pid :  in  which  book  he  not  only  represented 
Cupid  as  the  most  powerful  of  the  gods,  but 


'   [Nat.  Dear.,  iii.  36.     De  Maistre,  Soirees,  i.  p,  30,  and  note, 
P  63J 

^  [Compare  the  remorseless  satire  of  Arnobius,  vol.  vi.  p.  49S.] 


also  as  their  conqueror.  For  having  enumerated 
the  loves  of  each,  by  which  they  had  come  into 
the  power  and  dominion  of  Cupid,  he  sets  in 
array  a  procession,  in  which  Jupiter,  with  the 
other  gods,  is  led  in  chains  before  the  chariot  of 
him,  celebrating  a  triumph.  This  is  elegantly 
pictured  by  the  poet,  but  it  is  not  far  removed 
from  the  truth.  For  he  who  is  without  virtue, 
who  is  overpowered  by  desire  and  wicked  lusts, 
is  not,  as  the  poet  feigned,  in  subjection  to  Cu- 
pid, but  to  everlasting  death.  But  let  us  cease 
to  speak  concerning  morals ;  let  us  examine  the 
matter,  in  order  that  men  may  understand  in 
what  errors  they  are  miserably  engaged.  The 
common  people  imagine  that  Jupiter  reigns  in 
heaven ;  both  learned  and  unlearned  are  alike 
persuaded  of  this.  For  both  religion  itself,  and 
prayers,  and  hymns,  and  shrines,  and  images 
demonstrate  this.  And  yet  they  admit  that  he 
was  also  descended  from  Saturn  and  Rhea. 
How  can  he  appear  a  god,  or  be  believed,  as 
the  poet  says,  to  be  the  author  of  men  and  all 
things,  when  innumerable  thousands  of  men  ex- 
isted before  his  birth  —  those,  for  instance,  who 
lived  during  the  reign  of  Saturn,  and  enjoyed 
the  light  sooner  than  Jupiter?  I  see  that  one 
god  was  king  in  the  earliest  times,  and  another 
in  the  times  that  followed.  It  is  therefore  possi- 
ble that  there  may  be  another  hereafter.  For 
if  the  former  kingdom  was  changed,  why  should 
we  not  expect  that  the  latter  may  possibly  be 
changed,  unless  by  chance  it  was  possible  for 
Saturn  to  produce  one  more  powerful  than  him- 
self, but  impossible  for  Jupiter  so  to  do  ?  And 
yet  the  divine  government  is  always  unchange- 
able ;  or  if  it  is  changeable,  which  is  an  im- 
possibility, it  is  undoubtedly  changeable  at  all 
times. 

Is  it  possible,  then,  for  Jupiter  to  lose  his 
kingdom  as  his  father  lost  it?  It  is  so  undoubt- 
edly. For  when  that  deity  had  spared  neither 
virgins  nor  married  women,  he  abstained  from 
Thetis  only  in  consequence  of  an  oracle  which 
foretold  that  whatever  son  should  be  born  from 
her  would  be  greater  than  his  father.  And  first 
of  all  there  was  in  him  a  want  of  foreknowledge 
not  befitting  a  god  ;  for  had  not  Themis  related 
to  him  future  events,  he  would  not  have  known 
them  of  his  own  accord.  But  if  he  is  not 
divine,  he  is  not  indeed  a  god ;  for  the  name 
of  divinity  is  derived  from  god,  as  humanity  is 
from  man.  Then  there  was  a  consciousness  of 
weakness  ;  but  he  who  has  feared,  must  plainly 
have  feared  one  greater  than  himself.  But  he 
who  does  this  assuredly  knows  that  he  is  not  the 
greatest,  since  something  greater  can  exist.  He 
also  swears  most  solemnly  by  the  Stygian  marsh  : 
"  Which  is  set  forth  the  sole  object  of  religious 
dread  to  the  gods  above."  What  is  this  object 
of  religious  dread?    Or  by  whom  is  it  set  forth? 


Chap.  XL] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


21 


Is  there,  then,  some  mighty  power  which  may 
punish  the  gods  who  commit  perjury?  What  is 
this  great  dread  of  the  infernal  marsh,  if  they 
are  immortal?  Why  should  they  fear  that  which 
none  are  about  to  see,  except  those  who  are 
bound  by  the  necessity  of  death  ?  \^^hy,  then, 
do  men  raise  their  eyes  to  the  heaven  ?  Why  do 
they  swear  by  the  gods  above,  when  the  gods 
above  themselves  have  recourse  to  the  infernal 
gods,  and  find  among  them  an  object  of  venera- 
tion and  worship?  But  what  is  the  meaning  of 
that  saying,  that  there  are  fates  whom  all  the 
gods  and  Jupiter  himself  obey?  If  the  power 
of  the  Parcae  is  so  great,  that  they  are  of  more 
avail  than  all  the  heavenly  gods,  and  their 
ruler  and  lord  himself,  why  should  not  they  be 
rather  said  to  reign,  since  necessity  compels  all 
the  gods  to  obey  their  laws  and  ordinances? 
Now,  who  can  entertain  a  doubt  that  he  who 
is  subservient  to  anything  cannot  be  greatest? 
For  if  he  were  so,  he  would  not  receive  fates,  but 
would  appoint  them.  Now  I  return  to  another 
subject  which  I  had  omitted.  In  the  case  of  one 
goddess  only  he  exercised  self-restraint,  though 
he  was  deeply  enamoured  of  her ;  but  this  was 
not  from  any  virtue,  but  through  fear  of  a  suc- 
cessor. But  this  fear  plainly  denotes  one  who 
is  both  m.ortal  and  feeble,  and  of  no  weight : 
for  at  the  very  hour  of  his  birth  he  might  have 
been  put  to  death,  as  his  elder  brother  had 
been  put  to  death ;  and  if  it  had  been  possible 
for  him  to  have  lived,  he  would  never  have  given 
up  the  supreme  power  to  a  younger  brother. 
But  yiipiter  himself  having  been  preserved  by 
stealth,  and  stealthily  nourished,  was  called  Zeus, 
or  Zen,'  not,  as  they  imagine,  from  the  fervor  of 
heavenly  fire,  or  because  he  is  the  giver  of  life, 
or  because  he  breathes  life  into  living  creatures, 
which  power  belongs  to  God  alone  ;  for  how  can 
he  impart  the  breath  of  life  who  has  himself  re- 
ceived it  from  another  source  ?  But  he  was  so 
called  because  he  was  the  first  who  lived  of  the 
male  children  of  Saturn.  Men,  therefore,  might 
have  had  another  god  as  their  ruler,  if  Saturn 
had  not  been  deceived  by  his  wife.  But  it  will 
be  said  the  poets  feigned  these  things.  Who- 
ever entertains  this  opinion  is  in  error.  For  they 
spoke  respecting  men ;  but  in  order  that  they 
might  embellish  those  whose  memory  they  used 
to  celebrate  with  praises,  they  said  that  they  were 
gods.  Those  things,  therefore,  which  they  spoke 
concerning  them  as  gods  were  feigned,  and  not 
those  which  they  spoke  concerning  them  as  men  ; 
and  this  will  be  manifest  from  an  instance  which 
we  will  bring  forward.  When  about  to  offer  vio- 
lence to  Danae,  he  poured  into  her  lap  a  great 
quantity  of  golden  coins.  This  was  the  price 
which  he  paid  for  her  dishonour.     But  the  poets 


'  Zeus  or  t^v.     [Quod  sit  auclor  vita;.     Delphin  ncte.^ 


who  spoke  about  him  as  a  god,  that  they  might 
not  weaken  the  authority  of  his  supposed  majesty, 
feigned  that  he  himself  descended  in  a  shower 
of  gold,  making  use  of  the  same  figure  with 
which  they  speak  of  showers  of  iron  when  they 
describe  a  multitude  of  darts  and  arrows.  He 
is  said  to  have  carried  away  Ganymede  by  an 
eagle  ;  it  is  a  picture  of  the  poets.  But  he  either 
carried  him  off  by  a  legion,  which  has  an  eagle 
for  its  standard ;  or  the  ship  on  board  of  which 
he  was  placed  had  its  tutelary  deity  in  the  shape 
of  an  eagle,  just  as  it  had  the  effigy  of  a  bull 
when  he  seized  Europa  and  conveyed  her  across 
the  sea.  In  the  same  manner,  it  is  related  that 
he  changed  lo,  the  daughter  of  Inachus,  into  a 
heifer.  And  in  order  that  she  might  escape  the 
anger  of  Juno,  just  as  she  was,  now  covered  with 
bristly  hair,  and  in  the  shape  of  a  heifer,  she  is 
said  to  have  swam  over  the  sea,  and  to  have 
come  into  Egypt ;  and  there,  having  recovered 
her  former  appearance,  she  became  the  goddess 
who  is  now  called  Isis.  By  what  argument,  then, 
can  it  be  proved  that  Europa  did  not  sit  on  the 
bull,  and  that  lo  was  not  changed  into  a  heifer? 
Because  there  is  a  fixed  day  in  the  annals  on 
which  the  voyage  of  Isis  is  celebrated ;  from 
which  fact  we  learn  that  she  did  not  swim  across 
the  sea,  but  sailed  over.  Therefore  they  who 
appear  to  themselves  to  be  wise  because  they 
understand  that  there  cannot  be  a  living  and 
earthly  body  in  heaven,  reject  the  whole  story 
of  Ganymede  as  false,  and  perceive  that  the 
occurrence  took  place  on  earth,  inasnmch  as  the 
matter  and  the  lust  itself  is  earthly.  The  poets 
did  not  therefore  invent  these  transactions,  for 
if  they  were  to  do  so  they  would  be  most  worth- 
less ;  but  they  added  a  certain  colour  to  the 
transactions.^  For  it  was  not  for  the  purpose 
of  detraction  that  they  said  these  things,  but 
from  a  desire  to  embellish  them.  Hence  men 
are  deceived ;  especially  because,  while  they 
think  that  all  these  things  are  feigned  by  the 
poets,  they  worship  that  of  which  they  are  igno- 
rant. For  they  do  not  know  what  is  the  limit 
of  poetic  licence,  how  far  it  is  allowable  to  pro- 
ceed in  fiction,  since  it  is  the  business  of  the 
poet  with  some  gracefulness  to  change  and  trans- 
fer actual  occurrences  into  other  representations 
by  oblique  transformations.  But  to  feign  the 
whole  of  that  which  you  relate,  that  is  to  be 
foolish  and  deceitful  rather  than  to  be  a  poet. 

But  grant  that  they  feigned  those  things  which 
are  believed  to  be  fabulous,  did  they  also  feign 
those  things  which  are  related  about  the  female 
deities  and  the  marriages  of  the  gods?  Why, 
then,  are  they  so  represented,  and  so  worshipped  ? 
unless  by  chance  not  the  poets  only,  but  painters 
also,  and  statuaries,  speak  falsehoods.      For  if 

-  [On  the  Poets,  vol.  i.  cap.  2,  p.  273.] 


22 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  I. 


this  is  the  Jupiter  who  is  called  by  you  a  god,  if 
it  is  not  he  who  was  born  from  Saturn  and  Ops, 
no  other  image  but  his  alone  ought  to  have  been 
placed  in  all  the  temples.  What  meaning  have 
the  efhgies  of  women?  What  the  doubtful  sex? 
m  which,  if  this  Jupiter  is  represented,  the  very 
stones  will  confess  that  he  is  a  man.  They  say 
that  the  poets  have  spoken  falsely,  and  yet  they 
believe  them  :  yes,  truly  they  prove  by  the  fact 
itself  that  the  poets  did  not  speak  falsely;  for 
they  so  frame  the  images  of  the  gods,  that,  from 
the  very  diversity  of  sex,  it  appears  that  these 
things  which  the  poets  say  are  true.  For  what 
other  conclusion  does  the  image  of  Ganymede 
and  the  efifigy  of  the  eagle  admit  of,  when  they 
are  placed  before  the  feet  of  Jupiter  in  the  tem- 
ples, and  are  worshipped  equally  with  himself, 
except  that  the  memory  of  impious  guilt  and 
debauchery  remains  for  ever?  Nothing,  there- 
fore, is  wholly  invented  by  the  poets  :  something 
perhaps  is  transferred  and  obscured  by  oblique 
fashioning,  under  which  the  truth  was  enwrapped 
and  concealed  ;  as  that  which  was  related  about 
the  dividing  of  the  kingdoms  by  lot.  For  they 
say  that  the  heaven  fell  to  the  share  of  Jupiter, 
the  sea  to  Neptune,  and  the  infernal  regions  to 
Pluto.  Why  was  not  the  earth  rather  taken  as 
the  third  portion,  except  that  the  transaction 
took  place  on  the  earth?  Therefore  it  is  true 
that  they  so  divided  and  portioned  out  the  gov- 
ernment of  the  world,  that  the  empire  of  the 
east  fell  to  Jupiter,  a  part  of  the  west  was  allotted 
to  Pluto,  who  had  the  surname  of  Agesilaus  ;  be- 
cause the  region  of  the  east,  from  which  Hght  is 
given  to  mortals,  seems  to  be  higher,  but  the 
region  of  the  west  lower.  Thus  they  so  veiled 
the  truth  under  a  fiction,  that  the  truth  itself  de- 
tracted nothing  from  the  public  persuasion.  It 
is  manifest  concerning  the  share  of  Neptune  ; 
for  we  say  that  his  kingdom  resembled  that  un- 
limited authority  possessed  by  Mark  Antony,  to 
whom  the  senate  had  decreed  the  power  of  the 
maritime  coast,  that  he  might  punish  the  pirates, 
and  tranquillize  the  whole  sea.  Thus  all  the 
maritime  coasts,  together  with  the  islands,  fell  to 
the  lot  of  Neptune.  How  can  this  be  proved  ? 
Undoubtedly  ancient  stories  attest  it.  Euhem- 
erus,  an  ancient  author,  who  was  of  the  city  of 
Messene,  collected  the  actions  of  Jupiter  and 
of  the  others,  who  are  esteemed  gods,  and  com- 
posed a  history  from  the  titles  and  sacred  inscrip- 
tions which  were  in  the  most  ancient  temples, 
and  especially  in  the  sanctuary  of  the  Triphylian 
Jupiter,  where  an  inscription  indicated  that  a 
golden  column  had  been  placed  by  Jupiter  him- 
self, on  which  column  he  wrote  an  account  of 
his  exploits,  that  posterity  might  have  a  memorial 
of  his  actions.  This  history  was  translated  and 
followed  by  Ennius,  whose  words  are  these  : 
"Where  Jupiter  gives  to  Neptune  the  govern- 


ment of  the  sea,  that  he  might  reign  in  all  the 
islands  and  places  bordering  on  the  sea." 

The  accounts  of  the  poets,  therefore,  are  true, 
but  veiled  with  an  outward  covering  and  show. 
It  is  possible  that  Mount  Olympus  may  have 
supplied  the  poets  with  the  hint  for  saying  that 
Jupiter  obtained  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  be- 
cause Olympus  is  the  conmion  name  both  of 
the  mountain  and  of  heaven.  But  the  same 
history  informs  us  that  Jupiter  dwelt  on  Mount 
Olympus,  when  it  says  :  "At  that  time  Jupiter 
spent  the  greatest  part  of  his  hfe  on  Mount 
Olympus  ;  and  they  used  to  resort  to  him  thither 
for  the  administration  of  justice,  if  any  matters 
were  disputed.  Moreover,  if  any  one  had  found 
out  any  new  invention  which  might  be  useful  for 
human  life,  he  used  to  come  thither  and  display 
it  to  Jupiter."  The  poets  transfer  many  things 
after  this  manner,  not  for  the  sake  of  speaking 
falsely  against  the  objects  of  their  worship,  but 
that  they  may  by  variously  coloured  figures  add 
beauty  and  grace  to  their  poems.  But  they  who 
do  not  understand  the  manner,  or  the  cause,  or 
the  nature  of  that  which  is  represented  by  figure, 
attack  the  poets  as  false  and  sacrilegious.  Even 
the  philosophers  were  deceived  by  this  error ; 
for  because  these  things  which  are  related  about 
Jupiter  appeared  unsuited  to  the  character  of  a 
god,  they  introduced  two  Jupiters,  one  natural, 
the  other  fabulous.  They  saw,  on  the  one  hand, 
that  which  was  true,  that  he,  forsooth,  concern- 
ing whom  the  poets  speak,  was  man  ;  but  in  the 
case  of  that  natural  Jupiter,  led  by  the  common 
practice  of  superstition,  they  committed  an  error, 
inasmuch  as  they  transferred  the  name  of  a  man 
to  God,  who,  as  we  have  already  said,  because 
He  is  one  only,  has  no  need  of  a  name.  But  it 
is  undeniable  that  he  is  Jupiter  who  was  born 
from  Ops  and  Saturn.  It  is  therefore  an  empty 
persuasion  on  the  part  of  those  who  give  the  name 
of  Jupiter  to  the  Supreme  God.  For  some  are 
in  the  habit  of  defending  their  errors  by  this  ex- 
cuse ;  for,  when  convinced  of  the  unity  of  God, 
since  they  cannot  deny  this,  they  affirm  that  they 
worship  Him,  but  that  it  is  their  pleasure  that 
He  should  be  called  Jupiter.  But  what  can  be 
more  absurd  than  this  ?  For  Jupiter  is  not  accus- 
tomed to  be  worshipped  without  the  accompany- 
ing worship  of  his  wife  and  daughter.  From 
which  his  real  nature  is  evident ;  nor  is  it  lawful 
for  that  name  to  be  transferred  thither,'  where 
there  is  neither  any  Minerva  nor  Juno.  Why 
should  I  say  that  the  peculiar  meaning  of  this 
name  does  not  express  a  divine,  but  human 
power?  For  Gicero  explains  the  names  Jupiter 
and  Juno  as  being  derived  from  giving  help;^ 
and  Jupiter  is  so  called  as  if  he  were  a  helping 
father,  —  a  name  which  is  ill  adapted  to  God  : 


'  Eo,  i  e.,  to  those. 

2  Juvando.     \^Nat.  Dear.,  iii.  25,  26.] 


Chap.  XI.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


23 


for  to  help  is  the  part  of  a  man  conferring  some 
aid  upon  one  who  is  a  stranger,  and  in  a  case 
where  the  benefit  is  small.  No  one  implores 
God  to  help  him,  but  to  preserve  him,  to  give 
him  life  and  safety,  which  is  a  much  greater  and 
more  important  matter  than  to  help. 

And  since  we  are  speaking  of  a  father,  no 
father  is  said  to  help  his  sons  when  he  begets  or 
brings  them  up.  For  that  expression  is  too  in- 
significant to  denote  the  magnitude  of  the  benefit 
derived  from  a  father.  How  much  more  un- 
suitable is  it  to  God,  who  is  our  true  Father,  by 
whom  we  exist,  and  whose  we  are  altogether,  by 
whom  we  are  formed,  endued  with  life,  and  en- 
lightened, who  bestows  upon  us  life,  gives  us 
safety,  and  supplies  us  with  various  kinds  of 
food  !  He  has  no  apprehension  of  the  divine 
benefits  who  thinks  that  he  is  only  aided  by  God. 
Therefore  he  is  not  only  ignorant,  but  impious, 
who  disparages  the  excellency  of  the  supreme 
power  under  the  name  of  Jupiter.  Wherefore, 
if  both  from  his  actions  and  character  we  have 
proved  that  Jupiter  was  a  man,  and  reigned  on 
earth,  it  only  remains  that  we  should  also  investi- 
gate his  death.  Ennius,  in  his  sacred  history, 
having  described  all  the  actions  which  he  per- 
formed in  his  life,  at  the  close  thus  speaks  :  Then 
Jupiter,  when  he  had  five  times  made  a  circuit 
of  the  earth,  and  bestowed  governments  upon  all 
his  friends  and  relatives,  and  left  laws  to  men, 
provided  them  with  a  settled  mode  of  life  and 
corn,  and  given  them  many  other  benefits,  and 
having  been  honoured  with  immortal  glory  and  re- 
membrance, left  lasting  memorials  to  his  friends, 
and  when  his  age  '  was  almost  spent,  he  changed  ^ 
his  life  in  Crete,  and  departed  to  the  gods.  And 
the  Curetes,  his  sons,  took  charge  of  him,  and 
honoured  him  ;  and  his  tomb  is  in  Crete,  in 
the  town  of  Cnossus,  and  Vesta  is  said  to  have 
founded  this  city  ;  and  on  his  tomb  is  an  inscrip- 
tion in  ancient  Greek  characters,  "  Zan  Kronou," 
which  is  in  Latin,  "Jupiter  the  son  of  Saturn." 
This  undoubtedly  is  not  handed  down  by  poets, 
but  by  writers  of  ancient  events ;  and  these 
things  are  so  true,  that  they  are  confirmed  by 
some  verses  of  the  Sibyls,  to  this  effect :  — 

"  Inanimate  demons,  images  of  the  dead, 
Whose  tombs  the  ill-fated  Crete  possesses  as  a  boast." 

Cicero,  in  his  treatise  concerning  the  Nature 
of  the  Gods,  having  said  that  three  Jupiterswere 
enumerated  by  theologians,  adds  that  the  third 
was  of  Crete,  the  son  of  Saturn,  and  that  his 
tomb  is  shown  in  that  island.  How,  therefore, 
can  a  god  be  alive  in  one  place,  and  dead  in 
another  ;  in  one  place  have  a  temple,  and  in 
another  a  tomb  ?  Let  the  Romans  then  know 
that  their  Capitol,  that  is  the  chief  head  of  their 


'  .(Etate  pessum  acta.     [See  plural  Joves,  Nat.  Dear.,  Hi.  16.] 
^  Commutavit;  others  read  consummavit,  "  he  completed." 


objects  of  public  veneration,  is  nothing  but  an 
empty  monument. 

Let  us  now  come  to  his  father  who  reigned 
before  him,  and  who  perhaps  had  more  power 
in  himself,  because  he  is  said  to  be  born  from 
the  meeting  of  such  great  elements.  Let  us  see 
what  there  was  in  him  worthy  of  a  god,  especially 
that  he  is  related  to  have  had  the  golden  age, 
because  in  his  reign  there  was  justice  in  the  earth. 
I  find  something  in  him  which  was  not  in  his 
son.  For  vvhat  is  so  befitting  the  character  of  a 
god,  as  a  just  government  and  an  age  of  piety  ? 
But  when,  on  the  same  principle,  I  reflect  that 
he  is  a  son,  I  cannot  consider  him  as  the  Supreme 
God ;  for  I  see  that  there  is  something  more  an- 
cient than  himself,  —  namely,  the  heaven  and  the 
earth.  But  I  am  in  search  of  a  God  beyond 
whom  nothing  has  any  existence,  who  is  the 
source  and  origin  of  all  things.  He  must  of 
necessity  exist  who  framed  the  heaven  itself, 
and  laid  the  foundations  of  the  earth.  But  if 
Saturn  was  born  from  these,  as  it  is  supposed, 
how  can  he  be  the  chief  God,  since  he  owes  his 
origin  to  another?  Or  who  presided  over  the 
universe  before  the  birth  of  Saturn?  But  this, 
as  I  recently  said,  is  a  fiction  of  the  poets.  For 
it  was  impossible  that  the  senseless  elements, 
which  are  separated  by  so  long  an  inter\-al,  should 
meet  together  and  give  birth  to  a  son,  or  that  he 
who  was  born  should  not  at  all  resemble  his  par- 
ents, but  should  have  a  form  which  his  parents 
did  not  possess. 

Let  us  therefore  inquire  what  degree  of  truth 
lies  hid  under  this  figure.  Minucius  Felix,  in 
his  treatise  which  has  the  title  of  Octavius,^  al- 
leged these  proofs  :  '•'  That  Saturn,  when  he  had 
been  banished  by  his  son,  and  had  come  into 
Italy,  was  called  the  son  of  Ccelus  (heaven), 
because  we  are  accustomed  to  say  that  those 
whose  virtue  we  admire,  or  those  who  have  un- 
expectedly arrived,  have  fallen  from  heaven ; 
and  that  he  was  called  the  son  of  earth,  because 
we  name  those  who  are  born  from  unknown  par- 
ents sons  of  earth."  These  things,  indeed,  have 
some  resemblance  to  the  truth,  but  are  not  true, 
because  it  is  evident  that  even  during  his  reign 
he  was  so  esteemed.  He  might  have  argued 
thus  :  That  Saturn,  being  a  very  powerful  king, 
in  order  that  the  memory  of  his  parents  might  be 
preserved,  gave  their  names  to  the  heaven  and 
earth,  whereas  these  were  before  called  by  other 
names,  for  which  reason  we  know  that  names 
were  applied  both  to  mountains  and  rivers.  For 
when  the  poets  speak  of  the  offspring  of  Atlas, 
or  of  the  river  Inachus,  they  do  not  absolutely 
say  that  men  could  possibly  be  born  from  inan- 
imate objects ;  but  they  undoubtedly  indicate 
those  who  were  born  from  those  men,  who  either 
during  their  lives  or  after  their  death  gave  their 


s  [Condensed  from  cap.  xxii.     See  vol.  iv.  p.  186,  this  series.] 


24 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  I. 


names  to  mountains  or  rivers.     For  that  was  a 
common  practice  among  the  ancients,  and  espe- 
ciallv  among  the  Greeks.     Thus  we  have  heard 
that' seas  received  the  names  of  those  who  had 
fallen  into  them,  as  the  .^gean,  the  Icarian,  and 
the  Hellespont.     In  Latium,  also,  Aventmus  gave 
his  name  to  the  mountain  on  which  he  was  bur- 
ied ;  and  Tiberinus,  or  Tiber,  gave  his  name  to 
the  river  in  which  he  was  drowned.     No  won- 
der, then,  if  the  names  of  those  who  had  given 
birth  to  most  powerful  kings  were  attributed  to 
the  heaven  and  earth.     Therefore  it  appears  that 
Saturn  was  not  born  from  heaven,  which  is  im- 
possible, but  from  that  man  who  bore  the  name 
of  Uranus.     And  Trismegistus  attests  the  truth 
of  this  ;  for  when  he  said  that  very  few  had  ex- 
isted  in  whom   there  was  perfect  learning,  he 
mentioned  by  name  among  these  his  relatives, 
Uranus,  Saturn,  and  T^Iercury.     And  because  he 
was  ignorant  of  these  things,  he  gave  another 
account  of  the  matter ;  how  he  might  have  ar- 
gued, I  have  shown.     Now  I  will  say  in  what 
manner,  at  what  time,  and  by  whom  this  was 
done  ;   for  it  was  not  Saturn  who  did  this,  but 
Jupiter.     Ennius  thus  relates  in  his  sacred  his- 
tory :   "Then   Pan  leads  him  to  the  mountain, 
which  is  called  the  pillar  of  heaven.     Having 
ascended  thither,  he  surveyed  the  lands  far  and 
wide,  and  there  on  that  mountain  he  builds  an 
altar  to  Coelus ;  and  Jupiter  was  the  first  who 
offered  sacrifice  on  that  altar.     In  that  place  he 
looked  up  to  heaven,  by  which  name  we  now 
call  it,  and  that  which  was  above  the  world  which 
was  called  the  firmament,'  and  he  gave  to  the 
heaven  its  name  from  the  name  of  his  grand- 
father ;  and  Jupiter  in  prayer  first  gave  the  name 
of  heaven  to  that  which  was  called  firmament,  = 
and  he  burnt  entire  the  victim  which  he  there 
offered  in  sacrifice."     Nor  is  it  here  only  that 
Jupiter  is  found  to  have  offered  sacrifice.     Caesar 
also,  in  Aratus,  relates  that  Aglaosthenes   says 
that  when  he  was  setting  out  from  the  island  of 
Naxos  against  the  Titans,  and  was  offering  sac- 
rifice on  the  shore,  an  eagle  flew  to  Jupiter  as 
an  omen,  and  that  the  victor  received  it  as  a 
good  token,  and  placed  it  under  his  own  protec- 
tion.    But  the  sacred  history  testifies  that  even 
beforehand  an  eagle  had  sat  upon  his  head,  and 
portended  to  him  the  kingdom.     1  o  whom,  then, 
could  Jupiter  have  offered  sacrifice,   except  to 
his   grandfather  Coelus,  who,   according   to  the 
saying  of  Euhemerus,^  died  in  Oceania,  and  was 
buried  in  the  town  of  Aulatia? 


CHAP.     XII. THAT     THE     STOICS     TRANSFER     THE 

FIGMENTS    OF     THE    POETS    TO    A    PHILOSOPHICAL 
SYSTEM. 


1  jEther.     [Tayler  Lewis,  Plato  cent.  Ath.,  pp.  126-129.] 

2  Euhemerus  was  a  Sicilian  author  of  the  age  of  Alexander  the 
Great.  He  wrote  a  sacred  history  containing  an  account  of  the  sev- 
eral gods  who  were  worshipped  in  Greece,  whom  he  represents  as 
having  originally  been  men  who  had  distinguished  themselves  by 
their  exploits,  or  benefits  conferred  upon  men,  and  who  were  therefore, 
after  their  death,  worshipped  as  gods.  The  Christian  writers  fre- 
quently refer  to  Euhemerus  as  helping  them  to  prove  that  the  pagan 
mythology  consisted  only  of  fables  invented  by  men.  See  Diction- 
ary of  Greek  and  Roman  Biography. 


Since  we  have  brought  to  light  the  mysteries 
of  the  poets,  and  have  found  out  the  parents  of 
Saturn,  let  us  return  to  his  virtues  and  actions. 
He  was,  they  say,  just  in  his  rule.     First,  from 
this  very  circumstance  he  is  not  now  a  god,  in- 
asmuch as  he  has  ceased  to  be.     In  the  next 
place,  he  was  not  even  just,  but  impious  not  only 
towards  his  sons,  whom  he  devoured,  but  also 
towards  his  father,  whom  he  is  said  to  have  muti- 
lated.    And  this  may  perhaps  have  happened  in 
truth.     But  men,  having  regard  to  the  element 
which  is  called  the  heaven,  reject  the  whole  fable 
as  most  foolishly  invented  ;    though  the  Stoics, 
(according  to  their  custom)  endeavour  to  trans- 
fer it  to  a  physical  system,  whose  opinion  Cicero 
has  laid  down  in  his  treatise  concerning  the  Na- 
ture of  the  Gods.     They  held,  he  says,  that  the 
highest  and  ethereal  nature  of  heaven,  that  is, 
of  fire,  which  by  itself  produced  all  things,  was 
without  that  part  of  the  body  which  contained 
the  productive  organs.     Now  this  theory  might 
have  been  suitable  to  Vesta,  if  she  were  called  a 
male.    For  it  is  on  this  account  that  they  esteem 
Vesta  to  be  a  virgin,  inasmuch  as  fire  is  an  incor- 
ruptible element ;  and  nothing  can  be  born  from 
it,  since  it  consumes  all  things,  whatever  it  has 
seized  upon.    Ovid  in  the  Fasti  says  :  3  "  Nor  do 
you  esteem  Vesta  to  be  anything  else  than  a  liv- 
ing flame  ;  and  you  see  no  bodies  produced  from 
flame.     Therefore  she  is  truly  a  virgin,  for  she 
sends  forth  no  seed,  nor  receives  it,  and  loves 
the  attendants  of  virginity." 

This  also  might  have  been  ascribed  to  Vulcan, 
who  indeed  is  supposed  to  be  fire,  and  yet  the 
poets  did  not  mutilate  him.  It  might  also  have 
been  ascribed  to  the  sun,  in  whom  is  the  nature 
and  cause  of  the  productive  powers.  For  with- 
out the  fiery  heat  of  the  sun  nothing  could  be 
born,  or  have  increase  ;  so  that  no  other  element 
has  greater  need  of  productive  organs  than  heat, 
by  the  nourishment  of  which  all  things  are  con- 
ceived, produced,  and  supported.  Lastly,  even 
if  the  case  were  as  they  would  have  it,  why 
should  we  sup])ose  that  Coelus  was  mutilated, 
rather  than  that  he  was  born  without  productive 
organs?  For  if  he  produces  by  himself,  it  is 
plain  that  he  had  no  need  of  productive  organs, 
since  he  gave  birth  to  Saturn  himself;  but  if  he 
had  them,  and  suffered  mutilation  from  his  son, 
the  origin  of  all  things  and  all  nature  would  have 
perished.  Why  should  I  say  that  they  deprive 
Saturn  himself  not  only  of  divine,  but  also  of 
human  intelligence,  when  they  affirm  that  Saturn 
is  he  who  comprises  the  course  and  change  of 
the  spaces  and  seasons,  and  that  he  has  that  very 


3  vi.  291.     [Tayler  Lewis  i^ut  supra),  note  xii.  p.  119.] 


Chap.  XIII.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


25 


name  in  Greek  ?  For  he  is  called  Cronos,  which 
is  the  same  as  Chronos,  that  is,  a  space  of  time. 
But  he  is  called  Saturn,  because  he  is  satiated 
with  years.  These  are  the  words  of  Cicero,  set- 
ting forth  the  opinion  of  the  Stoics :  "  The 
worthlessness  of  these  things  any  one  may  read- 
ily understand.  For  if  Saturn  is  the  son  of 
Ccelus,  how  could  Time  have  been  born  from 
Ccelus,  or  Coelus  have  been  mutilated  by  Time, 
or  afterwards  could  Time  have  been  despoiled 
of  his  sovereignty  by  his  son  Jupiter?  Or  how 
was  Jupiter  born  from  Time?  Or  with  what 
years  could  eternity  be  satiated,  since  it  has  no 
limit?"  ' 

CHAP.    XIII. HOW   VAIN    .-VND     TRIFLING     ARE    THE 

INTERPRETATIONS  OF  THE  STOICS  RESPECTING 
THE  GODS,  AND  IN  THEM  CONCERNING  THE  ORI- 
GIN OF    JUPIIER,    CONCERNING    SATURN    AND    OPS. 

If  therefore  these  speculations  of  the  philoso- 
phers are  trifling,  what  remains,  except  that  we 
believe  it  to  be  a  matter  of  fact  that,  being  a 
man,  he  suffered  mutilation  from  a  man?  Unless 
by  chance  any  one  esteems  him  as  a  god  who 
feared  a  co-heir ;  whereas,  if  he  had  possessed 
any  divine  knowledge,  he  ought  not  to  have 
mutilated  his  father,  but  himself,  to  prevent  the 
birth  of  Jupiter,  who  deprived  him  of  the  pos- 
session of  his  kingdom.  And  he  also,  when  he 
had  married  his  sister  Rhea,  whom  in  Latin  we 
call  Ops,  is  said  to  have  been  warned  by  an  ora- 
cle not  to  bring  up  his  male  children,  because  it 
would  come  to  pass  that  he  should  be  driven 
into  banishment  by  a  son.  And  being  in  fear  of 
this,  it  is  plain  that  he  did  not  devour  his  sons, 
as  the  fables  report,  but  put  them  to  death  ;  al- 
though it  is  written  in  sacred  history  that  Saturn 
and  Ops,  and  other  men,  were  at  that  time  ac- 
customed to  eat  human  flesh,  but  that  Jupiter, 
who  gave  to  men  laws  and  civilization,  was  the 
first  who  by  an  edict  prohibited  the  use  of  that 
food.  Now  if  this  is  true,  what  justice  can  there 
possibly  have  been  in  him  ?  But  let  us  suppose 
it  to  be  a  fictitious  story  that  Saturn  devoured 
his  sons,  only  true  after  a  certain  fashion ;  must 
we  then  suppose,  with  the  vulgar,  that  he  has 
eaten  his  sons,  who  has  carried  them  out  to 
burial  ?  But  when  Ops  had  brought  forth  Jupi- 
ter, she  stole  away  the  infant,  and  secredy  sent 
him  into  Crete  to  be  nourished.  Again,  I  cannot 
but  blame  his  want  of  foresight.  For  why  did 
he  receive  an  oracle  from  another,  and  not  from 
himself?  Being  placed  in  heaven,  why  did  he 
not  see  the  things  which  were  taking  place  on 
earth?  Why  did  the  Corybantes  with  their  cym- 
bals escape  his  notice  ?  Lastly,  why  did  there 
exist  any  greater  force  which  might  overcome 
his  power?    Doubtless,  being  aged,  he  was  easily 


overcome  by  one  who  was  young,  and  despoiled 
of  his  sovereignty.  He  was  therefore  l^anished 
and  went  into  exile  ;  and  after  long  wanderings 
came  into  Italy  in  a  ship,  as  Ovid  relates  in  his 
Fasti :  — 

"  The  cause  of  the  ship  remains  to  be  explained.  The 
scythe-bearing  god  came  to  the  Tuscan  river  in  a 
ship,  having  first  traversed  the  world." 

Janus  received  him  wandering  and  destitute  ; 
and  the  ancient  coins  are  a  proof  of  this,  on 
which  there  is  a  representation  of  Janus  with  a 
double  face,  and  on  the  other  side  a  ship  ;  as 
the  same  poet  adds  :  — 

"  But  pious  posterity  represented  a  ship  on  the  coin, 
bearing  testimony  to  the  arrival  of  the  stranger 
god." 

Not  only  therefore  all  the  poets,  but  the 
writers  also  of  ancient  histories  and  events,  agree 
rhat  he  was  a  man,  inasmuch  as  they  handed 
down  to  memory  his  actions  in  Italy  :  of  Greek 
writers,  Diodorus  and  Thallus  ;  of  Latin  writers, 
Nepos,  Cassius,  and  Varro.  For  since  men  lived 
in  Italy  after  a  rustic  fashion,-  — 

"  He  brought  the  race  to  union  first, 
Erewhile  on  mountain  tops  dispersed, 
And  gave  them  statutes  to  obey, 
And  willed  the  land  wherein  he  lay 
Should  Latium's  title  bear." 

Does  any  one  imagine  him  to  be  a  god,  who  was 
driven  into  banishment,  who  fled,  who  lay  hid  ? 
No  one  is  so  senseless.  For  he  who  flees,  or 
lies  hid,  must  fear  both  violence  and  death. 
Orpheus,  who  lived  in  more  recent  times  than 
his,  openly  relates  that  Saturn  reigned  on  earth 
and  among  men  :  — 

"  First  Cronus  ruled  o'er  men  on  earth, 
And  then  from  Cronus  sprung  the  mighty  king, 
The  widely  sounding  Zeus." 

And  also  our  own  Maro  says  :  ^  — 

"This  life  the  golden  Saturn  led  on  earth  ; " 
and  in  another  place  :  ■*  — 

"  That  was  the  storied  age  of  gold, 
So  peacefully,  serenely  rolled 
The  years  beneath  his  reign." 

The  poet  did  not  say  in  the  former  passage  that 
he  led  this  life  in  heaven,  nor  in  the  latter  pas- 
sage that  he  reigned  over  the  gods  above.  From 
which  it  appears  that  he  was  a  king  on  earth  ; 
and  this  he  declares  more  plainly  in  another 
place  :  5  — 

"  Restorer  of  the  age  of  gold, 
In  lands  where  Saturn  ruled  of  old." 


'  De  Nat.  deer.,  ii.  64. 


2  Virg.,  /E/ieid,  viii.  321. 

3  Georg.,  ii.  538. 

<  yKiieui.  viii.  324. 
5  Ibid.,  vi.  793. 


26 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  L 


Ennius,  indeed,  in  his  translation  <?/ Euhemerus, 
says  that  Saturn  was  not  the  first  who  reigned, 
but  his  father  Uranus.  In  the  beginning,  he 
says,  Coelus  first  had  the  supreme  power  on  the 
earth.  He  instituted  and  prepared  that  king- 
dom in  conjunction  with  his  brothers.  There  is 
no  great  dispute,  if  there  is  doubt,  on  the  part 
of  the  greatest  authorities  respecting  the  son 
and  the  father.  But  it  is  possible  that  each 
may  have  happened  :  that  Uranus  first  began 
to  be  pre-eminent  in  power  among  the  rest,  and 
to  have  the  chief  place,  but  not  the  kingdom  ; 
and  that  afterwards  Saturn  acquired  greater  re- 
sources, and  took  the  title  of  king. 

CHAP.  XIV. WHAT   THE   SACRED   HISTORY   OF    EU- 

HEMERUS     AND     ENNIUS     TEACHES     CONCERNING 
THE    GODS. 

Now,  since  the  sacred  history  differs  in  some 
degree  from  those  things  which  we  have  related, 
let  us  open  those  things  which  are  contained  in 
the  true  writings,  that  we  may  not,  in  accusing 
superstitions,  appear  to  follow  and  approve  of 
the  follies  of  the  poets.  These  are  the  words  of 
Ennius  :  "  Afterwards  Saturn  married  Ops.  Titan, 
who  was  older  than  Saturn,  demands  the  king- 
dom for  himself.  Upon  this  their  mother  Vesta, 
and  their  sisters  Ceres  and  Ops,  advise  Saturn 
not  to  give  up  the  kingdom  to  his  brother. 
Then  Titan,  who  was  inferior  in  person  to  Saturn, 
on  that  account,  and  because  he  saw  that  his 
mother  and  sisters  were  using  their  endeavours 
that  Saturn  might  reign,  yielded  the  kingdom  to 
him.  He  therefore  made  an  agreement  with 
Saturn,  that  if  any  male  children  should  be  born 
to  him,  he  would  not  bring  them  up.  He  did 
so  for  this  purpose,  that  the  kingdom  might  re- 
turn to  his  own  sons.  Then,  when  a  son  was 
first  born  to  Saturn,  they  slew  him.  Afterwards 
twins  were  born,  Jupiter  and  Juno.  Upon  this 
they  present  Juno  to  the  sight  of  Saturn,  and 
secretly  hide  Jupiter,  and  give  him  to  Vesta  to 
be  brought  up,  concealing  him  from  Saturn. 
Ops  also  brings  forth  Neptune  without  the  knowl- 
edge of  Saturn,  and  secretly  hides  him.  In  the 
same  manner  Ops  brings  forth  twins  by  a  third 
birth,  Pluto  and  Glauca,  Pluto  in  Latin  is  Dis- 
pater ;  others  call  him  Orcus.  Upon  this  they 
show  to  Saturn  the  daughter  Glauca,  and  conceal 
and  hide  the  son  Pluto.  Then  Glauca  dies  while 
yet  young."  This  is  the  lineage  of  Jupiter  and 
his  brothers,  as  these  things  are  written,  and  the 
relationship  is  handed  down  to  us  after  this  man- 
ner from  the  sacred  narrative.  Also  shortly 
afterwards  he  introduces  these  things  :  "  Then 
Titan,  when  he  learned  that  sons  were  born  to 
Saturn,  and  secretly  brought  up,  secretly  takes 
with  him  his  sons,  who  are  called  Titans,  and 
seizes  his  brother  Saturn  and  Ops,  and  encloses 


them  within  a  wall,  and  places   over  them   a 
guard." 

The  truth  of  this  history  is  taught  by  the  Ery- 
thraean Sibyl,  who  speaks  almost  the  same  things, 
with  a  few  discrepancies,  which  do  not  affect  the 
subject-matter  itself.  Therefore  Jupiter  is  freed 
from  the  charge  of  the  greatest  wickedness,  ac- 
cording to  which  he  is  reported  to  have  bound 
his  father  with  fetters  ;  for  this  was  the  deed  of 
his  uncle  Titan,  because  he,  contrary  to  his  prom- 
ise and  oath,  had  brought  up  male  children.  The 
rest  of  the  history  is  thus  put  together.  //  is 
said  that  Jupiter,  when  grown  up,  having  heard 
that  his  father  and  mother  had  been  surrounded 
with  a  guard  and  imprisoned,  came  with  a  great 
multitude  of  Cretans,  and  conquered  Titan  and 
his  sons  in  an  engagement,  and  rescued  his  par- 
ents from  imprisonment,  restored  the  kingdom 
to  his  father,  and  thus  returned  into  Crete. 
Then,  after  these  things,  they  say  that  an  ora- 
cle was  given  to  Saturn,  bidding  him  to  take 
heed  lest  his  son  should  expel  him  from  the 
kingdom  ;  that  he,  for  the  sake  of  weakening  the 
oracle  and  avoiding  the  clanger,  laid  an  ambush 
for  Jupiter  to  kill  him ;  that  Jupiter,  having 
learned  the  plot,  claimed  the  kingdom  for  him- 
self afresh,  and  banished  Saturn  ;  and  that  he, 
when  he  had  been  tossed  over  all  lands,  followed 
by  armed  men  whom  Jupiter  had  sent  to  seize 
or  put  him  to  death,  scarcely  found  a  place  of 
concealment  in  Italy. 

CHAP.    XV. HOW  THEY  WHO  WERE  MEN  OBTAINED 

THE   NAME    OF    GODS. 

Now,  since  it  is  evident  from  these  things  that 
they  were  men,  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  in  what 
manner  they  began  to  be  called  gods.'  For  if 
there  were  no  kings  before  Saturn  or  Uranus,  on 
account  of  the  small  number  of  men  who  lived 
a  rustic  life  without  any  ruler,  there  is  no  doubt 
but  in  those  times  men  began  to  exalt  the  king 
himself,  and  his  whole  family,  with  the  highest 
praises  and  with  new  honours,  so  that  they  even 
called  them  gods  ;  whether  on  account  of  their 
wonderful  excellence,  men  as  yet  rude  and  sim- 
ple really  entertained  this  opinion,  or,  as  is  com- 
monly the  case,  in  flattery  of  present  power,  or 
on  account  of  the  benefits  by  which  they  were 
set  in  order  and  reduced  to  a  civilized  state. 
Afterwards  the  kings  themselves,  since  they  were 
beloved  by  those  whose  life  they  had  civilized, 
after  their  death  left  regret  of  themselves.  There- 
fore men  formed  images  of  them,  that  they 
might  derive  some  consolation  from  the  con- 
templation of  their  likenesses  ;  and  proceeding 
further  through  love  of  their  worth,^  they  began 
to  reverence  the  memory  of  the  deceased,  that 


■  [Vol.  ii.  cap.  28,  p.  143,  this  .series.] 

*  Per  amorem  meriti.     Some  editions  omit  "  meriti." 


Chap.  XV.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


27 


they  might  appear  to  be  grateful  for  their  ser- 
vices, and  might  attract  their  successors  to  a  de- 
sire of  ruhng  well.  And  this  Cicero  teaches  in 
his  treatise  on  the  Nature  of  the  Gods,  saying : 
"  But  the  life  of  men  and  common  intercourse 
led  to  the  exalting  to  heaven  by  fame  and  good- 
will men  who  were  distinguished  by  their  bene- 
fits. On  this  account  Hercules,  on  this  Castor 
and  Pollux,  ^sculapius  and  Liber  "  were  ranked 
with  the  gods.  And  in  another  passage  :  "  And 
in  most  states  it  may  be  understood,  that  for  the 
sake  of  exciting  valour,  or  that  the  men  most  dis- 
tinguished for  bravery  might  more  readily  en- 
counter danger  on  account  of  the  state,  their 
memory  was  consecrated  with  the  honour  paid 
to  the  immortal  gods."  It  was  doubtless  on  this 
account  that  the  Romans  consecrated  their 
Caesars,  and  the  Moors  their  kings.  Thus  by  de- 
■  grees  religious  honours  began  to  be  paid  to  them  ; 
while  those  who  had  known  them,  first  instructed 
their  own  children  and  grandchildren,  and  after- 
wards all  their  posterity,  in  the  practice  of  this 
rite.  And  yet  these  great  kings,  on  account  of 
the  celebrity  of  their  name,  were  honoured  in  all 
provinces. 

But  separate  people  privately  honoured  the 
founders  of  their  nation  or  city  with  the  highest 
veneration,  whether  they  were  men  distinguished 
for  bravery,  or  women  admirable  for  chastity ; 
as  the  Egyptians  honoured  Isis,  the  Moors  Juba, 
the  Macedonians  Cabirus,  the  Carthaginians 
Uranus,  the  Latins  Faunus,  the  Sabines  Sancus, 
the  Romans  Quirinus.  In  the  same  manner 
truly  Athens  worshipped  Minerva,  Samos  Juno, 
Paphos  Venus,  Lemnos  Vulcan,  Naxos  Liber, 
and  Delos  Apollo.  And  thus  various  sacred  rites 
have  been  undertaken  among  different  peoples 
and  countries,  inasmuch  as  men  desire  to  show 
gratitude  to  their  princes,  and  cannot  find  out 
other  honours  which  they  may  confer  upon  the 
dead.  Moreover,  the  piety  of  their  successors 
contributed  in  a  great  degree  to  the  error ;  for, 
in  order  that  they  might  appear  to  be  born  from 
a  divine  origin,  they  paid  divine  honours  to  their 
parents,  and  ordered  that  they  should  be  paid 
by  others.  Can  any  one  doubt  in  what  way  the 
honours  paid  to  the  gods  were  instituted,  when 
he  reads  in  Virgil  the  words  of  yEneas  giving 
commands  to  his  friends  :  ■  — 

"  Now  witli  full  cups  libation  pour 
To  mighty  Jove,  whom  all  adore, 
Invoke  Anchises'  blessed  soul." 

And  he  attributes  to  him  not  only  immortality, 
but  also  power  over  the  winds  :  ^  — 

"  Invoke  the  winds  to  speed  our  flight, 
And  pray  that  he  we  hold  so  dear 
May  take  our  offerings  year  by  year, 
Soon  as  our  promised  town  we  raise, 
In  temples  sacred  to  his  praise." 

'  ALncid,  vii.  133. 
^  Ibid.,  V.  59. 


In  truth,  Liber  and  Pan,  and  Mercury  and  Apollo, 
acted  in  the  same  way  respecting  Jupiter,  and 
afterwards  their  successors  did  the  same  respect- 
ing them.  The  poets  also  added  their  influence, 
and  by  means  of  poems  composed  to  give  pleas- 
ure, raised  them  to  the  heaven ;  as  is  the  case 
with  those  who  flatter  kings,  even  though  wicked, 
with  false  panegyrics.  And  this  evil  originated 
with  the  Greeks,  whose  levity  being  furnished  ^ 
with  the  ability  and  copiousness  of  speech,  ex- 
cited in  an  incredible  degree  mists  of  falsehoods. 
And  thus  from  admiration  of  them  they  first 
undertook  their  sacred  rites,  "and  handed  them 
down  to  all  nations.  On  account  of  this  vanity 
the  Sibyl  thus  rebukes  them  :  — 

"  Why  trustest  thou,  O  Greece,  to  princely  men .-" 
Why  to  the  dead  dost  offer  empty  gifts  ? 
Thou  offerest  to  idols  ;  this  error  who  suggested, 
That  thou  shouldst  leave  the  presence  of  the  mighty 

God, 
And  make  these  offerings  .'  " 

Marcus  Tullius,  who  was  not  only  an  accom- 
plished orator,  but  also  a  philosopher,  since  he 
alone  was  an  imitator  of  Plato,  in  that  treatise 
in  which  he  consoled  himself  concerning  the 
death  of  his  daughter,  did  not  hesitate  to  say 
that  those  gods  who  were  publicly  worshipped 
were  men.  And  this  testimony  of  his  ought  to 
be  esteemed  the  more  weighty,  because  he  held 
the  priesthood  of  the  augurs,  and  testifies  that 
he  worships  and  venerates  the  same  gods.  And 
thus  within  the  compass  of  a  few  verses  he  has 
presented  us  with  two  facts.  For  while  he  de- 
clared his  intention  of  consecrating  the  image 
of  his  daughter  in  the  same  manner  in  which 
they  were  consecrated  by  the  ancients,  he  both 
taught  that  they  were  dead,  and  showed  the 
origin  of  a  vain  superstition.  "  Since,  in  truth," 
he  says,  "  we  see  many  men  and  women  among 
the  number  of  the  gods,  and  venerate  their 
shrines,  held  in  the  greatest  honour  in  cities  and 
in  the  country,  let  us  assent  to  the  wisdom  of 
those  to  whose  talents  and  inventions  we  owe  it 
that  life  is  altogether  adorned  with  laws  and  insti- 
tutions, and  established  on  a  firm  basis.  And  if 
any  living  being  was  worthy  of  being  consecrated, 
assuredly  it  was  this.  If  the  offspring  of  Cadmus, 
or  Amphitryon,  or  Tyndarus,  Avas  worthy  of  l)eing 
extolled  by  fame  to  the  heaven,  the  same  honour 
ought  undoubtedly  to  be  appropriated  to  her. 
And  this  indeed  I  will  do ;  and  with  the  appro- 
bation of  the  gods,  I  will  place  you  the  best  and 
most  learned  of  all  women  in  their  assembly, 
and  will  consecrate  you  to  the  estimation  of  all 
men."  Some  one  may  perhaps  say  that  Cicero 
raved  through  excessive  grief.  But,  in  truth,  the 
whole  of  that  speech,  which  was  perfect  both  in 
learning  and  in  its  examples,  and  in  the  very 
style  of  expression,  gave  no  indications  of  a  dis- 


3    Instructa.     [Vol.  ii.  cap.  18,  p.  137,  this  series.] 


28 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  I. 


tempered  mind,  but  of  constancy  and  judgment ; 
and  this  very  sentence  exhibits  no  sign  of  grief. 
For  I  do  not  think  that  he  could  have  written 
with  such  variety,  and  copiousness,  and  orna- 
ment, had  not  his  grief  been  mitigated  by  reason 
itself,  and  the  consolation  of  his  friends  and 
length  of  time.  Why  should  I  mention  what 
he  says  in  his  books  concerning  the  Republic, 
and  also  concerning  glory  ?  For  in  his  treatise 
on  the  Laws,  in  which  work,  following  the  ex- 
ample of  Plato,  he  wished  to  set  forth  those  laws 
which  he  thought  that  a  just  and  wise  state  would 
employ,  he  thus  decreed  concerning  religion  :  ' 
"  Let  them  reverence  the  gods,  both  those  who 
have  always  been  regarded  as  gods  of  heaven, 
and  those  whose  services  to  men  have  placed 
them  in  heaven  :  Hercules,  Liber,  ^sculapius, 
Castor,  Pollux,  and  Quirinus."  Also  in  his  Tus- 
culan  Disputations,^  when  he  said  that  heaven 
was  almost  entirely  filled  with  the  human  race, 
he  said  :  "  If,  indeed,  I  should  attempt  to  inves- 
tigate ancient  accounts,  and  to  extract  from  them 
those  things  which  the  writers  of  Greece  have 
handed  down,  even  those  who  are  held  in  the 
highest  rank  as  gods  will  be  found  to  have  gone 
from  us  into  heaven.  Inquire  whose  sepulchres 
are  pointed  out  in  Greece :  remember,  since 
you  are  initiated,  what  things  are  handed  down 
in  the  mysteries ;  and  then  at  length  you  will 
understand  how  widely  \h\?, persuasion  is  spread." 
He  appealed,  as  it  is  plain,  to  the  conscience  of 
Atticus,  that  it  might  be  understood  from  the 
very  mysteries  that  all  those  who  are  worshipped 
were  men  ;  and  when  he  acknowledged  this  with- 
out hesitation  in  the  case  of  Hercules,  Liber, 
^sculapius,  Castor  and  Pollux,  he  was  afraid 
openly  to  make  the  same  admission  respecting 
Apollo  and  Jupiter  their  fathers,  and  likewise 
respecting  Neptune,  Vulcan,  Mars,  and  Mercury, 
whom  he  termed  the  greater  gods  ;  and  therefore 
he  says  that  this  opinion  is  widely  spread,  that 
we  may  understand  the  same  concerning  Jupiter 
and  the  other  more  ancient  gods  :  for  if  the  an- 
cients consecrated  their  memory  in  the  same 
manner  in  which  he  says  that  he  will  consecrate 
the  image  and  the  name  of  his  daughter,  those 
who  mourn  may  be  pardoned,  but  those  who 
believe  it  cannot  be  pardoned.  For  who  is  so 
infatuated  as  to  believe  that  heaven  is  opened  to 
the  dead  at  the  consent  and  pleasure  of  a  sense- 
less multitude?  Or  that  any  one  is  able  to  give 
to  ailother  that  which  he  himself  does  not  pos- 
sess? Among  the  Romans,  Julius  was  made  a 
god,  because  it  pleased  a  guilty  man,  Antony ; 
Quirinus  was  made  a  god,  because  it  seemed 
good  to  the  shepherds,  though  one  of  them  was 
the  murderer  of  his  twin  brother,  the  other  the 
destroyer  of  his  country.     But  if  Antony  had  not 

'  \De  Legibiis,  ii.  cap.  8.] 
^  [Liber  i.  capp.  12,  13.] 


been  consul,  in  return  for  his  services  towards 
the  state  Caius  Caesar  would  have  been  without 
the  honour  even  of  a  dead  man,  and  that,  too, 
by  the  advice  of  his  father-in-law  Piso,  and  of 
his  relative  Lucius  Caesar,  who  opposed  the  cele- 
bration of  the  funeral,  and  by  the  advice  of 
Dolabella  the  consul,  who  overthrew  the  column 
in  the  forum,  that  is,  his  monuments,  and  purified 
the  forum.  For  Ennius  declares  that  Romulus 
was  regretted  by  his  people,  since  he  represents 
the  people  as  thus  speaking,  through  grief  for 
their  lost  king :  "  O  Romulus,  Romulus,  say 
what  a  guardian  of  your  country  the  gods  pro- 
duced you?  You  brought  us  forth  within  the 
regions  of  light.  O  father,  O  sire,  O  race,  de- 
scended from  the  gods."  On  account  of  this 
regret  they  more  readily  believed  Julius  Proculus 
uttering  falsehoods,  who  was  suborned  by  the 
fathers  to  announce  to  the  populace  that  he  had 
seen  the  king  in  a  form  more  majestic  than  that 
of  a  man  ;  and  that  he  had  given  command  to 
the  people  that  a  temple  should  be  built  to  his 
honour,  that  he  was  a  god,  and  was  called  by 
the  name  of  Quirinus.  By  which  deed  he  at 
once  persuaded  the  people  that  Romulus  had 
gone  to  the  gods,  and  freed  the  senate  from  the 
suspicion  of  having  slain  the  king. 

CHAP.  XVI.  —  BY  WHAT  ARGUMENT  IT  IS  PROVED 
THAT  THOSE  WHO  ARE  DISTINGUISHED  BV  A 
DIFFERENCE   OF   SEX   CANNOT   BE   G0DS.3 

I  might  be  content  with  those  things  which  I 
have  related,  but  there  still  remain  many  things 
which  are  necessary  for  the  work  which  I  have 
undertaken.  For  although,  by  destroying  the 
principal  part  of  superstitions,  I  have  taken 
away  the  whole,  yet  it  pleases  me  to  follow  up 
the  remaining  parts,  and  more  fully  to  refute  so 
inveterate  a  persuasion,  that  men  may  at  length 
be  ashamed  and  repent  of  their  errors.  This  is 
a  great  undertaking,  and  worthy  of  a  man.  "  I 
proceed  to  release  the  minds  of  men  from  the 
ties  of  superstitions,"  as  Lucretius  "^  says ;  and 
he  indeed  was  unable  to  effect  this,  because  he 
brought  forward  nothing  true.  This  is  our  duty, 
who  both  assert  the  existence  of  the  true  God 
and  refute  false  deities.  They,  therefore,  who 
entertain  the  opinion  that  the  i)oets  have  invented 
fables  about  the  gods,  and  yet  believe  in  the  ex- 
istence of  female  deities,  and  worship  them,  are 
unconsciously  brought  back  to  that  which  they 
had  denied  —  that  they  have  sexual  intercourse, 
and  bring  forth.  For  it  is  impossible  that  the 
two  sexes  can  have  been  instituted  except  for  the 
sake  of  generation.  But  a  difterence  of  sex  be- 
ing admitted,  they  do  not  perceive  that  concep- 
tion follows  as  a  consequence.     And  this  cannot 


3  And  that  the  office  of  propagating  (his  race)  does  not  fall  within 
the  nature  of  God. 

*  i.  931.     [i.e.,  De  Rerum  Natura,  lib.  i.  verse  931.] 


Chap.  XVIL] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


29 


be  the  case  with  a  God.  But  let  the  matter  be 
as  they  imagine  ;  for  they  say  that  there  are  sons 
of  Jupiter  and  of  the  other  gods.  Therefore 
new  gods  are  born,  and  that  indeed  daily,  for 
gods  are  not  surpassed  in  fruitfuhiess  by  men. 
It  follows  that  all  things  are  full  of  gods  without 
number,  since  forsooth  none  of  them  dies.  For 
since  the  multitude  of  men  is  incredible,  and 
their  number  not  to  be  estimated  —  though,  as 
they  are  born,  they  must  of  necessity  die  —  what 
must  we  suppose  to  be  the  case  with  the  gods 
who  have  been  born  through  so  many  ages,  and 
have  remained  immortal?  How  is  it,  then,  that 
so  few  are  worshipped  ?  Unless  we  think  by  any 
means  that  there  are  two  sexes  of  the  gods,  not 
for  the  sake  of  generation,  but  for  mere  gratifi- 
cation, and  that  the  gods  practise  those  things 
which  men  are  ashamed  to  do,  and  to  submit  to. 
But  when  any  are  said  to  be  born  from  any,  it 
follows  that  they  always  continue  to  be  born,  if 
they  are  born  at  any  time  ;  or  if  they  ceased  at 
any  time  to  be  born,  it  is  befitting  that  we  should 
know  why  or  at  what  time  they  so  ceased.  Sen- 
eca, in  his  books  of  moral  philosophy,  not  with- 
out some  pleasantry,  asks,  "  What  is  the  reason 
why  Jupiter,  who  is  represented  by  the  poets  as 
most  addicted  to  lust,  ceased  to  beget  children? 
Was  it  that  he  was  become  a  sexagenarian,  and 
was  restrained  by  the  Papian  law?'  Or  did  he 
obtain  the  privileges  conferred  by  having  three 
children  ?  Or  did  the  sentiment  at  length  occur 
to  him,  'What  you  have  done  to  another,  you 
may  expect  from  another  ; '  and  does  he  fear  lest 
any  one  should  act  towards  him  as  he  himself 
did  to  Saturn?"  But  let  those  who  maintain 
that  they  are  gods,  see  in  what  manner  they  can 
answer  tliis  argument  which  I  shall  bring  forward. 
If  there  are  two  sexes  of  the  gods,  conjugal  in- 
tercourse follows ;  and  if  this  takes  place,  they 
must  have  houses,  for  they  are  not  without  virtue 
and  a  sense  of  shame,  so  as  to  do  this  openly 
and  promiscuously,  as  we  see  that  the  brute  ani- 
mals do.  If  they  have  houses,  it  follows  that 
they  also  have  cities  ;  and  for  this  we  have  the 
authority  of  Ovid,  who  says,  "  The  multitude  of 
gods  occupy  separate  places  ;  in  this  front  the 
powerful  and  illustrious  inhabitants  of  heaven 
have  placed  their  dwellings."  If  they  have  cities, 
they  will  also  have  fields.  Now  who  cannot  see 
the  consequence,  —  namely,  that  they  plough  and 
cultivate  their  lands  ?  And  this  is  done  for  the 
sake  of  food.  Therefore  they  are  mortal.  And 
this  argument  is  of  the  same  weight  when  re- 
versed. For  if  they  have  no  lands,  they  have  no 
cities ;  and  if  they  have  no  cities,  they  are  also 
without  houses.  And  if  they  have  no  houses, 
they  have  no  conjugal  intercourse ;  and  if  they 
are  without  this,  they  have  no  female  sex.     But 


'  [Cicero,  De  Offictis,  lib.  iii.  11.] 


we  see  that  there  are  females  among  the  gods 
also.  Therefore  there  are  not  gods.  If  any  one 
is  able,  let  him  do  away  with  this  argument.  For 
one  thing  so  follows  the  other,  that  it  is  impossi- 
ble not  to  admit  these  last  things.  But  no  one 
will  refute  even  the  former  argument.  Of  the 
two  sexes  the  one  is  stronger,  the  other  weaker. 
For  the  males  are  more  robust,  the  females  more 
feeble.  But  a  god  is  not  liable  to  feebleness ; 
therefore  there  is  no  female  sex.  To  this  is 
added  that  last  conclusion  of  the  former  argu- 
ment, that  there  are  no  gods,  since  there  are 
females  also  among  the  gods. 

CHAP.   XVII. CONCERNING   THE    SAME    OPINION   OF 

THE    STOICS,    AND    CONCERNING    THE     HARDSHIPS 
AND   DISGRACEFUL   CONDUCT   OF  THE   GODS. 

On  these  accounts  the  Stoics  form  a  different 
conception  of  the  gods ;  and  because  they  do 
not  perceive  what  the  truth  is,  they  attempt  to 
join  them  with  the  system  of  natural  things. 
And  Cicero,  following  them,  brought  forward 
this  opinion  respecting  the  gods  and  their  re- 
ligions. Do  you  see  then,  he  says,  how  an 
argument  has  been  drawn  from  physical  subjects 
which  have  been  well  and  usefully  found  out, 
to  the  existence  of  false  and  fictitious  gods? 
And  this  circumstance  gave  rise  to  false  opin- 
ions and  turbulent  errors,  and  almost  old- 
womanly  superstitions.  For  both  the  forms  of 
the  gods,  and  their  ages,  and  clothing  and  orna- 
ments, are  known  to  us ;  and  moreover  their 
races,  and  marriages,  and  all  their  relationships, 
and  all  things  reduced  to  the  similitude  of  hu- 
man infirmity.  What  can  be  said  more  plain, 
more  true?  The  chief  of  the  Roman  philoso- 
phy, and  invested  with  the  most  honourable 
priesthood,  refutes  the  false  and  fictitious  gods, 
and  testifies  that  their  worship  consists  of  almost 
old-womanly  superstitions :  he  complains  that 
men  are  entangled  in  false  opinions  and  turbu- 
lent errors.  For  the  whole  of  his  third  book 
respecting  the  Nature  of  the  Gods  altogether 
overthrows  and  destroys  all  religion.  What 
more,  therefore,  is  expected  from  us  ?  Can  we 
surpass  Cicero  in  eloquence  ?  By  no  means ; 
but  confidence  was  wanting  to  him,  being  igno- 
rant of  the  truth,  as  he  himself  simply  acknowl- 
edges in  the  same  work.  For  he  says  that  he 
can  more  easily  say  what  is  not,  than  what  is ; 
that  is,  that  he  is  aware  that  the  received  sys- 
tefn  is  false,  but  is  ignorant  of  the  truth.^  It  is 
plain,  therefore,  that  those  who  are  supposed  to 
be  gods  were  but  men,  and  that  their  memory 
was  consecrated  after  their  death.  And  on  this 
account  also  different  ages  and  established  rep- 
resentations of  form  are  assigned  to  each,  be- 


*  [N'at.  Dear.,  liber  i.  32.] 


.".o 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  I. 


cause  their  images  were  fashioned  in  that  dress 
and  of  that  age  at  wliich  death  arrested  each. 

Let  us  consider,  if  you  please,  the  hardships 
of  the  unfortunate  gods.  Isis  lost  her  son ; 
Ceres  her  daughter ;  Latona,  expelled  and  driven 
about  over  the  earth,  with  ditificulty  found  a 
small  island '  where  she  might  bring  forth.  The 
mother  of  the  gods  both  loved  a  beautiful  youth, 
and  also  mutilated  him  when  found  in  company 
with  a  harlot ;  and  on  this  account  her  sacred 
rites  are  now  celebrated  by  the  Galli  ^  as  priests. 
Juno  violently  persecuted  harlots,  because  she 
was  not  able  to  conceive  by  her  brother.^  Varro 
writes,  that  the  island  Samos  was  before  called 
Parthenia,  because  Juno  there  grew  up,  and 
there  also  was  married  to  Jupiter.  Accordingly 
there  is  a  most  noble  and  ancient  temple  of  hers 
at  Samos,  and  an  image  fashioned  in  the  dress 
of  a  bride ;  and  her  annual  sacred  rites  are 
celebrated  after  the  manner  of  a  marriage.  If, 
therefore,  she  grew  up,  if  she  was  at  first  a  vir- 
gin and  afterwards  a  woman,  he  who  does  not 
understand  that  she  was  a  human  being  con- 
fesses himself  a  brute.  Why  should  I  speak  of 
the  lewdness  of  Venus,  who  ministered  to  the 
lusts  of  all,  not  only  gods,  but  also  men?  For 
from  her  infamous  debauchery  with  Mars  she 
brought  forth  Harmonia ;  from  Mercury  she 
brought  forth  Hermaphroditus,  who  was  born 
of  both  sexes  ;  from  Jupiter  Cupid  ;  from  An- 
chises  ^neas  ;  from  Butes  Eryx ;  from  Adonis 
she  could  bring  forth  no  offspring,  because  he 
was  struck  by  a  boar,  and  slain,  while  yet  a  boy. 
And  she  first  instituted  the  art  of  courtesanship, 
as  is  contained  in  the  sacred  history ;  and  taught 
women  in  Cyprus  to  seek  gain  by  prostitution, 
which  she  commanded  for  this  purpose,  that  she 
alone  might  not  appear  unchaste  and  a  courier 
of  men  beyond  other  females.  Has  she,  too, 
any  claim  to  religious  worship,  on  whose  part 
more  adulteries  are  recorded  than  births  ?  But 
not  even  were  those  virgins  who  are  celebrated 
able  to  preserve  their  chastity  inviolate.  For 
from  what  source  can  we  suppose  that  Erichtho- 
nius  was  born?  Was  it  from  the  earth,  as  the 
poets  would  have  it  appear?  But  the  circum- 
stance itself  cries  out.  For  when  Vulcan  had 
made  arms  for  the  gods,  and  Jupiter  had  given 
him  the  option  of  asking  for  whatever  reward  he 
might  wish,  and  had  sworn,  according  to  his 
custom,  by  the  infernal  lake,  that  he  would  re- 
fuse him  nothing  which  he  might  ask,  then  the 
lame  artificer  demanded  Minerva  in  marriage. 
Upon  this  the  excellent  and  mighty  Jupiter, 
being  bound  by  so  great  an  oath,  was  not  able 
to  refuse  ;  he,  however,  advised  Minerva  to  op- 
pose  and   defend  her  chastity.     Then   in  that 


struggle  they  say  that  Vulcan  shed  his  seed  upon 
the  earth,  from  which  source  Erichthonius  was 
born  :  and  that  this  name  was  given  to  him  from 
eptSj?  and  yBovoi,  that  is,  from  the  contest  and  the 
ground.  Why,  then,  did  she,  a  virgin,  entrust 
that  boy  shut  up  with  a  dragon  and  sealed  to 
three  virgins  born  from  Cecrops?  An  evident 
case  of  incest,  as  I  think,  which  can  by  no  means 
be  glossed  over.  Another,  when  she  had  almost 
lost  her  lover,  who  was  torn  to  pieces  by  his 
madened  horses,  called  in  the  most  excellent 
physician  yEsculapius  for  the  treatment  of  the 
youth  j  and  when  he  was  healed, 

"Trivia  kind  her  favourite  hides, 
And  to  Egeria's  care  confides, 
To  live  in  woods  obscure  and  lone, 
And  lose  in  Virbius'  name  his  own."* 

What  is  the  meaning  of  this  so  diligent  and 
anxious  care  ?  Why  this  secret  abode  ?  Why 
this  banishment,  either  to  so  great  a  distance,  or 
to  a  woman,  or  into  solitude  ?  Why,  in  the  next 
place,  the  change  of  name  ?  Lastly,  why  such  a 
determined  hatred  of  horses?  What  do  all 
these  things  imply,  but  the  consciousness  of  dis- 
honour, and  a  love  by  no  means  consistent  with 
a  virgin?  There  was  evidently  a  reason  why 
she  undertook  so  great  a  labour  for  a  youth  so 
faithful,  who  had  refused  compliance  with  the 
love  of  his  stepmother. 

CHAP.  XVIII.  —  ON  THE  CONSECRATION  OF  GODS, 
ON  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  BENEFITS  WHICH  THEY 
CONFERRED    UPON    MEN. 

In  this  place  also  they  are  to  be  refuted,  who 
not  only  admit  that  gods  have  been  made  from 
men,  but  even  boast  of  it  as  a  subject  of  praise, 
either  on  account  of  their  valour,  as  Hercules, 
or  of  their  gifts,  as  Ceres  and  Liber,  or  of  the 
arts  which  they  discovered,  as  yEsculapius  or 
Minerva.  But  how  foolish  these  things  are,  and 
how  unworthy  of  being  the  causes  why  men 
should  contaminate  themselves  with  inexpiable 
guilt,  and  become  enemies  to  God,  in  contempt 
of  whom  they  undertake  offerings  to  the  dead,  I 
will  show  from  particular  instances.  They  say 
that  it  is  virtue  5  which  exalts  man  to  heaven,  — 
not,  however,  that  concerning  which  philoso- 
phers discuss,  which  consists  in  goods  of  the 
soul,  but  this  connected  with  the  body,  which  is 
called  fortitude  ;  and  since  this  was  pre-eminent 
in  Hercules,  it  is  believed  to  have  deserved  im- 
mortality. Who  is  so  foolishly  senseless  as  to 
judge  strength  of  body  to  be  a  divine  or  even 
a  human  good,  when  it  has  been  assigned  in 
greater  measure  to  cattle,  and  it  is  often  im- 
paired by  one  disease,  or  is  lessened  by  old  age 


»  Delos. 

^  The  priests  of  Cybele  were  called  Galli. 

3  Jupiter. 


*  Virg.,  j^neid,  vii   774. 

5  Virtus  in   its  first  meaning  denotes  valour,  the  property  of  a 
man  {vir) ;  theu  it  is  used  to  signify  moral  excellence. 


Chap.  XVIII.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


itself,  and  altogether  fails?  -\nd  so  Hercules, 
when  he  perceived  that  his  muscles  were  dis- 
figured by  ulcers,  neither  wished  to  be  healed 
nor  to  grow  old,  that  he  might  not  at  any  time 
appear  to  have  less  strength  or  comeliness  than 
he  once  had.'  They  supposed  that  he  ascended 
into  heavenTrom  the  funeral  pile  on  which  he  had  ^ 
burnt  himself  alive  ;  and  those  very  qualities 
which  they  most  fooHshly  admired,  they  ex- 
pressed by  statues  and  images,  and  consecrated, 
so  that  they  might  for  ever  remain  as  memorials 
of  the  folly  of  those  who  had  believed  that  gods 
owed  their  origin  to  the  slaughter  of  beasts. 
But  this,  perchance,  may  be  the  fault  of  the 
Greeks,  who  always  esteemed  most  trifling 
things  as  of  the  greatest  consequence.  What  is 
the  case  of  our  own  countrymen?  Are  they 
more  wise?  For  they  despise  valour  in  an 
athlete,  because  it  produces  no  injur>';  but  in 
the  case  of  a  king,  because  it  occasions  widely- 
spread  disasters,  they  so  admire  it  as  to  imagine 
that  brave  and  warlike  generals  are  admitted  to 
the  assembly  of  the  gods,  and  that  there  is  no 
other  way  to  immortality  than  to  lead  armies, 
to  lay  waste  the  territory  of  others,  to  destroy 
cities,  to  overthrow  tOA\-ns,  to  put  to  death  or 
enslave  free  peoples.  Truly  the  greater  number 
of  men  they  have  cast  down,  plundered,  and 
slain,  so  much  the  more  noble  and  distinguished 
do  they  think  themselves ;  and  ensnared  by  the 
show  of  empty  glory,  they  give  to  their  crimes 
the  name  of  virtue.  I  would  rather  that  they 
should  make  to  themseh^es  gods  from  the  slaugh- 
ter of  wild  beasts,  than  approve  of  an  immortal- 
ity so  stained  with  blood.  If  any  one  has  slain 
a  single  man,  he  is  regarded  as  contaminated 
and  wicked,  nor  do  they  think  it  lawful  for  him 
to  be  admitted  to  this  earthly  abode  of  the  gods. 
But  he  who  has  slaughtered  countless  thousands 
of  men,  has  inundated  plains  with  blood,  and  in- 
fected rivers,  is  not  only  admitted  into  the  tem- 
ple, but  even  into  heaven.  In  Emiius  Africanus 
thus  speaks  :  "  If  it  is  permitted  any  one  to  as- 
cend to  the  regions  of  the  gods  above,  the 
greatest  gate  of  heaven  is  open  to  me  alone." 
Because,  in  truth,  he  extinguished  and  destroyed 
a  great  part  of  the  human  race.  Oh  how  great 
the  darkness  in  which  you  were  involved,  O  Afri- 
canus, or  rather  O  poet,  in  that  you  imagined  the 
ascent  to  heaven  to  be  open  to  men  through 
slaughters  and  bloodshed  !  And  Cicero  also  as- 
sented to  this  delusion.  It  is  so  in  truth,  he  said, 
O  Africanus,  for  the  same  gate  was  open  to  Her- 
cules ;  as  though  he  himself  had  been  doorkeeper 
in  heaven  at  the  time  when  this  took  place.  I 
indeed  cannot  determine  whether  I  should  think 
it  a  subject  of  grief  or  of  ridicule,  when  I  see 
grave  and  learned,  and,  as  they  appear  to  them- 

*  Lit.,  than  himself. 


selves,  wise  men,  involved  in  such  miserable 
waves  of  errors.  If  this  is  the  virtue  which  ren- 
ders us  immortal,  I  for  my  part  should  prefer  to 
die,  rather  than  to  be  the  cause  of  destruction  to 
as  many  as  possible.  If  immortality  can  be  ob- 
tained in  no  other  way  than  by  bloodshed,  what 
wdll  be  the  result  if  all  shall  agree  to  live  in  har- 
mony? And  this  may  undoubtedly  be  realized, 
if  men  would  cast  aside  their  pernicious  and  im- 
pious madness,  and  live  in  innocence  and  jus- 
tice. Shall  no  one,  then,  be  worthy  of  heaven  ? 
Shall  virtue  perish,  because  it  will  not  be  per- 
mitted men  to  rage  against  their  fellow-men? 
But  they  who  reckon  the  overthrow  of  cities  and 
people  as  the  greatest  glory  will  not  endure  pub- 
lic tranquillity  :  they  will  plunder  and  rage  ;  and 
by  the  infliction  of  outrageous  injuries  will  dis- 
turb the  compact  of  human  society,  that  they 
may  have  an  enemy  whom  they  may  destroy 
with  greater  wickedness  than  that  with  which 
they  attacked. 

Now  let  us  proceed  to  the  remaining  subjects. 
The  conferring  of  benefits  gave  the  name  of  gods 
to  Ceres  and  Liber.  I  am  able  to  prove  from 
the  sacred  wTitings  that  wine  and  corn  were  used 
by  men  before  the  offspring  of  Coelus  and  Satur- 
nus.  But  let  us  suppose  that  they  were  intro- 
duced by  these.  Can  it  appear  to  be  a  greater 
thing  to  have  collected  corn,  and  having  bruised 
it,  to  have  taught  men  to  make  bread ;  or  to 
have  pressed  grapes  gathered  from  the  vine,  and 
to  have  made  wine,  than  to  have  produced  and 
brought  forth  from  the  earth  com  itself,  or  the 
j  \dne  ?  God,  indeed,  may  have  left  these  things 
1  to  be  drawn  out  by  the  ingenuitj'  of  man ;  yet 

■  all  things  must  belong  to  Him,  who  gave  to  man 
both  wisdom  to  discover,  and  those  very  things 
which  might  be  discovered.  The  arts  also  are 
said  to  have  gained  immortahty  for  their  in- 
ventors, as  medicine  for  ^Esculapius,  the  craft  of 
the  smith  for  Vulcan.  Therefore  let  us  worship 
those  also  who  taught  the  art  of  the  fuller  and 
of  the  shoemaker.  But  why  is  not  honour  paid 
to  the  discoverer  of  the  potter's  art?  Is  it  that 
those  rich  men  despise  Samian  vessels  ?  There 
are  also  other  arts,  the  inventors  of  which  greatly 
profited  the  life  of  man.  Why  have  not  temples 
been  assigned  to  them  also  ?  But  doubtless  it  is 
Minerva  who  discovered  all,  and  therefore  work- 
men offer  prayers  to  her.     Such,  then,  was  the 

;  low  condition  ^  from  which  Minen-a  ascended  to 

■  heaven.  Is  there  truly  any  reason  why  any  one 
should  leave  the  worship  of  Him  who  created  ^ 
the  earth  with  its  living  creatures,  and  the  heaven 
with  its  stars,  for  the  adoration  of  her  who  taught 
men  to  set  up  the  woof?  What  place  does  he 
hold  who  taught  the  healing  of  wounds  in  the 

*  Ab  his  sordibus. 
I        3  Exorsus  est.     The  word  properly  denotes  to  begin  a  web,  to  lay 
I  the  waip;  hence  the  use  of  "  ordiii"  in  the  following  clause. 


32 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  I. 


body  ?  Can  he  be  more  excellent  than  Him  who 
formed  the  body  itself,  and  the  power  of  sensi- 
bility and  of  life  ?  Finally,  did  he  contrive  and 
bring  to  light  the  herbs  themselves,  and  the  other 
things  in  which  the  healing  art  consists? 

CHAP.     XIX. THAT     IT     IS     IMPOSSIBLE     FOR     ANY 

ONE    TO     WORSHIP    THE    TRUE    GOD     TOGETHER 
WITH    FALSE    DEITIES. 

But  some  one  will  say  that  this  supreme  Being, 
who  made  all  things,  and  those  also  who  con- 
ferred on  men  particular  benefits,  are  entitled  to 
their  respective  worship.  First  of  all,  it  has  never 
happened  that  the  worshipper  of  these  has  also 
been  a  worshipper  of  God.  Nor  can  this  possi- 
bly happen.  For  if  the  honour  paid  to  Him  is 
shared  by  others,  He  altogether  ceases  to  be 
worshipped,  since  His  religion  requires  us  to  be- 
lieve that  He  is  the  one  and  only  God.  The 
excellent  poet  exclaims,  that  all  those  who  re- 
fined life  by  the  invention  of  arts  are  in  the  lower 
regions,  and  that  even  the  discoverer  himself  of 
such  a  medicine  and  art  was  thrust  down  by 
lightning  to  the  Stygian  waves,  that  we  may  un- 
derstand how  great  is  the  power  of  the  Almighty 
Father,  who  can  extinguish  even  gods  by  His 
lightnings.  But  ingenious  men  perchance  thus 
reasoned  with  themselves  :  Because  God  cannot 
be  struck  with  lightning,  it  is  manifest  that  the 
occurrence  never  took  place  ;  nay,  rather,  be- 
cause it  did  take  place,  it  is  manifest  that  the 
person  in  question  was  a  man,  and  not  a  god. 
For  the  falsehood  of  the  poets  does  not  consist 
in  the  deed,  but  in  the  name.  For  they  feared 
evil,  if,  in  opposition  to  the  general  persuasion, 
they  should  acknowledge  that  which  was  true. 
But  if  this  is  agreed  upon  among  themselves, 
that  gods  were  made  from  men,  why  then  do 
they  not  believe  the  poets,  if  at  any  time  they 
describe  their  banishments  and  wounds,  their 
deaths,  and  wars,  and  adulteries?  From  which 
things  it  may  be  understood  that  they  could  not 
possibly  become  gods,  since  they  were  not  even 
good  men,  and  during  their  life  they  performed 
those  actions  which  bring  forth  everlasting  death. 


CH.\P,     XX.  —  OF     THE    GODS     PECULIAR    TO     THE 
ROMANS,    AND   THEIR   SACRED    RITES. 

I  now  come  to  the  superstitions  peculiar  to 
the  Romans,  since  I  have  spoken  of  those  which 
are  common.  The  wolf,  the  nurse  of  Romulus, 
was  invested  with  divine  honours.  And  I  could 
endure  this,  if  it  had  been  the  animal  itself 
whose  figure  she  bears.  Livy  relates  that  there 
was  an  image  of  Larentina,  and  indeed  not  of 
her  body,  but  of  her  mind  and  character.  For 
she  was  the  wife  of  Faustulus,  and  on  account 
of  her  prostitution  she  was  called  among   the 


shepherds  wolf,'  that  is,  harlot,  from  which  also 
the  brothel^  derives  its  name.  The  Romans 
doubtless  followed  the  example  of  the  Athenians 
in  representing  her  figure.  For  when  a  harlot,  by 
name  Legena,  had  put  to  death  a  tyrant  among 
them,  because  it  was  unlawful  for  the  image  of  a 
harlot  to  be  placed  in  the  temple,  %ey  erected 
the  effigy  of  the  animal  whose  name  she  bore. 
Therefore,  as  the  Athenians  erected  a  monument 
from  the  name,  so  did  the  Romans  from  the  pro- 
fession of  the  person  thus  honoured.  A  festival 
was  also  dedicated  to  her  name,  and  the  Laren- 
tinalia  were  instituted.  Nor  is  she  the  only  har- 
lot whom  the  Romans  worship,  but  also  Faula, 
who  was,  as  Verrius  writes,  the  paramour  of  Her- 
cules. Now  how  great  must  that  immortality  be 
thought  which  is  attained  even  by  harlots ! 
Flora,  having  obtained  great  wealth  by  this  prac- 
tice, made  the  people  her  heir,  and  left  a  fixed 
sum  of  money,  from  the  annual  proceeds  of 
which  her  birthday  might  be  celebrated  by  pub- 
lic games,  which  they  called  Floralia.  And  be- 
cause this  appeared  disgraceful  to  the  senate,  in 
order  that  a  kind  of  dignity  might  be  given  to  a 
shameful  matter,  they  resolved  that  an  argument 
should  be  taken  from  the  name  itself.  They 
pretended  that  she  was  the  goddess  who  presides 
over  flowers,  and  that  she  must  be  appeased,  that 
the  crops,  together  with  the  trees  or  vines,  might 
produce  a  good  and  abundant  blossom.  The 
poet  followed  up  this  idea  in  his  Fasti,  and 
related  that  there  was  a  nymph,  by  no  means 
obscure,  who  was  called  Chloris,  and  that,  on  her 
marriage  with  Zephyrus,  she  received  from  her 
husband  as  a  wedding  gift  the  control  over  all 
flowers.  These  things  are  spoken  with  propriety, 
but  to  believe  them  is  unbecoming  and  shameful. 
And  when  the  truth  is  in  question,  ought  dis- 
guises of  this  kind  to  deceive  us  ?  Those  games, 
therefore,  are  celebrated  with  all  wantonness,  as 
is  suitable  to  the  memory  of  a  harlot.  For  be- 
sides licentiousness  of  words,  in  which  all  lewd- 
ness is  poured  forth,  women  are  also  stripped  of 
their  garments  at  the  demand  of  the  people,  and 
then  perform  the  office  of  mimeplayers,  and  are 
detained  in  the  sight  of  the  people  with  indecent 
gestures,  even  to  the  satiating  of  unchaste  eyes. 
Tatius  consecrated  an  image  of  Cloacina, 
which  had  been  found  in  the  great  sewer ;  and 
because  he  did  not  know  whose  likeness  it  was, 
he  gave  it  a  name  from  the  place.  Tullus  Hos- 
tilius  fashioned  and  worshipped  Fear  and  Pallor. 
What  shall  I  say  respecting  him,  but  that  he  was 
worthy  of  having  his  gods  always  at  hand,  as 
men  commonly  wish  ?  The  conduct  of  Marcus 
Marcellus  concerning  the  consecration  of  Honour 
and  V^alour  differs  from  this  in  goodness  of  the 
names,  but  agrees  with  it  in  reality.     The  senate 

J  Lupa.     [See  vol.  iii.  cap.  lo,  p.  138,  this  series.] 
*  Lupanar. 


Chap.  XX.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


33 


acted  with  the  same  vanity  in  placing  Mind ' 
among  the  gods ;  for  if  they  had  possessed  any 
intelHgence,  they  would  never  have  undertaken 
sacred  rites  of  this  kind.  Cicero  says  that 
Greece  undertook  a  great  and  bold  design  in 
consecrating  the  images  of  Cupids  and  Loves  in 
the  gymnasia  :  it  is  plain  that  he  flattered  Atticus, 
and  jested  with  his  friend.  For  that  ought  not 
to  have  been  called  a  great  design,  or  a  design 
at  all,  but  the  abandoned  and  deplorable  wicked- 
ness of  unchaste  men,  who  exposed  their  chil- 
dren, whom  it  was  their  duty  to  train  to  an 
honourable  course,  to  the  lust  of  youth,  and 
wished  them  to  worship  gods  of  profligacy,  in 
those  places  especially  where  their  naked  bodies 
were  exposed  to  the  gaze  of  their  corruptors, 
and  at  that  age  which,  through  its  simplicity  and 
incautiousness,  can  be  enticed  and  ensnared  be- 
fore it  can  be  on  its  guard.  What  wonder,  if  all 
kinds  of  profligacy  flowed  from  this  nation, 
among  whom  vices  themselves  have  the  sanction 
of  religion,  and  are  so  far  from  being  avoided, 
that  they  are  even  worshipped  ?  And  therefore, 
as  though  he  surpassed  the  Greeks  in  prudence, 
he  subjoined  to  this  sentence  as  follows :  "  Vices 
ought  not  to  be  consecrated,  but  virtues."  But 
if  you  admit  this,  O  Marcus  TuUius,  you  do  not 
see  that  it  will  come  to  pass  that  vices  will  break 
in  together  with  virtues,  because  evil  things  ad- 
here to  those  which  are  good,  and  have  greater 
influence  on  the  minds  of  men  ;  and  if  you  for- 
bid these  to  be  consecrated,  the  same  Greece 
will  answer  you  that  it  worships  some  gods  that 
it  may  receive  benefits,  and  others  that  it  may 
escape  injuries. 

For  this  is  always  the  excuse  of  those  who  re- 
gard their  evils  as  gods,  as  the  Romans  esteem 
Blight  and  Fever.  If,  therefore,  vices  are  not  to 
be  consecrated,  in  which  I  agree  with  you, 
neither  indeed  are  virtues.  For  they  have  no 
intelligence  or  perception  of  themselves ;  nor 
are  they  to  be  placed  within  walls  or  shrines 
made  of  clay,  but  within  the  breast ;  and  they 
are  to  be  enclosed  within,  lest  they  should  be 
false  if  placed  without  man.  Therefore  I  laugh 
at  that  illustrious  law  of  yours  which  you  set  forth 
in  these  words  :  "  But  those  things  on  accovmt 
of  which  it  is  given  to  man  to  ascend  into 
heaven  —  I  speak  of  mind,  virtue,  piety,  faith  — 
let  there  be  temples  for  their  praises."  But  these 
things  cannot  be  separated  from  man.  For  if 
they  are  to  be  honoured,  they  must  necessarily 
be  in  man  himself.  But  if  they  are  without 
man,  what  need  is  there  to  honour  those  things 
which  you  do  not  possess?  For  it  is  virtue 
which  is  to  be  honoured,  and  not  the  image  of 
virtue ;  and  it  is  to  be  honoured  not  by  any  sac- 
rifice, or  incense,  or  solemn  prayer,  but  only  by 


*  Mens.     [Tayler  Lewis,  Plato,  etc.,  p.  219. ] 


the  will  and  purpose.  For  what  else  is  it  to 
honour  virtue,  but  to  comprehend  it  with  the 
mind,  and  to  hold  it  fast  ?  And  as  soon  as  any 
one  begins  to  wish  for  this,  he  attains  it.  This 
is  the  only  honour  of  virtue  ;  for  no  other  reli- 
gion and  worship  is  to  be  held  but  that  of  the 
one  God.  To  what  purport  is  it,  then,  O  wisest 
man,  to  occupy  with  superfluous  buildings  places 
which  may  turn  out  to  the  service  of  men?  To 
what  purport  is  it  to  establish  priests  for  the  wor- 
ship of  vain  and  senseless  objects  ?  To  what  pur- 
port to  immolate  victims?  To  what  purport  to 
bestow  such  great  expenditure  on  the  forming 
or  worshipping  of  images  ?  The  human  breast 
is  a  stronger  and  more  uncorrupted  temple  :  let 
this  rather  be  adorned,  let  this  be  filled  with 
the  true  deities.  For  they  who  thus  worship  the 
virtues  —  that  is,  who  pursue  the  shadows  and 
images  of  virtues  —  cannot  hold  the  very  things 
which  are  true.  Therefore  there  is  no  virtue  in 
any  one  when  vices  bear  rule ;  there  is  no  faith 
when  each  individual  carries  off"  all  things  for 
himself;  there  is  no  piety  when  avarice  spares 
neither  relatives  nor  parents,  and  passion  rushes 
to  poison  and  the  sword  :  no  peace,  no  concord, 
when  wars  rage  in  public,  and  in  private  enmities 
prevail  even  to  bloodshed ;  no  chastity  when 
unbridled  lusts  contaminate  each  sex,  and  the 
whole  body  in  every  part.  Nor,  however,  do 
they  cease  to  worship  those  things  which  they 
flee  from  and  hate.  For  they  worship  with  in- 
cense and  the  tips  of  their  fingers  those  things 
which  they  ought  to  have  shrunk  from  with  their 
inmost  feelings  ;  and  this  error  is  altogether  de- 
rived from  their  ignorance  of  the  principal  and 
chief  good. 

When  their  city  was  occupied  by  the  Gauls, 
and  the  Romans,  who  were  besieged  in  the  Cap- 
itol, had  made  military  engines  from  the  hair  of 
the  women,  they  dedicated  a  temple  to  the  Bald 
Venus.  They  do  not  therefore  understand  how 
vain  are  their  religions,  even  from  this  very  fact, 
that  they  jeer  at  them  by  these  follies.  They 
had  perhaps  learned  from  the  Lacedaemonians 
to  invent  for  themselves  gods  from  events.  For 
when  they  were  besieging  the  Messenians,  and 
they  (the  Messenians)  had  gone  out  secretly,  es- 
caping the  notice  of  the  besiegers,  and  had  has- 
tened to  plunder  Lacediemon,  they  were  routed 
and  put  to  flight  by  the  Spartan  women.  But 
the  Lacedaemonians,  having  learned  the  strata- 
gem of  the  enemy,  followed.  The  women  in 
arms  went  out  to  a  distance  to  meet  them  ;  and 
when  they  saw  that  their  husbands  were  prepar- 
ing themselves  for  battle,  supposing  them  to  be 
Messenians,  they  laid  bare  their  persons.  But 
the  men,  recognising  their  wives,  and  excited  to 
passion  by  the  sight,  rushed  to  promiscuous  in- 
tercourse, for  there  was  not  time  for  discrimina- 
tion.    In  like  manner,  the  youths  who  had  on  a 


34 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book'  J. 


former  occasion  been  sent  by  the  same  people, 
having  intercourse  with  the  virgins,  from  whom 
the  Parthenioe  were  born,  in  memory  of  this  deed 
erected  a  temple  and  statue  to  armed  Venus. 
And  although  this  originated  in  a  shameful  cause, 
yet  it  seems  better  to  have  consecrated  Venus  as 
armed  than  bald.  At  the  same  time  an  altar 
was  erected  also  to  Jupiter  Pistor  (the  baker), 
because  he  had  admonished  them  in  a  dream 
to  make  all  the  corn  which  they  had  into  bread, 
and  throw  it  into  the  camp  of  the  enemy ;  and 
when  this  was  done,  the  siege  was  ended,  since 
the  Gauls  despaired  of  being  able  to  reduce  the 
Romans  by  want. 

What  a  derision  of  religious  rites  is  this  !  If 
I  were  a  defender  of  these,  what  could  I  com- 
plain of  so  greatly  as  that  the  name  of  gods  had 
come  into  such  contempt  as  to  be  mocked  by 
the  most  disgraceful  names?  Who  would  not 
laugh  at  the  goddess  Fornax,  or  rather  that 
learned  men  should  be  occupied  with  celebrating 
the  Fornacalia?  Who  can  refrain  from  laughter 
on  hearing  of  the  goddess  INIuta  ?  They  say  that 
she  is  the  goddess  from  whom  the  Lares  were 
born,  and  they  call  her  Lara,  or  Larunda.  What 
advantage  can  she,  who  is  unable  to  speak,  afford 
to  a  worshipper?  Caca  also  is  worshipped,  who 
informed  Hercules  of  the  theft  of  his  oxen,  having 
obtained  immortality  through  the  betrayal  of  her 
brother ;  and  Cunina,  who  protects  infants  in  the 
cradle,  and  keeps  oif  witchcraft ;  and  Stercutus, 
who  first  introduced  the  method  of  manuring  the 
land  ;  and  Tutinus,  before  whom  brides  sit,  as 
an  introduction  to  the  marriage  rites ;  and  a 
thousand  other  fictions,  so  that  they  who  regarded 
these  as  objects  of  worship  may  be  said  to  be 
more  foolish  than  the  Egyptians,  who  worship 
certain  monstrous  and  ridiculous  images.  These, 
however,  have  some  delineation  of  form.  What 
shall  I  say  of  those  who  worship  a  rude  and 
shapeless  stone  under  the  name  of  Terminus? 
This  is  he  whom  Saturnus  is  said  to  have  swal- 
lowed in  the  place  of  Jupiter ;  nor  is  the  honour 
paid  to  him  undeservedly.  For  when  Tarquinius 
wished  to  build  the  Capitol,  and  there  were  the 
chapels  of  many  gods  on  that  spot,  he  consulted 
them  by  augury  whether  they  would  give  way  to 
Jupiter ;  and  when  the  rest  gave  way.  Terminus 
alone  remained.  From  which  circumstance  the 
poet  speaks  of  the  immoveable  stone  of  the  Capi- 
tol. Now  from  this  very  fact  how  great  is  Jupiter 
found  to  be,  to  whom  a  stone  did  not  give  way, 
with  this  confidence,  perhaps,  because  it  had 
rescued  him  from  the  jaws  of  his  father  !  There- 
fore, when  the  Capitol  was  built,  an  aperture  was 
left  in  the  roof  above  Terminus  himself,  that, 
since  he  had  not  given  Avay,  he  might  enjoy  the 
free  heaven ;  but  they  did  not  themselves  enjoy 
this,  who  imagined  that  a  stone  enjoyed  it.  And 
therefore  they  make  public  supplications  to  him, 


as  to  the  god  who  is  the  guardian  of  boundaries  ; 
and  he  is  not  only  a  stone,  but  sometimes  also  a 
stock.  What  shall  I  say  of  those  who  worship 
such  objects,  unless  —  that  they  above  all  others 
are  stones  and  stocks  ? 


CHAP.  XXI.  —  OF  CERTAIN  DEITIES  PECULIAR  TO 
BARBARIANS,  AND  THEIR  SACRED  RITES  ;  AND 
IN    LIKE    MANNER   CONCERNING   THE    ROMANS. 

We  have  spoken  of  the  gods  themselves  who 
are  worshipped  ;  we  must  now  speak  a  few  words 
respecting  their  sacrifices  and  mysteries.  i\mong 
the  people  of  Cyprus,  Teucer  sacrificed  a  human 
victim  to  Jupiter,  and  handed  down  to  posterity 
that  sacrifice  which  was  lately  abolished  by  Ha- 
drian when  he  was  emperor.  There  was  a  law 
among  the  people  of  Tauris,  a  fierce  and  inhuman 
nation,  by  which  it  was  ordered  that  strangers 
should  be  sacrificed  to  Diana ;  and  this  sacrifice 
was  practised  through  many  ages.  The  Gauls 
used  to  appease  Hesus  and  Teutas  with  human 
blood.  Nor,  indeed,  were  the  Latins  free  from 
this  cruelty,  since  Jupiter  Latialis  is  even  now 
worshipped  with  the  offering  of  human  blood. 
What  benefit  do  they  who  offer  such  sacrifices 
implore  from  the  gods  ?  Or  what  are  such  deities 
able  to  bestow  on  the  men  by  whose  punishments 
they  are  propitiated?  But  this  is  not  so  much  a 
matter  of  surprise  with  respect  to  barbarians, 
whose  religion  agrees  with  their  character.  But 
are  not  our  countrymen,  who  have  always 
claimed  for  themselves  the  glory  of  gentleness 
and  civilization,  found  to  be  moi;e  inhuman  by 
these  sacrilegious  rites  ?  For  these  ought  rather 
to  be  esteemed  impious,  who,  though  they  are 
embellished  with  the  pursuits  of  liberal  training, 
turn  aside  from  such  refinement,  than  those 
who,  being  ignorant  and  inexperienced,  glide 
into  evil  practices  from  their  ignorance  of  those 
which  are  good.  And  yet  it  is  plain  that  this 
rite  of  immolating  human  victims  is  ancient, 
since  Saturn  was  honoured  in  Latium  with  the 
same  kind  of  sacrifice  ;  not  indeed  that  a  man 
was  slain  at  the  altar,  but  that  he  was  thrown  from 
the  Milvian  bridge  into  the  Tiber.  And  Varro 
relates  that  this  was  done  in  accordance  with  an 
oracle  ;  of  which  oracle  the  last  verse  is  to  this 
effect :  "  And  offer  heads  to  Ades,  and  to  the 
father  a  man.'"  And  because  this  appears  am- 
biguous, both  a  torch  and  a  man  are  accustomed 
to  be  thrown  to  him.  But  it  is  said  that  sacrifices 
of  this  kind  were  put  an  end  to  by  Hercules 
when  he  returned  from  Spain ;  the  custom  still 
continuing,  that  instead  of  real  men,  images 
made  from  rushes  were  cast  forth,  as  Ovid  in- 
forms us  in  his  Fasti :^  "Until  the  Tirynthian 


'  Or,  lights.     The  oracle  is  ambiguous,  since  the  word  ^ta%  signi- 
fies a  man,  and  also  light,     [i.e.,  <^<us  =  man,  and  0ws  =  light.] 
'^  V.  629. 


S:hap.  XXL] 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


15 


came  into  these  lands,  gloomy  sacrifices  were 
annually  offered  in  the  Leucadian  manner :  he 
threw  into  the  water  Romans  made  of  straw ;  do 
you,  after  the  example  of  Hercules,  cast '  in  the 
images  of  human  bodies." 

The  Vestal  virgins  make  these  sacred  offerings, 
as  the  same  poet  says  :  ^  "  Then  also  a  virgin  is 
accustomed  to  cast  from  the  wooden  bridge  the 
images  of  ancient  men  made  from  rushes." 

For  I  cannot  find  language  to  speak  of  the 
infants  vvho  were  immolated  to  the  same  Saturn, 
on  account  of  his  hatred  of  Jupiter.  To  think 
that  men  were  so  barbarous,  so  savage,  that  they 
gave  the  name  of  sacrifice  to  the  slaughter  of 
their  own  children,  that  is,  to  a  deed  foul,  and 
to  be  held  in  detestation  by  the  human  race ; 
since,  without  any  regard  to  parental  affection, 
they  destroyed  tender  and  innocent  lives,  at  an 
age  which  is  especially  pleasing  to  parents,  and 
surpassed  in  brutality  the  savageness  of  all  beasts, 
which  —  savage  as  they  are  —  still  love  their 
offspring  !  O  incurable  madness  !  What  more 
could  those  gods  do  to  them,  if  they  were  most 
angry,  than  they  now  do  when  propitious,  when 
they  defile  their  worshippers  with  parricide,  visit 
them  with  bereavements,  and  deprive  them  of 
the  sensibilities  of  men?  What  can  be  sacred 
to  these  men?  Or  what  will  they  do  in  profane 
places,  who  commit  the  greatest  crimes  amidst 
the  altars  of  the  gods?  Pescennius  Festus  re- 
lates in  the  books  of  his  History  by  a  Satire,  that 
the  Carthaginians  were  accustomed  to  immolate 
human  victims  to  Saturn  ;  and  when  they  were 
conquered  by  Agathocles,  the  king  of  the  Sicili- 
ans, they  imagined  that  the  god  was  angry  with 
them  ;  and  tlierefore,  that  they  might  more  dili- 
gently offer  an  expiation,  they  immolated  two 
hundred  sons  of  their  nobles  :  "  So  great  the 
ills  to  which  religion  could  prompt,  which  has 
ofttimes  produced  wicked  and  impious  deeds." 
What  advantage,  then,  did  the  men  propose  by 
that  sacrifice,  when  they  put  to  death  so  large  a 
part  of  the  state,  as  not  even  Agathocles  had 
slain  when  victorious  ? 

From  this  kind  of  sacrifices  those  pul)lic  rites 
are  to  Ije  judged  signs  of  no  less  madness  ;  some 
of  which  are  in  honour  of  the  mother  of  the 
gods,  in  which  men  mutilate  themselves  ;  others 
are  in  honour  of  Virtus,  whom  they  also  call 
Bellona,  in  which  the  priests  make  offsprings  not 
with  the  blood  of  another  victim,  but  with  their 
own.3  For,  cutting  their  shoulders,  antl  thrust- 
ing forth  drawn  swords  in  each  hand,  they  run, 
they  are  beside  themselves,  they  are  frantic. 
Quintilian  therefore  says  excellently  in  his  Fa- 
natic:  "If  a  god  compels  this,  he  does  it  in 
anger."     Are  even  these  thin-fs  sacred?     Is  it 


'  Jace.     Others  read  "jaci." 

2  V.  621. 

3  So  tue  priests  of  Baal  cut  themselves,  i  Kings  xviii.  aS. 


not  better  to  live  like  cattle,  than  to  worship 
deities  so  impious,  profane,  and  sanguinary? 
But  we  will  discuss  at  the  proper  time  the 
source  from  which  these  errors  and  deeds  of 
such  great  disgrace  originated.  In  the  mean- 
time, let  us  look  also  to  other  matters  which  are 
without  guilt,  that  we  may  not  seem  to  select  the 
worse  parts  through  the  desire  of  finding  fault. 
In  Egypt  there  are  sacred  rites  in  honour  of 
Isis,  since  she  either  lost  or  found  her  little  son. 
For  at  first  her  priests,  having  made  their  bodies 
smooth,  beat  their  breasts,  and  lament,  as  the 
goddess  herself  had  done  when  her  child  was 
lost.  Afterwards  the  boy  is  brought  forward,  as 
if  found,  and  that  mourning  is  changed  into  joy. 
Therefore  Lucan  says,  "  And  Osiris  never  suffi- 
ciently sought  for."  For  they  always  lose,  and 
they  always  find  him.  Therefore  in  the  sacred 
rites  there  is  a  representation  of  a  circumstance 
which  really  occurred  ;  and  which  assuredly  de- 
clares, if  we  have  any  intelligence,  that  she  was 
a  mortal  woman,  and  almost  desolate,  had  she 
not  found  one  person.  And  this  did  not  escape 
the  notice  of  the  poet  himself;  for  he  repre- 
sents Pompey  when  a  youth  as  thus  speaking, 
on  hearing  the  death  of  his  father  :  "  I  will  now 
draw  forth  the  deity  Isis  from  the  tomb,  aiiti 
send  iicr  through  the  nations ;  and  I  will 
scatter  through  the  people  Osiris  covered  with 
wood."  This  Osiris  is  the  same  whom  the 
people  call  Serapis.  For  it  is  customary  for  the 
names  of  the  dead  who  are  deified  to  be  changed, 
that  no  one,  as  I  believe,  may  imagine  them  to 
be  men.  For  Romulus  after  his  death  became 
Quirinus,  and  Leda  became  Nemesis,  and  Circe 
Marica  ;  and  Ino,  when  she  had  leapt  into  the 
sea,  was  called  Leucothea ;  and  the  mother 
Matuta ;  and  her  son  Melicerta  was  called  Pa- 
Isemon  and  Portumnus.  And  the  sacred  rites 
of  the  Eleusinian  Ceres  are  not  unlike  these. 
For  as  in  those  which  have  been  vientioned  the 
boy  Osiris  is  sought  with  the  wailing  of  his 
mother,  so  in  these  Proserpine  is  carried  away 
to  contract  an  incestuous  marriage  with  her 
uncle ;  and  because  Ceres  is  said  to  ha\^e  sought 
for  her  in  Sicily  with  torches  lighted  from  tlie 
top  of  Etna,  on  this  account  her  sacred  rites  are 
celebrated  with  the  throwing  of  torches. 

At  Lampsacus  the  victim  to  be  offered  to 
Priapus  is  an  ass,  and  the  cause  of  the  sacrifice 
of  this  animal  is  thus  set  forth  in  the  Fasti:  — 
When  all  the  deities  had  assembled  at  the  festi- 
val of  the  Great  Mother,  and  when,  satiated  with 
feasting,  they  were  spending  the  night  in  sport, 
they  say  that  Vesta  had  laid  herself  on  the  ground 
for  rest,  and  had  fallen  asleep,  and  that  Priapus 
upon  this  formed  a  design  against  her  honour  as 
she  slept ;  but  that  she  was  aroused  l)y  the  un- 
seasonable braying  of  the  ass  on  which  Silenus 
used  to  ride,  and  that  the  design  of  the  insidi- 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  I. 


ous  plotter  was  frustrated.  On  this  account  they 
say  that  the  people  of  Lampsacus  were  accus- 
tomed to  sacrifice  an  ass  to  Priapus,  as  thougli  it 
were  in  revenge  ;  but  among  the  Romans  the 
same  animal  was  crowned  at  the  Vestalia  (festival 
of  Vesta)  with  loaves,'  in  honour  of  the  preser- 
vation of  her  chastity.  What  is  baser,  what  more 
disgraceful,  than  if  Vesta  is  indebted  to  an  ass 
for  the  preservation  of  her  purity?  But  the  poet 
in\-ented  a  fable.  But  was  that  more  true  which 
is  related  by  those  ^  who  wrote  "  Phenomena," 
when  they  speak  concerning  the  two  stars  of 
Cancer,  which  the  Greeks  call  asses  ?  That  they 
were  asses  which  carried  across  father  Liber  when 
he  was  unable  to  cross  a  river,  and  that  he  re- 
warded one  of  them  with  the  power  of  speak- 
ing with  human  voice  ;  and  that  a  contest  arose 
between  him  and  Priapus  ;  and  Priapus,  being 
worsted  in  the  contest,  was  enraged,  and  slew  the 
victor.  This  truly  is  much  more  absurd.  But 
poets  have  the  licence  of  saying  what  they  will. 
I  do  not  meddle  with  a  mystery  so  odious  ;  nor 
do  I  strip  Priapus  of  his  disguise,  lest  something 
deserving  of  ridicule  should  be  brought  to  light. 
It  is  true  the  poets  invented  these  fictions,  but 
they  must  have  been  invented  for  the  purpose  of 
concealing  some  greater  depravity.  Let  us  in- 
quire what  this  is.  But  in  fact  it  is  evident. 
For  as  the  bull  is  sacrificed  to  Luna,^  because  he 
also  has  horns  as  she  has  ;  and  as  "  Persia  pro- 
pitiates with  a  horse  Hyperion  surrounded  with 
rays,  that  a  slow  victim  may  not  be  offered  to 
the  swift  god ;  "  so  in  this  case  no  more  suitable 
victim  could  be  found  than  that  which  resembled 
him  to  whom  it  is  offered. 

At  Lindus,  which  is  a  town  of  Rhodes,  there 
are  sacred  rites  in  honour  of  Hercules,  the  ob- 
servance of  which  differs  widely  from  all  other 
rites  ;  for  they  are  not  celebrated  with  words  of 
good  omen  •»  (as  the  Greeks  term  it),  but  with 
revilings  and  cursing.  And  they  consider  it  a 
violation  of  the  sacred  rites,  if  at  any  time  during 
the  celel)ration  of  the  solemnities  a  good  word 
shall  have  escaped  from  any  one  even  inadver- 
tently. And  this  is  the  reason  assigned  for  this 
practice,  if  indeed  there  can  be  any  reason  in 
things  utterly  senseless.  When  Hercules  had 
arrived  at  the  place,  and  was  suffering  hunger,  he 
saw  a  ploughman  at  work,  and  began  to  ask  him 
to  sell  one  of  his  oxen.  But  the  ])loughman  re- 
plied that  this  was  impossible,  because  his  hope 
of  cultivating  the  land  depended  altogether  upon 
those  two  bullocks.  Hercules,  with  his  usual 
violence,  because  he  was  not  able  to  receive  one 

'  Panibus,  loaves  made  in  the  shape  of  crowns. 

2  [See  this  page,  note  6,  in/ra.\ 

3  The  moon. 

^  evibritJua.  It  was  supposed  that  words  of  ill  omen,  if  uttered 
during  the  offering  of  a  sacrifice,  would  render  the  gods  unpropitious: 
the  priest  therefore,  at  the  commencement  of  a  sacrifice,  called  upon 
the  people  to  abstain  from  ill-omened  words;  tv<j>riiJ.€iTt,  "  favete 
linguis." 


of  them,  killed  both.  But  the  unhappy  man, 
when  he  saw  that  his  oxen  were  slain,  avenged 
the  injury  with  revilings,  —  a  circumstance  which 
afforded  gratification  to  the  man  of  elegance  and 
refinement.  For  while  he  prepares  a  feast  for 
his  companions,  and  while  he  devours  the  oxen 
of  another  man,  he  receives  with  ridicule  and 
loud  laughter  the  bitter  reproaches  with  which 
the  other  assails  him.  But  when  it  had  been 
determined  that  divine  honours  should  be  paid 
to  Hercules  in  admiration  of  his  excellence,  an 
altar  was  erected  in  his  honour  by  the  citizens, 
which  he  named,  from  the  circumstance,  the  yoke 
of  oxen  ;  5  and  at  this  altar  two  yoked  oxen  were 
sacrificed,  like  those  which  he  had  taken  from 
the  ploughman.  And  he  appointed  the  same 
man  to  be  his  priest,  and  directed  him  always  to 
use  the  same  revilings  in  offering  sacrifice,  be- 
cause he  said  that  he  had  never  feasted  more 
pleasantly.  Now  these  things  are  not  sacred, 
but  sacrilegious,  in  which  that  is  said  to  be  en- 
joined, which,  if  it  is  done  in  other  things,  is 
punished  with  the  greatest  severity.  What,  more- 
over, do  the  rites  of  the  Cretan  Jupiter  himself 
show,  except  the  manner  in  which  he  was  with- 
drawn from  his  father,  or  brought  up  ?  I'here  is 
a  goat  belonging  to  the  nymph  Amalthea,  which 
gave  suck  to  the  infant ;  and  of  this  goat  Ger- 
manicus  Caesar  thus  speaks,  in  his  poem  trans- 
lated from  x\ratus  :  ^  — 

"  She  is  supposed  to  be  the  nurse  of  Jupiter;  if  in  truth 
the  infant  Ju])iter  pressed  the  faithful  teats  of  the 
Cretan  goat,  which  attests  the  gratitude  of  her  lord 
by  a  bright  constellation." 

Musceus  relates  that  Jupiter,  when  fighting 
against  the  Titans,  used  the  hide  of  this  goat  as 
a  shield,  from  which  circumstance  he  is  called 
by  the  poets  shield-bearer.^  Thus,  whatever 
was  done  in  concealing  the  boy,  that  also  is  done 
by  way  of  representation  in  the  sacred  rites. 
Moreover,  the  mystery  of  his  mother  also  con- 
tains the  same  stary  which  Ovid  sets  forth  in  the 
Fasti :  — 

"  Now  the  lofty  Ida  resounds  with  tinklings,  that  the 
boy  may  cry  in  safety  with  infant  mouth.  Some 
strike  their  shields  with  stakes,  some  beat  their 
empty  helmets.  This  is  the  employment  of  the 
Curetes,  this  of  the  Corybantes.  The  matter  was 
concealed,  and  imitations  of  the  ancient  deed  re- 
main ;  the  attendant  goddesses  shake  instruments 
of  brass,  and  hoarse  hides.  Instead  of  helmets 
they  strike  cymbals,  and  drums  instead  of  shields  ; 
the  flute  gives  Phrygian  strains,  as  it  gave  before." 

Sallust  rejected  this  opinion  altogether,  as 
though  invented  by  the  poets,  and  wished  to 
give  an  ingenious  explanation  of  the  reasons  for 


5   VtovCjVyGV, 

*  Aratus  was  the  author  of  two  Greek  astronomical  poems,  the 
<ba.i.v6tx.iva.  and  the  Aio<7»)|ucia.  Virgil,  in  his  Georgics,  has  borrowed 
largely  from  the  latter.  Germanicus  Caesar,  the  grandson  o(  Augus- 
tus, as  stated  in  the  text,  translated  the  ■taivo/icva. 

7  oiyioxos;  "  scutum  habens." 


Chap.  XXII.] 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


37 


which  the  Curetes  are  said  to  have  nourished 
Jupiter ;  and  he  speaks  to  this  purport :  Because 
they  were  the  first  to  understand  the  worship  of 
the  deity,  that  therefore  antiquity,  which  exag- 
gerates all  things,  made  them  known  as  the  nour- 
ishers  of  Jupiter.     How  much  this  learned  man 
was  mistaken,  the  matter  itself  at  once  declares. 
For  if  Jupiter  holds  the  first  place,  both  among 
the  gods  and  in  religious  rites,  if  no  gods  were 
worshipped  by  the  people  before  him,  because 
they  who  are  worshipped  were  not  yet  born ;  it 
appears  that  the  Curetes,  on  the  contrary,  were 
the  first  who  did  not  understand  the  worship  of 
the  deity,  since  all  error  was  introduced  by  them, 
and  the  memory  of  the  true  God  was  taken  away. 
They  ought  therefore  to  have  understood  from 
the  mysteries  and  ceremonies  themselves,  that 
they  were  offering  prayers  to  dead  men.     I  do 
not  then  require  that  any  one  should  believe  the 
fictions  of  the  poets.     If  any  one  imagines  that 
these  speak  falsely,  let  him  consider  the  writings 
of  the  pontiffs  themselves,  and  weigh  whatever 
there  is  of  literature  pertaining  to  sacred  rites  : 
he  will  perhaps  find  more  things  than  we  bring 
forward,  from  which  he  may  understand  that  all 
things  which   are   esteemed   sacred  are  empty, 
vain,   and    fictitious.      But   if  any  one,   having 
discovered  wisdom,  shall  lay  aside  his  error,  he 
will  assuredly  laugh  at  the  follies  of  men  who 
are  almost  without  understanding  :  I  mean  those 
who  either  dance  with  unbecoming  gestures,  or 
run  naked,  anointed,  and  crowned  with  chaplets, 
either  wearing  a  mask  or  besmeared  with  mud. 
What  shall  I  say  about  shields  now  putrid  with 
age?     When   they  carry  these,  they  think  that 
they  are  carrying  gods  themselves  on  their  shoul- 
ders.    For  Furius  Bibaculus  is  regarded  among 
the  chief  examples  of  piety,  who,  though  he  was 
praetor,  nevertheless  carried  the  sacred  shield,' 
preceded  by  the   lictors,  though   his   office   as 
prcetor  gave  him  an  exemption  from  this  duty. 
He  was  therefore  not  Furius,  but  altogether  mad,^ 
who  thought  that  he  graced  his  prtetorship  by 
this  service.     Deservedly  then,  since  these  things 
are  done  by  men  not  unskilful  and  ignorant,  does 
Lucretius  exclaim  :  — 

"O  foolish  minds  of  men!  O  blinded  breasts  I  In 
what  darkness  of  life  and  in  how  great  dangers  is 
passed  this  term  of  life,  whatever  be  its  dura- 
tion I  " 

Who  that  is  possessed  of  any  sense  would  not 
laugh  at  these  mockeries,  when  he  sees  that 
men,  as  though  bereft  of  intelligence,  do  those 
things  seriously,  which  if  any  one  should  do  in 
sport,  he  would  appear  too  full  of  sport  and 
folly? 


CHAP.     XXII. WHO    WAS     THE     AUTHOR     OF     THE 

VANITIES     BEFORE     DESCRIBED     IN     ITALY   AMONG 
THE  ROMANS,  AND  WHO   AMONG   OTHER  NATIONS. 


1  Ancih,  the  sacred  shield,  carried  by  the  Salii,  or  priests  of 
Mars,  in  the  processions  at  the  festival  of  that  deity. 

2  Non  Furius,  sed  plane  furiosus. 


The  author  and  establisher  of  these  vanities 
among  the  Romans  was  that  Sabine  king  who 
especially  engaged  ^  the  rude  and  ignorant  minds 
of  men  with   new   superstitions :   and   that   he 
might  do  this  with  some  authority,  he  pretended 
that  he  had  meetings  by  night  with  the  goddess 
Egeria.     There  was  a  very  dark  cavern  in  the 
grove  of  Aricia,  from  which  flowed  a  stream  with 
a  never  failing   spring.     Hither  he  was   accus- 
tomed  to   withdraw   himself  without   any  wit- 
nesses, that  he  might  be  able  to  pretend  that, 
by  the  admonition  of  the  goddess  his  wife,  he 
delivered  to  the  people  those  sacred  rites  which 
were  most  acceptable  to  the  gods.     It  is  evident 
that  he  wished  to  imitate  the  craftiness  of  Minos, 
who  concealed  himself  in  the  cave  of  Jupiter, 
and,  after  a  long  delay  there,  brought  forward 
laws,  as  though  delivered  to  him  by  Jupiter,  that 
he  might  bind  men  to  obedience  not  only  by 
the  authority  of  his  government,  but  also  by  the 
sanction   of  religion.     Nor   was   it   difficult   to 
persuade   shepherds.      Therefore    he   instituted 
pontiffs,  priests,  Salii,  and  augurs ;  he  arranged 
the  gods  in  families ;   and  by  these    means  he 
softened  the  fierce  spirits   of  the   new  people, 
and   called   them  away  from  warlike   affairs  to 
the  pursuit  of  peace.     But  though  he  deceived 
others,  he  did  not  deceive  himself.     For  after 
many  years,  in  the  consulship  of  Cornelius  and 
Bebius,  in  a  field  belonging  to  the  scribe  Petilius, 
under   the   Janiculum,    two    stone    chests   were 
found   by  men   who   were   digging,  in   one   of 
which  was  the  body  of  Numa,  in  the  other  seven 
books  in  Latin  respecting  the  law  of  the  pontiffs, 
and  the  same  number  written  in  Greek  respect- 
ing systems  of  philosophy,  in  which  he  not  only 
annulled  the  religious  rites  which  he  himself  had 
instituted,  but  all  others  also.     When  this  was 
referred  to  the  senate,  it  was  decreed  that  these 
books  shoukl  be  destroyed.     Therefore  Quintus 
Petilius,  the  praetor  who  had  jurisdiction  in  the 
city,  burnt  them  in  an  assembly  of  the  people. 
This  was  a  senseless  proceeding;    for  of  what 
advantage  was   it   that   the   books  were   burnt, 
when  the  cause  on  account  of  which  they  were 
burnt  —  that  they  took  away  the  authority  due 
to  religion  —  was  itself  handed  down  to  memory? 
Lvery  one  then  in  the  senate  was  most  ioo\\i\\ ; 
for  the  books  might  have  been  burnt,  and  yet 
the  matter    itself   have    been    unknown.     Thus, 
while  they  wish  to  prove  even  to  posterity  with 
what  piety  they  defended  religious  institutions, 
they  lessened  the   authority  of  the    institutions 
themselves  by  tlu-Mr  testimony. 

But  as  Pompilius  was  the  institutor  of  foolish 


3  Iiiiplicavit. 


437420 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  I. 


superstitions  among  the  Romans,  so  also,  before 
Pompilius,  Faunas  was  in  Latium,  who  both  es- 
tabhshed  impious  rites  to  his  grandfather  Satur- 
nus,  and  honoured  his  father  Picus  with  a  place 
among  the  gods,  and  consecrated  his  sister  Fatua 
Fauna,  who  was  also  his  wife ;  who,  as  Gabius 
Bassus  relates,  was  called  Fatua  because  she 
had  been  in  the  habit  of  foretelling  their  fates  to 
women,  as  Faunus  did  to  men.  And  Varro 
writes  that  she  was  a  woman  of  such  great  mod- 
esty, that,  as  long  as  she  lived,  no  male  except 
her  husband  saw  her  or  heard  her  name.  On 
this  account  women  sacrifice  to  her  in  secret, 
and  call  her  the  Good  Goddess.  And  Sextus 
Claudius,  in  that  book  which  he  wrote  in  Greek, 
relates  that  it  was  the  wife  of  Faunus  who,  be- 
cause, contrary  to  the  practice  and  honour  of 
kings,  she  had  drunk  a  jar  of  wine,  and  had  be- 
come intoxicated,  was  beaten  to  death  by  her 
husband  with  myrtle  rods.  But  afterwards,  when 
he  was  sorry  for  what  he  had  done,  and  was  un- 
able to  endure  his  regret  for  her,  he  paid  her 
divine  honours.  For  this  reason  they  say  that 
a  covered  jar  of  wine  is  placed  at  her  sacred 
rites.  Therefore  Faunus  also  left  to  posterity 
no  slight  error,  w^hich  all  that  are  intelligent  see 
through.  For  Lucilius  in  these  verses  derides 
the  folly  of  those  who  imagine  that  images  are 
gods  :  "  The  terrestrial '  Lamias,  which  Faunus 
and  Numa  Pompilius  and  others  instituted ;  at 
these  he  trembles,  he  places  everything  in  this. 
As  infant  boys  believe  that  every  statue  of  bronze 
is  a  hving  man,  so  these  imagine  that  all  things 
feigned  are  true  :  they  believe  that  statues  of 
bronze  contain  a  heart.  It  is  a  painter's  gal- 
lery ;  ^  there  is  nothing  true ;  all  things  are 
fictitious."  The  poet,  indeed,  compares  foolish 
men  to  infants.  But  I  say  that  they  are  much 
more  senseless  than  infants.  For  they  (infants) 
suppose  that  images  are  men,  whereas  these 
take  them  for  gods :  the  one  through  their 
age,  the  others  through  folly,  imagine  that  which 
is  not  true  :  at  any  rate,  the  one  soon  ceased  to 
be  deceived ;  the  foolishness  of  the  others  is 
permanent,  and  always  increases.  Orpheus  was 
the  first  who  introduced  the  rites  of  father  Liber 
into  Greece ;  and  he  first  celebrated  them  on  a 
mountain  of  Bcjeotia,  very  near  to  Thebes,  where 
Liber  was  born ;  and  because  this  mountain 
continually  resounded  with  the  strains  of  the 
lyre,  it  was  called  Cithceron.^  Those  sacred 
rites  are  even  now  called  Orphic,  in  which  he 
himself  was  lacerated  and  torn  in  pieces ;  and 
he  lived  about  the  same  time  with  Faunus.  But 
which  of  them  was  prior  in  age  admits  of  doubt. 


'  Terricolas.     Another  reading  is  terrtcitlas,  bugbears. 

^  Pergula.  The  word  properly  means  a  projection  attached  to  a 
house.  Apelles  is  said  to  have  placed  his  pictures  in  such  an  adjunct, 
and  to  have  concealed  himself  behind  them,  that  he  might  hear  the 
comments  of  persons  passing  by. 

^  Cithaeron,  from  "  cithara,"  a  lyre. 


since  Latinus  and  Priam  reigned  during  the 
same  years,  as  did  also  their  fathers  Faunus  and 
Laomedon,  in  whose  reign  Orpheus  came  with 
the  Argonauts  to  the  coast  of  the  Trojans. 

Let  us  therefore  advance  further,  and  inquire 
who  was  really  the  first  author  of  the  worship  of 
the  gods.  Didymus,*  in  the  books  of  his  com- 
mentary on  Pindar,  says  that  Melisseus,  king  of 
the  Cretans,  was  the  first  who  sacrificed  to  the 
gods,  and  introduced  new  rites  and  parades  of 
sacrifices.  He  had  two  daughters,  Amalthaea 
and  Melissa,  who  nourished  the  youthful  Jupiter 
with  goats'  milk  and  honey.  Hence  that  poetic 
fable  derived  its  origin,  that  bees  flew  to  the  child, 
and  filled  his  mouth  with  honey.  Moreover,  he 
says  that  Melissa  was  appointed  by  her  father  the 
first  priestess  of  the  Great  Mother ;  from  which 
circumstance  the  priests  of  the  same  Mother  are 
still  called  Melissae.  But  the  sacred  history  tes- 
tifies that  Jupiter  himself,  when  he-  had  gained 
possession  of  power,  arrived  at  such  insolence 
that  he  built  temples  in  honour  of  himself  in 
many  places.  For  when  he  went  about  to  differ- 
ent lands,  on  his  arrival  in  each  region,  he  united 
to  himself  the  kings  or  princes  of  the  people  in 
hospitality  and  friendship  ;  and  when  he  was  de- 
parting from  each,  he  ordered  that  a  shrine  should 
be  dedicated  to  himself  in  the  name  of  his  host, 
as  though  the  remembrance  of  their  friendship 
and  league  could  thus  be  preserved.  Thus  tem- 
ples were  founded  in  honour  of  Jupiter  Atabyrius 
and  Jupiter  Labrandius ;  for  Atabyrius  and  La- 
brandius  were  his  entertainers  and  assistants  in 
war.  Temples  were  also  built  to  Jupiter  Laprius, 
to  Jupiter  Molion,  to  Jupiter  Casius,  and  others, 
after  the  same  manner.  This  was  a  very  crafty 
device  on  his  part,  that  he  might  both  acquire 
divine  honour  for  himself,  and  a  perpetual  name 
for  his  entertainers  in  conjunction  with  religious 
observances.  Accordingly  they  were  glad,  and 
cheerfully  submitted  to  his  command,  and  ob- 
served annual  rites  and  festivals  for  the  sake  of 
handing  down  their  own  name,  ^neas  did 
something  like  this  in  Sicily,  when  he  gave  the 
name  of  his  host  s  Acestes  to  a  city  which  he  had 
built,  that  Acestes  might  afterwards  joyfully  and 
willingly  love,  increase,  and  adorn  it.  In  this 
manner  Jupiter  spread  abroad  through  the  world 
the  observance  of  his  worship,  and  gave  an  ex- 
ample for  the  imitation  of  others.  Whether, 
then,  the  practice  of  worshipping  the  gods  pro- 
ceeded from  Melisseus,  as  Didymus  related,  or 
from  Jupiter  also  himself,  as  Euhemerus  says,  the 


^  Didymus.  A  celebrated  Alexandrian  grammarian,  a  follower 
of  the  school  of  Aristarchus.  He  is  distinguished  from  other  gram- 
marians who  bore  the  name  of  Didymus,  by  the  surname  Chaicntieros, 
which  he  is  said  to  have  received  from  his  unwearied  diligence  in  study. 
Among  his  productions,  which  are  all  lost,  was  one  on  the  Homeric 
poems.  He  also  wrote  a  commentary  on  Pindar,  to  which  allusion  is 
made  in  the  text.  See  Smith's  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Rotnati 
Biography. 

s  Cf.  Virg.,  ALneid,  v.  [verse  718]. 


Chap.  XXIIL] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


39 


time  is  still  agreed  upon  when  the  gods  began  to 
be  worshipped.  Melisseus,  indeed,  was  much 
prior  in  time,  inasmuch  as  he  brought  up  Jupi- 
ter his  grandson.  It  is  therefore  possible  that 
either  before,  or  while  Jupiter  was  yet  a  boy, 
he  taught  the  worship  of  the  gods,  namely,  the 
mother  of  his  foster-child,  and  his  grandmother 
Tellus,  who  was  the  wife  of  Uranus,  and  his  father 
Saturnus ;  and  he  himself,  by  this  example  and 
institution,  may  have  exalted  Jupiter  to  such  pride, 
that  he  afterwards  ventured  to  assume  divine 
honours  to  himself. 

CHAP.  XXIII. OF  THE  AGES  OF  VAIN  SUPERSTITIONS, 

AND   THE   TIMES    AT  WHICH   THEY   COMMENCED. 

Now,  since  we  have  ascertained  the  origin  of 
vain  superstitions,  it  remains  that  we  should  also 
collect  the  times  during  which  they  whose  mem- 
ory is  honoured  lived.  Theophilus,'  in  his  book 
written  to  Autolycus  respecting  the  times,-  says 
that  Thallus  relates  in  his  history,  that  Belus, 
who  is  worshipped  by  the  Babylonians  and  As- 
syrians, is  found  to  have  lived  322  years  before 
the  Trojan  war ;  that  Belus,  moreover,  was  con- 
temporary with  Saturnus,  and  that  they  both  grew 
up  at  one  time  ;  —  which  is  so  true,  that  it  may 
be  inferred  by  reason  itself.  For  Agamemnon, 
who  carried  on  the  Trojan  war,  was  the  fourth  ^ 
in  descent  from  Jupiter ;  and  Achilles  and  Ajax 
were  of  the  third  +  descent  from  him  ;  and  Ulys- 


'  Theophilus  was  bishop  of  Antioch  in  the  latter  part  of  the  sec- 
ond century.  He  was  originally  a  heathen,  and  was  converted  to 
Christianity,  as  he  tells  us,  by  the  reading  of  the  Scriptures.  [See 
vol.  ii.  pp.  87  and  120,  this  series.] 

2  De  Tcmporibus.  Among  the  extant  works  of  Theophilus  there 
is  not  any  with  this  title,  but  his  work  to  Autolycus  contains  an  apol- 
ogy for  Christianity  in  three  books.  It  is  to  this  that  Lactautius  here 
refers. 

3  Abnepos,  son  of  a  great-grandchild. 

4  Pronepotes,  great-grandsons. 


ses  was  related  in  the  same  degree.  Priam,  in- 
deed, was  distant  by  a  long  series  of  descents. 
But  according  to  some  authorities,  Dardanus  and 
lasius  were  sons  of  Coritus,  not  of  Jupiter.  For 
if  it  had  been  so,  Jupiter  could  not  have  formed 
that  unchaste  connection  with  Ganymede,  his 
own  descendant.  Therefore,  if  you  divide  the 
years  which  are  in  agreement,  the  number  will 
be  found  in  harmony  with  the  parents  of  those 
whom  I  have  named  above.  Now,  from  the 
destruction  of  the  Trojan  city  fourteen  hundred 
and  seventy  years  are  made  up.  From  this  cal- 
culation of  times,  it  is  manifest  that  Saturnus  has 
not  been  born  more  than  eighteen  hundred  years, 
and  he  also  was  the  father  of  all  the  gods.  Let 
them  not  glory,  then,  in  the  antiquity  of  their 
sacred  rites,  since  both  their  origin  and  system 
and  times  have  been  ascertained.  There  still 
remain  some  things  which  may  be  of  great 
weight  for  the  disproving  of  false  religions ;  but 
I  have  determined  now  to  bring  this  book  to  an 
end,  that  it  may  not  exceed  moderate  limits. 
For  those  things  must  be  followed  up  more  fully, 
that,  having  refuted  all  things  which  seem  to 
oppose  the  truth,  we  may  be  able  to  instruct  in 
true  religion  men  who,  through  ignorance  of 
good  things,  wander  in  uncertainty.  But  the  first 
step  towards  wisdom  is  to  understand  what  is 
false ;  the  second,  to  ascertain  what  is  true. 
Therefore  he  who  shall  have  profited  by  this  first 
discussion  of  mine,  in  which  we  have  exposed 
false  things,  will  be  excited  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  truth,  than  which  no  pleasure  is  more  grati- 
fying to  man ;  and  he  will  now  be  worthy  of  the 
wisdom  of  heavenly  training,  who  shall  approach 
with  willingness  and  preparation  to  the  knowl- 
edge of  the  other  subjects. 


THE    DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 
BOOK    II. 


OF  THE   ORIGIN   OF   ERROR. 


CH.\P.  I  — THAT  FORGETFULNESS  OF  REASON 
MAKES  MEN  IGNORANT  OF  THE  TRUE  GOD, 
WHOM  THEY  WORSHIP  IN  ADVERSITY  AND  DE- 
SPISE  IN   PROSPERITY. 

Although  I  have  shown  in  the  first  book  that 
the  rehgious  ceremonies  of  the  gods  are  false, 
because  those  in  whose  honour  the  general  con- 
sent of  men  throughout  the  world  by  a  foolish 
persuasion  undertook  various  and  dissimilar  rites 
were   mortals,  and  when   they  had   completed 
their  term  <?/life,  yielded  to  a  divinely  appointed 
necessity  and  died,  yet,  lest  any  doubt  should  be 
left,  this  second  book  shall  lay  open  the  very 
fountain   of    errors,    and   shall   explain   all   the 
causes  by  which  men  were  deceived,  so  that  at 
first  they  believed  that  they  were  gods,  and  after- 
wards with  an  inveterate  persuasion  persevered 
in  the  religious  observances  which  they  had  most 
perversely  undertaken.     For  I  desire,  O   Em- 
peror Constantine,  now  that  I  have  proved  the 
emptiness  of  these  things,  and  brought  to  light 
the  impious  vanity  of  men,  to  assert  the  majesty 
of  the  one  God,  undertaking  the  more  useful 
and  greater  duty  of  recalling  men  from  crooked 
paths,  and  of  bringing  them  back  into  favour 
with  themselves,  that  they  may  not,  as  some  phi- 
losophers do,  so  greatly  despise  themselves,  nor 
think  that  they  are  weak  and  useless,  and  of  no 
account,  and  altogether  born  in  vain.     For  this 
notion   drives   many   to   vicious   pursuits.     For 
while  they  imagine  that  we  are  a  care  to  no  God, 
or  that  we  are  about  to  have  no  existence  after 
death,  they  altogether  give  themselves  to  the  in- 
dulgence of  their  passions  ;  and  while  they  think 
that  it  is  allowed  them,  they  eagerly  apply  them- 
selves to  the  enjoyment  of  pleasures,  by  which 
they  unconsciously  nm  into  the  snares  of  death  ; 
for  they  are  ignorant  as  to  what  is  reasonable 
conduct  on  the  part  of  man  :  for  if  they  wished 
to  understand  this,  in  the  first  place  they  would 
acknowledge  their  Lord,  and  would  follow  after 
virtue  and  justice  ;  they  would  not  subject  their 
40 


souls  to  the  influence  of  earth-bom  fictions,  nor 
would  they  seek  the  deadly  fascinations  of  their 
lusts;  in  short,  they  would  value  themselves 
highly,  and  would  understand  that  there  is  more 
in  man  than  appears;  and  that  they  cannot 
retain  their  power  and  standing  unless  men  lay 
aside  depravity,  and  undertake  the  worship  of 
their  true  Parent.  I  indeed,  as  I  ought,  often 
reflecting  on  the  sum  of  affairs,  am  accustomed 
to  wonder  that  the  majesty  of  the  one  God, 
which  keeps  together  and  rules  all  things,  has 
come  to  be  so  forgotten,  that  the  only  befitting 
object  of  worship  is,  above  all  others,  the  one 
which  is  especially  neglected;  and  that  men 
have  sunk  to  such  blindness,  that  they  prefer  the 
dead  to  the  true  and  living  God,  and  those  who 
are  of  the  earth,  and  buried  in  the  earth,  to 
Him  who  was  the  Creator  of  the  earth  itself. 

And  yet  this  impiety  of  men  might  meet  with 
some  indulgence  if  the  error  entirely  arose  from 
ignorance  of  the  divine  name.  But  since  we 
often  see  that  the  worshippers  of  other  gods 
themselves  confess  and  acknowledge  the  Supreme 
God,  what  pardon  can  they  hope  for  their  im- 
piety, who  do  not  acknowledge  the  worship  of 
Him  whom  man  cannot  altogether  be  ignorant 
of?  For  both  in  swearing,  and  in  expressing  a 
wish,  and  in  giving  thanks,  they  do  not  name 
Jupiter,  or  a  number  of  gods,  but  God;'  so 
entirely  does  the  truth  of  its  own  accord  break 
forth  by  the  force  of  nature  even  from  unwilling 
breasts.  And  this,  indeed,  is  not  the  case  with 
men  in  their  prosperity.  For  then  most  of  all 
does  God  escape  the  memory  of  men,  when  in 
the  enjoyment  of  His  benefits  they  ought  to 
honour  His  divine  beneficence.  But  if  any 
weighty  necessity  shall  press  them,  then  they 
remember  God.  If  the  terror  of  war  shall  have 
resounded,  if  the  pestilential  force  of  diseases 
shall  have  overhung  them,  if  long-continued 
drought  shall  have  denied  nourishment  to  the 

«  [See  TertulUan,  vol.  iii.  p.  1761  this  series.] 


Chap.  II.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


41 


crops,  if  a  violent  tempest  or  hail  shall  have  as- 
sailed them,  they  betake  themselves  to  God,  aid 
is  implored  from  God,  God  is  entreated  to  suc- 
cour them.  If  any  one  is  tossed  about  on  the 
sea,  the  wind  being  furious,  it  is  this  God  whom 
he  invokes.  If  any  one  is  harassed  by  any  vio- 
lence, he  implores  His  aid.  If  any  one,  reduced 
to  the  last  extremity  of  poverty,  begs  for  food, 
he  appeals  to  God  alone,  and  by  His  divine  and 
matchless  name  '  alone  he  seeks  to  gain  the  com- 
passion of  men.  Thus  they  never  remember 
God,  unless  it  be  while  they  are  in  trouble. 
When  fear  has  left  them,  and  the  dangers  have 
withdrawn,  then  in  truth  they  quickly  hasten  to 
the  temples  of  the  gods  :  they  pour  libations  to 
them,  they  sacrifice  to  them,  they  crown  ^  them 
with  garlands.  But  to  God,  whom  they  called 
upon  in  their  necessity  itself,  they  do  not  give 
thanks  even  in  word.  Thus  from  prosperity 
arises  luxury ;  and  from  luxury,  together  with  all 
other  vices,  there  arises  impiety  towards  God. 

From  what  cause  can  we  suppose  this  to 
arise?  Unless  we  imagine  that  there  is  some 
perverse  power  which  is  always  hostile  to  the 
truth,  which  rejoices  in  the  errors  of  men,  whose 
one  and  only  task  it  is  perpetually  to  scatter 
darkness,  and  to  blind  the  minds  of  men,  lest 
they  should  see  the  light,  —  lest,  in  short,  they 
should  look  to  heaven,  and  observe  the  nature  ^ 
of  their  own  body,  the  origin  ^  of  which  we  shall 
relate  at  the  proper  place  ;  but  now  let  us  refute 
fallacies.  For  since  other  animals  look  down  to 
the  ground,  with  bodies  bending  forward,  be- 
cause they  have  not  received  reason  and  wisdom, 
whereas  an  upright  position  and  an  elevated 
countenance  have  been  given  to  us  by  the  Crea- 
tor God,  it  is  evident  that  these  ceremonies 
paid  to  the  gods  are  not  in  accordance  with  the 
reason  of  man,  because  they  bend  down  the 
heaven-sprung  being  to  the  worship  of  earthly 
objects.  For  that  one  and  only  Parent  of  ours, 
when  He  created  man,  —  that  is,  an  animal  intel- 
ligent and  capable  of  exercising  reason,  —  raised 
him  from  the  ground,  and  elevated  him  to  the 
contemplation  of  his  Creator.  As  an  ingenious 
poet  5  has  well  represented  it :  — 

"  And  when  other  animals  bend  forward  and  look  to  the 
earth,  He  gave  to  man  an  elevated  countenance, 
and  commanded  him  to  look  up  to  the  heaven, 
and  to  raise  his  countenance  erect  to  stars." 

From  this  circumstance  the  Greeks  plainly 
derived  the  name  dv$pu)Tro<;,^  because  he  looks 


*  Nomen.     Another  reading  is  niimen,  deity. 

*  It  was  a  custom  among  the  heathen  nations  to  crown  the  images 
of  the  gods  with  garlands  of  flowers. 

3  The  alkision  is  to  the  upright  attitude  of  man,  as  compared  with 
Other  crc.ited  beings.     The  argument  is  often  used  by  Lactantius. 

*  This  sentence  is  omitted  in  some  editions. 
i  Ovid,  Metamorphosis  [lx)ok  i.    85. 

Os  homini  sublime  dedit:  coelumque  tueri 
Jussit,  et  erectos  ad  sidera  tollcrc  vultus]. 

*  The  allusion  is  to  the  supposed  derivation  of  the  word  avflpwiros, 
from  i-va.,  Tptffto,  lii^,  to  turn  the  face  upwards. 


upward.  They  therefore  deny  themselves,  and 
renounce  the  name  of  man,  who  do  not  look  up, 
but  downward  :  unless  they  think  that  the  fact 
of  our  being  upright  is  assigned  to  man  without 
any  cause.  God  willed  that  we  should  look  up 
to  heaven,  and  undoubtedly  not  without  reason. 
For  both  the  birds  and  almost  all  of  the  dumb 
creation  see  the  heaven,  but  it  is  given  to  us  in 
a  peculiar  manner  to  behold  the  heaven  as  we 
stand  erect,  that  we  may  seek  religion  there  ; 
that  since  we  cannot  see  God  with  our  eyes, 
we  may  with  our  mind  contemplate  Him,  whose 
throne  is  there  :  and  this  cannot  assuredly  be 
done  by  him  who  worships  brass  and  stone,  which 
are  earthly  things.  But  it  is  most  incorrect  that 
the  nature  of  the  body,  which  is  temporary, 
should  be  upright,  but  that  the  soul  itself,  which 
is  eternal,  should  be  abject ;  whereas  the  figure 
and  position  have  no  other  signification,  except 
that  the  mind  of  man  ought  to  look  in  the  same 
direction  as  his  countenance,  and  that  his  soul 
ought  to  be  as  upright  as  his  body,  so  that  it 
may  imitate  that  which  it  ought  to  nile.  But 
men,  forgetful  both  of  their  name  and  nature, 
cast  down  their  eyes  from  the  heaven,  and  fix 
them  upon  the  ground,  and  fear  the  works  of 
their  own  hands,  as  though  anything  could  be 
greater  than  its  own  artificer. 

CH.\P.  II. WH.\T  WAS  THE  FIRST  CAUSE  OF  MAK- 
ING IMAGES  ;  OF  THE  TRUE  LIKENESS  OF  GOD, 
ANT)   THE   TRUE    WORSHIP   OF    HIM. 

What  madness  is  it,  then,  either  to  form  those 
objects  which  they  themselves  may  afterwards 
fear,  or  to  fear  the  things  which  they  have 
formed?  But,  they  say,  we  do  not  fear  the 
images  themselves,  but  those  beings  after  whose 
likeness  they  were  formed,  and  to  whose  names 
they  are  dedicated.  You  fear  them  doubtless 
on  this  account,  because  you  think  that  they  are 
in  heaven ;  for  if  they  are  gods,  the  case  cannot 
be  otherwise.  Why,  then,  do  you  not  raise 
your  eyes  to  heaven,  and,  invoking  their  names, 
offer  sacrifices  iii  the  open  air?  Why  do  you 
look  to  walls,  and  wood,  and  stone,  rather  than 
to  the  place  where  you  believe  them  to  be? 
What  is  the  meaning  of  temples  ^  and  altars? 
what,  in  short,  of  the  images  themselves,  which 
are  memorials  either  of  the  dead  or  absent? 
For  the  plan  of  making  likenesses  was  invented 
by  men  for  this  reason,  that  it  might  be  possible 
to  retain  the  memory  of  those  who  had  either 
been  removed  by  death  or  separated  by  absence. 


'  The  word  temples  is  not  here  applied  to  the  buildings  which 
the  faithful  set  apart  for  the  worship  of  God,  but  to  the  places  used  by 
the  heathens  for  their  rites  and  sacrifices.  [For  three  centuries  tern- 
pla  was  the  word  among  Christians  fi.r  the  idobtrous  places  1  Th.-it 
buildings  were  set  apart  by  Christians  from  the  earliest  .ages  for  their 
religious  assemblies,  is  gathered  from  the  express  testimony  of  Ter- 
tullfan,  Cyprian,  and  other  early  writers.  They  were  called  ecclesiie; 
churches,  not  temples.  [For  Kvf>i.aKov,  dominkum,  basilica,  etc., 
see  Bingham,  book  viii.  cap  i.  sec.  a.] 


42 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  II. 


In  which  of  these  classes,  then,  shall  we  reckon 
the  gods?  If  among  the  dead,  who  is  so  foolish 
as  to  worship  them  ?  If  among  the  absent,  then 
tliey  are  not  to  be  worshipped,  if  they  neither 
see  our  actions  nor  hear  our  prayers.  But  if  the 
gods  cannot  be  absent,  —  for,  since  they  are 
divine,  they  see  and  hear  all  things,  in  whatever 
part  of  the  universe  they  are,  —  it  follows  that 
images  are  superfluous,  since  the  gods  are  pres- 
ent everywhere,  and  it  is  sufficient  to  invoke 
with  prayer  the  names  of  those  who  hear  us. 
But  if  they  are  present,  they  cannot  fail  to  be  at 
hand  at  their  own  images.  It  is  entirely  so,  as 
the  people  imagine,  that  the  spirits  of  the  dead 
wander '  about  the  tombs  and  relics  of  their 
bodies.  But  after  that  the  deity  has  begun  to 
be  near,  there  is  no  longer  need  of  his  statue. 

For  I  ask,  if  any  one  should  often  contemplate 
the  likeness  of  a  man  who  has  settled  in  a  for- 
eign land,  that  he  may  thus  solace  himself  for 
him  who  is  absent,  would  he  also  appear  to  be 
of  sound  mind,  if,  when  the  other  had  returned 
and  was  present,  he  should  persevere  in  con- 
templating the  likeness,  and  should  prefer  the 
enjoyment  of  it,  rather  than  the  sight  of  the  man 
himself?  Assuredly  not.  For  the  likeness  of  a 
man  appears  to  be  necessary  at  that  time  when 
he  is  far  away ;  and  it  will  become  superfluous 
when  he  is  at  hand.  But  in  the  case  of  God, 
whose  spirit  and  influence  are  diffused  every- 
where, and  can  never  be  absent,  it  is  plain  that 
an  image  is  always  superfluous.  But  they  fear 
lest  their  religion  should  be  altogether  vain  and 
empty  if  they  should  see  nothing  present  which 
they  may  adore,  and  therefore  they  set  up  im- 
ages ;  and  since  these  are  representations  of  the 
dead,  they  resemble  the  dead,  for  they  are  en- 
tirely destitute  of  perception.  But  the  image 
of  the  ever-living  God  ought  to  be  living  and 
endued  with  perception.  But  if  it  received  this 
name  -  from  resemblance,  how  can  it  be  supposed 
that  these  images  resemble  God,  which  have 
neither  perception  nor  motion?  Therefore  the 
image  of  God  is  not  that  which  is  fashioned  by 
the  fingers  of  men  out  of  stone,  or  bronze,  or 
other  material,  but  man  himself,  since  he  has 
both  perception  aud  motion,  and  performs  many 
and  great  actions.  Nor  do  the  foolish  men  un- 
derstand, that  if  images  could  exercise  perception 
and  motion,  they  would  of  their  own  accord 
adore  men,  by  whom  they  have  been  adorned  and 
embellished,  since  they  would  be  either  rough 
and  unpolished  stone,  or  rude  and  unshapen 
wood,^  had  they  not  been  fashioned  by  man. 


'  The  heathens  thought  that  the  souls  of  the  unburied  dead  wan- 
dered about  on  the  earth,  until  their  remains  were  committed  to  the 
tomb. 

2  The  words  siimdacrum,  "  an  image,"  and  similitudo,  "  a  like- 
ness "  or  "  resemblance,"  are  connected  together  through  the  common 
root  similis,  "  like." 

3  Materia  is  especially  used  in  the  sense  of  wood  or  timber. 


Man,  therefore,  is  to  be  regarded  as  the  parent 
of  these  images  ;  for  they  were  produced  by  his 
instrumentality,  and  through  him  they  first  had 
shape,  figure,  and  beauty.  Therefore  he  who 
made  them  is  superior  to  the  objects  which  were 
made.  And  yet  no  one  looks  up  to  the  Maker 
Himself,  or  reverences  Him  :  he  fears  the  things 
which  he  has  made,  as  though  there  could  be 
more  power  in  the  work  than  in  the  workman. 
Seneca,  therefore,  rightly  says  in  his  moral  trea- 
tises :  They  worship  the  images  of  the  gods,  they 
supplicate  them  with  bended  knee,  they  adore 
them,  they  sit  or  stand  beside  them  through  the 
whole  day,  they  offer  to  them  contributions,'*  they 
slay  victims  ;  and  while  they  value  these  images 
so  highly,  they  despise  the  artificers  who  made 
them.  What  is  so  inconsistent,  as  to  despise  the 
statuary  and  to  adore  the  statue ;  and  not  even 
to  admit  to  your  society  him  who  makes  your 
gods  ?  What  force,  what  power  can  they  have, 
when  he  who  made  them  has  none?  But  he 
was  unable  to  give  to  these  even  those  powers 
which  he  had,  the  power  of  sight,  of  hearing,  of 
speech,  and  of  motion.  Is  any  one  so  foolish 
as  to  suppose  that  there  is  anything  in  the  image 
of  a  god,  in  which  there  is  nothing  even  of  a  man 
except  the  mere  resemblance  ?  But  no  one  con- 
siders these  things ;  for  men  are  imbued  with 
this  persuasion,  and  their  minds  have  thoroughly 
imbibed  the  deception  5  of  folly.  And  thus 
beings  endowed  with  sense  adore  objects  which 
are  senseless,  rational  beings  adore  irrational 
objects,  those  who  are  alive  adore  inanimate  ob- 
jects, those  sprung  from  heaven  adore  earthly 
objects.  It  delights  me,  therefore,  as  though 
standing  on  a  lofty  watch-tower,  from  which  all 
may  hear,  to  proclaim  aloud  that  saying  of  Per- 
sius  :  ^  — 

"  O  souls  bent  down  to  the  earth,  and  destitute  of  heav- 
enly things  ?  " 

Rather  look  to  the  heaven,  to  the  sight  of 
which  God  your  Creator  raised  you.  He  gave 
to  you  an  elevated  countenance  ;  you  bend  it 
down  to  the  earth ;  you  depress  to  things  below 
those  lofty  minds,  which  are  raised  together  with 
their  bodies  to  their  parent,  as  though  it  repented 
you  that  you  were  not  born  quadrupeds.  It  is 
not  befitting  that  the  heavenly  being  should  make 
himself  equal  to  things  which  are  earthly,  and 
incline  to  the  earth.  Why  do  you  deprive  your- 
selves of  heavenly  benefits,  and  of  your  own  ac- 
cord fall  prostrate  upon  the  ground  ?  For  you 
do  wretchedly  roll  yourselves  ^  on  the   ground. 


*  Stipem  jaciunt,  "  they  throw  a  coin."  The  word  properly  means 
a  "coin,"  money  bearing  a  stamped  impression;  hence  stipendium, 
"  soldiers'  pay." 

5  Fucus,  "  colouring  juice;  "  hence  anything  not  genuine,  but  arti- 
ficial.    Others  read  succum,  "  juice." 

*  Persius,  Satire  2d,  6.  Lactantius  uses  the  testimony  of  heathen 
writers  against  the  heathen. 

^  Or  wallow  —  "  voluto." 


Chap.  ,111.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


43 


when  you  seek  here  below  that  which  you  ought 
to  have  sought  above.  For  as  to  those  vain ' 
and  fragile  productions,  the  work  of  man's  hands, 
from  whatever  kind  of  material  they  are  formed, 
what  are  they  but  earth,  out  of  which  they  were 
produced?  Why,  then,  do  you  subject  your- 
selves to  lower  objects?  why  do  you  place  the 
earth  above  your  heads  ?  For  when  you  lower 
yourselves  to  the  earth,  and  humiliate  yourselves, 
you  sink  of  your  own  accord  to  hell,  and  con- 
demn yourselves  to  death  ;  for  nothing  is  lower 
and  more  humble  than  the  earth,  except  death 
and  hell.  And  if  you  wished  to  escape  these,  you 
would  despise  the  earth  lying  beneath  your  feet, 
preserving  the  position  of  your  body,  which  you 
received  upright,  in  order  that  you  might  be  able 
to  direct  your  eyes  and  your  mind  to  Him  who 
made  it.  But  to  despise  and  trample  upon  the 
earth  is  nothing  else  than  to  refrain  from  adoring 
images,  because  they  are  made  of  earth  ;  also 
not  to  desire  riches,  and  to  despise  the  pleasures 
of  the  body,  because  wealth,  and  the  body  itself, 
which  we  make  use  of  as  a  lodging,  is  but  earth. 
Worship  a  living  being,  that  you  may  live  ;  for 
he  must  necessarily  die  who  has  subjected '  him- 
self and  his  soul  to  the  dead. 

CHAP.     III. THAT     CICERO    AND     OTHER    MEN    OF 

LEARNING     ERRED     IN     NOT    TURNING   AWAY   THE 
PEOPLE    FROM    ERROR. 

But  what  does  it  avail  thus  to  address  the  vul- 
gar and  ignorant,  when  we  see  that  learned  and 
prudent  men,  though  they  understand  the  vanity 
of  these  ceremonies,  nevertheless  through  some 
perverseness  persist  in  the  worship  of  those  very 
objects  which  they  condemn?  Cicero  was  well 
aware  that  the  deities  which  men  worshipped 
were  false.  For  when  he  had  spoken  many 
things  which  tended  to  the  overthrow  of  religious 
ceremonies,  he  said  nevertheless  that  these  mat- 
ters ought  not  to  be  discussed  by  the  vulgar,  lest 
such  discussion  should  extinguish  the  system  of 
religion  which  was  publicly  received.  What  can 
you  do  respecting  him,  who,  when  he  perceives 
himself  to  be  in  error,  of  his  own  accord  dashes 
himself  against  the  stones,  that  all  the  people 
may  stumble  ?  or  tears  out  his  own  eyes,  that  all 
may  be  blind  ?  who  neither  deserves  well  of  oth- 
ers, wnom  he  suffers  to  be  in  error,  nor  of  him- 
self, since  he  inclines  to  the  errors  of  others,  and 
makes  no  use  of  the  benefit  of  his  own  wisdom, 
so  as  to  carry  out^  in  action  the  conception  of 
his  own  mind,  but  knowingly  and  consciously 
thrusts  his  foot  into  the  snare,  that  he  also  may 
be  taken  with  the  rest,  whom  he  ought,  as  the 
more  prudent,  to  have  extricated?     Nay  rather, 


'  Ludicra,  "  diversions."    The  word  is  applied  to  stage-plays. 
^  Adjudicavit,  adjudged,  made  over.     Cf.  Hor.,^/.,i.  i8:  "Et,  si 
quid  abest,  Italis  adjudicat  armis." 

^  Fill  up  and  complete  the  outline  which  he  has  conceived. 


if  you  have  any  virtue,  Cicero,  endeavour  to 
make  the  people  wise  :  that  is  a  befitting  subject, 
on  which  you  may  expend  all  the  powers  of  your 
eloquence.  For  there  is  no  fear  lest  speech 
should  fail  you  in  so  good  a  cause,  when  you 
have  often  defended  even  bad  ones  with  copious- 
ness and  spirit.  But  truly  you  fear  the  prison 
of  Socrates,-*  and  on  that  account  you  do  not 
venture  to  undertake  the  advocacy  of  truth. 
But,  as  a  wise  man,  you  ought  to  have  despised 
death.  And,  indeed,  it  would  have  been  much 
more  glorious  to  die  on  account  of  good  words 
than  on  account  of  revilings.  Nor  would  the 
renown  of  your  Philippics  have  been  more  ad- 
vantageous to  you  than  the  dispersion  of  the 
errors  of  mankind,  and  the  recalling  of  the  minds 
of  men  to  a  healthy  state  by  your  disputation. 

But  let  us  make  allowance  for  timidity,  which 
ought  not  to  exist  in  a  wise  man.  Why,  then, 
are  you  yourself  engaged  in  the  same  error?  I 
see  that  you  worship  things  of  earth  made  by 
the  hand  :  you  understand  that  they  are  vain, 
and  yet  you  do  the  same  things  which  they  do, 
whom  you  confess  to  be  most  foolish.  What, 
therefore,  did  it  profit  you,  that  you  saw  the 
truth,  which  you  were  neither  about  to  defend 
nor  to  follow  ?  If  even  they  who  perceive  them- 
selves to  be  in  error  err  willingly,  how  much  more 
so  do  the  unlearned  vulgar,  who  delight  in  empty 
processions,  and  gaze  at  all  things  with  boyish 
minds  !  They  are  delighted  with  trifling  things, 
and  are  captivated  with  the  form  of  images  ;  and 
they  are  unable  to  weigh  every  object  in  their 
own  minds,  so  as  to  understand  that  nothing 
which  is  beheld  by  the  eyes  of  mortals  ought  to 
be  worshipped,  because  it  must  necessarily  be 
mortal.  Nor  is  it  matter  of  surprise  if  they  do 
not  see  God,  when  they  themselves  do  not  even 
see  man,  whom  they  believe  that  they  see.  For 
this,  which  falls  under  the  notice  of  the  eyes,5  is 
not  man,  but  the  receptacle  of  man,  the  quality 
and  figure  of  which  are  not  seen  from  the  linea- 
ments of  the  vessel  which  contains  them,  but 
from  the  actions  and  character.  They,  therefore, 
who  worship  images  are  mc7-e  bodies  without  men, 
because  they  have  given  themselves  to  corporeal 
things,  and  do  not  see  anything  with  the  mind 
more  than  with  the  body  ;  whereas  it  is  the  office 
of  the  soul  to  perceive  those  things  more  clearly 
which  the  eye  of  the  body  cannot  behold.  And 
that  philosoi)her  and  poet  severely  accuses  those 
men  as  humble  and  abject,  who,  in  opposition 
to  the  design  of  their  nature,  prostrate  them- 


<  Lactantius  charges  Cicero  with  want  of  courage,  in  being  un- 
willing to  declare  the  truth  to  the  Romans,  lest  he  should  incur  the 
peril  of  death.  The  fortitude  with  which  Socrates  underwent  death, 
when  condemned  by  the  Athenians,  is  related  by  Xcnophon  and 
Plato. 

5  Lactantius  here  follows  Plato,  who  placed  the  essence  of  man  in 
the  intellectual  soul.  The  body,  however,  as  well  as  the  soul,  is  of 
the  essence  of  man ;  but  Lactantius  seems  to  limit  the  name  of  man 
to  the  higher  and  more  worthy  part.    [Rhetorically,  not  dogmatically.] 


44 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  II. 


selves  to  the  worship  of  earthly  things ;  for  he 
says  : '  — 

"  And  they  abase  their  souls  with  fear  of  the  gods,  and 
weigh  and  press  them  down  to  earth." 

When  he  said  these  things,  indeed,  his  meaning 
was  different  —  that  nothing  was  to  be  wor- 
shipped, because  the  gods  do  not  regard  the 
affairs  of  men. 

In  another  place,  at  length,  he  acknowledges 
that  the  ceremonies  and  worship  of  the  gods  is 
an  unavailing  office  :  ^  — 

'*  Nor  is  it  any  piety  to  be  often  seen  with  veiled  head 
to  turn  to  a  stone,  and  approach  every  altar,  and 
fall  prostrate  on  the  ground,  and  spread  the  hands 
before  the  shrines  of  the  gods,  and  sprinkle  the 
altars  with  much  blood  of  beasts,  and  to  offer  vow 
after  vow." 

And  assuredly  if  these  things  are  useless,  it  is 
not  right  that  sublime  and  lofty  souls  should  be 
called  away  and  depressed  to  the  earth,  but  that 
they  should  think  only  of  heavenly  things. 

False  religious  systems,  therefore,  have  been 
attacked  by  more  sagacious  men,  because  they 
perceived  their  falsehood ;  but  the  true  religion 
was  not  introduced,  because  they  knew  not  what 
and  where  it  was.  1  hey  therefore  so  regarded 
it  as  though  it  had  no  existence,  because  they 
were  unable  to  find  it  in  its  truth.  And  in  this 
manner  they  fell  into  a  much  greater  error  than 
they  who  held  a  religion  which  was  false.  For 
those  worshippers  of  fragile  images,  however 
foolish  they  may  be,  inasmuch  as  they  place 
heavenly  things  in  things  which  are  earthly  and 
corruptible,  yet  retain  something  of  wisdom,  and 
may  be  pardoned,  because  they  hold  the  chief 
duty  of  man,  if  not  in  reality,  yet  still  in  their 
purpose  ;  since,  if  not  the  only,  yet  certainly  the 
greatest  difference  between  men  and  the  beasts 
consists  in  religion.  But  this  latter  class,  in 
proportion  to  their  superior  wisdom,  in  that  they 
understood  the  error  of  false  religion,  rendered 
themselves  so  much  the  more  foolish,  because 
they  did  not  imagine  that  some  religion  was  true. 
And  thus,  because  it  is  easier  to  judge  of  the 
affairs  of  others  than  of  their  own,  while  they  see 
the  downfall  of  others,  they  have  not  observed 
what  was  before  their  own  feet.  On  either  side 
is  found  the  greatest  folly,  and  a  certain  trace  ^ 
of  wisdom  ;  so  that  you  may  doubt  which  are 
rather  to  be  called  more  foolish  —  those  who 
embrace  a  false  religion,  or  those  who  embrace 
none.  But  (as  I  have  said)  pardon  may  be 
granted  to  those  who  are  ignorant  and  do  not 
own  themselves  to  be  wise  ;  but  it  cannot  be 
extended  to  those  who,  while  they  profess  ■*  wis- 
dom, rather  exhibit  folly.  I  am  not,  indeed,  so 
unjust  as   to   imagine    that   they  could   divine. 


•  'L\i<:xe\\\i?,,  De Rerum  Natura,yi.  ^.    [  "Premunt  ad  terrain."] 
'  Lucretius,  v.  1197. 
^  Odor  quidam  sapientiae. 

*•  Rom.  i.  22;   "Professing  themselves  to  be  wise,  they  became 
fools." 


so  that  they  might  find  out  the  truth  by  them- 
selves ;  for  I  acknowledge  that  this  is  impossible. 
But  I  require  from  them  that  which  they  were 
able  to  perform  by  reason  5  itself.  For  they  would 
act  more  prudently,  if  they  both  understood  that 
some/f^r;//  <y  religion  is  true,  and  if,  while  they  at- 
tacked false  religions,  they  openly  proclaimed  that 
men  were  not  in  possession  of  that  which  is  true. 
But  this  consideration  may  perhaps  have  in- 
fluenced them,  that  if  there  were  any  true 
religion,  it  would  exert  itself  and  assert  its  au- 
thority, and  not  permit  the  existence  of  anything 
opposed  to  it.  For  they  were  unable  to  see  at 
all,  on  what  account,  or  by  whom,  and  in  what 
manner  true  religion  was  depressed,  which  par- 
takes of  a  divine  mystery  ^  and  a  heavenly  secret. 
And  no  man  can  know  ?  this  by  any  means,  un- 
less he  is  taught.  The  sum  of  the  matter  is  this  : 
The  unlearned  and  the  foolish  esteem  false  re- 
ligions as  true,  because  they  neither  know  the 
true  nor  understand  the  false.*  But  the  more 
sagacious,  because  they  are  ignorant  of  the  true, 
either  persist  in  those  religions  which  they  know 
to  be  false,  that  they  may  appear  to  possess 
something ;  or  worship  nothing  at  all,  that  they 
may  not  fall  into  error,  whereas  this  very  thing 
partakes  largely  of  error,  under  the  figure  of  a 
man  to  imitate  the  life  of  cattle.  To  understand 
that  which  is  false  is  truly  the  part  of  wisdom, 
but  of  human  wisdom.  Beyond  this  step  man 
cannot  proceed,  and  thus  many  of  the  philoso- 
phers have  taken  away  religious  institutions,  as 
I  have  pointed  out ;  but  to  know  the  truth  is 
the  part  of  divine  wisdom.  But  man  by  himself 
cannot  attain  to  this  knowledge,  unless  he  is 
taught  by  God.  Thus  philosophers  have  reached 
the  height  of  human  wisdom,  so  as  to  understand 
that  which  is  not ;  but  they  have  failed  in  at- 
taining the  power  of  saying  that  which  really  is. 
It  is  a  well-known  saying  of  Cicero  :  ^  "  I  vvish 
that  I  could  as  easily  find  out  the  truth  as  I  can 
refute  false  things."  And  because  this  is  beyond 
the  power  of  man's  condition,  the  capability  of 
this  office  is  assigned  to  us,  to  whom  God  has 
delivered  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  ;  to  the 
explaining  of  which  the  four  last  books  shall  be 
devoted.  Now,  in  the  meantime,  let  us  bring 
to  light  false  things,  as  we  have  begun  to  do. 

CHAP.  IV.  —  OF  IMAGES,  AND  THE  ORNAMENTS  OF 
TEMPLES,  AND  THE  CONTEMPT  IN  WHICH  THEY  ARE 
HELD  EVEN  BY  THE  HEATHENS  THEMSELVES. 

What  majesty,  then,  can  images  have,  which 
were  altogether  in  the  power  of  puny  man,  either 


5  The  apostle  teaches  the  same,  Rom.  i.  19-21. 

*  Divini  sacrameiiti.  i  Cor.  ii.  7:  "  We  speak  the  wisdom  of  God 
in  a  mystery." 

7  I  Cor  ii.  14:  "  The  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  for  they  are  foolishness  unto  him;  neither  can  he  know 
them,  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned." 

*  [2  Pet.  iii.  16.     Even  among  believers  such  perils  exist.] 

9  De  Natura  Deorum,  lib.  i.  [cap.  32.    Quam  falsa  convmcere]. 


Chap.  IV.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


45 


that  they  should  be  formed  into  something  else, 
or  that  they  should  not  be  made  at  all?  On 
which  account  Priapus  thus  speaks  in  Horace  : ' 

•'  Formerly  I  was  the  trunk  of  a  fig-tree,^  a  useless  log, 
when  the  carpenter,  at  a  loss  whether  he  should 
make  a  bench  or  a  Priapus,  decided  that  it  should 
be  a  god.  Accordingly  I  am  a  god,  a  very  great 
terror  to  thieves  and  birds." 

Who  would  not  be  at  ease  with  such  a  guardian 
as  this?  For  thieves  are  so  foolish  as  to  fear 
the  figure  of  Priapus  ;  though  the  very  birds, 
which  they  imagine  to  be  driven  away  by  fear 
of  his  scythe,  settle  upon  the  images  which  are 
skilfully  made,  that  is,  which  altogether  resemble 
men,  build  their  nests  there,  and  defile  them. 
But  Flaccus,  as  a  writer  of  satire,  ridiculed  the 
folly  of  men.  But  they  who  make  the  images 
fancy  that  they  are  performing  a  serious  business. 
In  short,  that  very  great  poet,  a  man  of  sagacity 
in  other  things,  in  this  alone  displayed  folly,  not 
like  a  poet,  but  after  the  manner  of  an  old  woman, 
when  even  in  those  most  highly-finished  ^  books 
he  orders  this  to  be  done  :  — 

"And  let  the  guardianship  of  Priapus  of  the  Helles- 
pont,* who  drives  away  thieves  and  birds  with  his 
willow  scvthe,  preserve  them." 

Therefore  they  adore  mortal  things,  as  made  by 
mortals.  For  they  may  be  broken,  or  burnt,  or 
be  destroyed.  For  they  are  often  apt  to  be 
broken  to  pieces,  when  houses  fall  through  age, 
and  when,  consumed  by  conflagration,  they  waste 
away  to  ashes ;  and  in  many  instances,  unless 
aided  by  their  own  magnitude,  or  protected  by 
diligent  watchfulness,  they  become  the  prey  of 
thieves.  What  madness  is  it,  then,  to  fear  those 
objects  for  which  either  the  downfall  of  a  build- 
ing, or  fires,  or  thefts,  may  be  feared  !  What 
folly,  to  hope  for  protection  from  those  things 
which  are  unable  to  protect  themselves  !  What 
perversity,  to  have  recourse  to  the  guardianship 
of  those  which,  when  injured,  are  themselves 
unavenged,  unless  vengeance  is  exacted  by  their 
worshippers  !  Where,  then,  is  truth  ?  Where 
no  violence  can  be  applied  to  religion  ;  where 
there  appears  to  be  nothing  which  can  be  in- 
jured ;  where  no  sacrilege  can  be  committed. 

But  whatever  is  sul)jectcd  to  the  eyes  and  to 
the  hands,  that,  in  truth,  because  it  is  perishable, 
is  inconsistent  with  the  whole  subject  of  immor- 
tality. It  is  in  vain,  therefore,  that  men  set  off 
and  adorn  their  gods  with  gold,  ivory,  and  jewels, 
as  though  they  were  capable  of  deriving  any 
pleasure  from  these  things.  What  is  the  use  of 
precious  gifts  to  insensible  objects?     Is  it  the 


*  Horat.,  I  Serm.  8.  i. 

*  The  wood  of  ihe  fig-tree  is  proverbially  used  to  denote  that  which 
is  worthless  and  contemptible. 

3  The  Georsics,  which  are  much  more  elaborately  finished  than 
the  other  works  of  Virgil. 

*  Priapus  was  especially  worshipped  at  Lampsacus  on  the  Helles- 
pont; hence  he  is  styled  Hellespontiacus. 


same  which  the  dead  have?  For  as  they  embalm 
the  bodies  of  the  dead,  wrap  them  in  spices  and 
precious  garments,  and  bury  them  in  the  earth, 
so  they  honour  the  gods,  who  when  they  were 
made  did  not  perceive  it,  and  when  they  are 
worshipped  have  no  knowledge  of  it ;  for  they 
did  not  receive  sensibility  on  their  consecration. 
Persius  was  displeased  that  golden  vessels  should 
be  carried  into  the  temples,  since  he  thought  it 
superfluous  that  that  should  be  reckoned  among 
religious  offerings  which  was  not  an  instrument 
of  sanctity,  but  of  avarice.  For  these  are  the 
things  which  it  is  better  to  offer  as  a  gift  to  the 
god  whom  you  would  rightly  worship  :  — 

"  Written  law  ^  and  the  divine  law  of  the  conscience, 
and  the  sacred  recesses  of  the  mind,  and  the  breast 
imbued  with  nobleness."  * 

A  noble  and  wise  sentiment.  But  he  ridicu- 
lously added  this  :  that  there  is  this  gold  in  the 
temples,  as  there  are  dolls  ^  presented  to  Venus 
by  the  virgin  ;  which  perhaps  he  may  have  de- 
spised on  account  of  their  smallness.  For  he 
did  not  see  that  the  very  images  and  statues  of 
the  gods,  wrought  in  gold  and  ivory  by  the  hand 
of  Polycletus,  Euphranor,  and  Phidias,  were 
nothing  more  than  large  dolls,  not  dedicated  by 
virgins,  to  whose  sports  some  indulgence  may  be 
granted,  but  by  bearded  men.  Therefore  Seneca 
deservedly  laughs  at  the  folly  even  of  old  men. 
We  are  not  (he  says)  boys  twice,  ^  as  is  commonly 
said,  but  are  always  so.  But  there  is  this  differ- 
ence, that  wlien  men  we  have  greater  subjects  of 
sport.  Therefore  men  offer  to  these  dolls,  which 
are  of  large  size,  and  adorned  as  though  for  the 
stage,  both  perfumes,  and  incense,  and  odours : 
they  sacrifice  to  these  cosdy  and  fattened  victims, 
which  have  a  mouth,^  but  one  that  is  not  suitable 
for  eating  ;  to  these  they  bring  robes  and  costly 
garments,  though  they  have  no  need  of  clothing  ; 
to  these  they  dedicate  gold  and  silver,  of  which 
they  who  receive  them  are  as  destitute  '°  as  they 
who  have  given  them. 

And  not  without  reason  did  Dionysius,  the 
despot  of  Sicily,  when  after  a  victory  he  had  be- 
come master  of  Greece,"  despise,  and  plunder 
antl  jeer  at  such  gods,  for  he  followed  up  his 
sacrilegious  acts  by  jesting  words.     For  when  he 


5  Compositum  jus,  fasque  animi.  Compositum  jus  is  explained 
as  "  the  written  and  onlaincd  laws  of  men;  '/"/,  "  ilivinc  and  sacred 
law."  Others  read  animo,  "  human  and  divine  law  settled  in  the 
mind." 

6  Persius,  Sat.,  ii.  73. 

'  Pupa;,  dolls  or  images  worn  Dy  girls,  as  buUte  were  by  boys. 
On  arriving  at  maturity,  they  dedicated  these  im.fges  to  Venus.  See 
Jahn's  note  on  the  pasAge  from  Persius. 

8  The  allusion  is  to  the  proverb  that  "  old  age  is  second  child- 
hood." 

9  An  allusion  to  Ps.  cxv.  5 :  "  They  have  mouths,  but  they  speak 
not."  . 

'°  Quae  tarn  non  h.ibcnt  qui  accipiunt,  qu.'im  qui  illa  donarunt. 
The  senseless  images  can  make  no  use  of  the  treasures. 

"  Justin  relates  that  Gra;cia  Magna,  a  part  of  Italy,  was  subdued 
by  Dionysius.  Cicero  s.ays  that  he  sailed  to  Peloponnesus,  .and  en- 
tered the  temple  of  the  Olympian  Jupiter.     \_De  Nat.  Dear.,  iu.  34.] 


46 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  II. 


had  taken  off  a  golden  robe  from  the  statue  of 
the  Olympian  Jupiter,  he  ordered  that  a  woollen 
garment  should  be  placed  upon  him,  saying  that 
a  golden  robe  was  heavy  in  summer  and  cold  in 
winter,  but  that  a  woollen  one  was  adapted  to 
each  season.  He  also  took  off  the  golden  beard 
from  .^sculapius,  saying  that  it  was  unbecoming 
and  unjust,  that  while  his  father  Apollo  was  yet 
smooth  and  beardless,  the  son  should  be  seen  to 
wear  a  beard  before  his  father.  He  also  took 
away  the  bowls,  and  spoils,  and  some  little  im- 
ages '  which  were  held  in  the  extended  hands  of 
the  statues,  and  said  that  he  did  not  take  them 
away,  but  received  them  :  for  that  it  would  be 
very  foolish  and  ungrateful  to  refuse  to  receive 
good  things,  when  offered  voluntarily  by  those 
from  wliom  men  were  accustomed  to  implore 
them.  He  did  tnese  things  with  impunity,  be- 
cause he  was  a  king  and  victorious.  Moreover, 
his  usual  good  fortune  also  followed  him ;  for  he 
lived  even  to  old  age,  and  handed  down  the 
kingdom  in  succession  to  his  son.  In  his  case, 
therefore,  because  men  could  not  punish  his  sac- 
rilegious deeds,  it  was  befitting  that  the  gods 
should  be  their  own  avengers.  But  if  any  humble 
person  shall  have  committed  any  such  crime, 
there  are  at  hand  for  his  punisliment  the  scourge, 
fire,  the  rack,^  the  cross,  and  whatever  torture 
men  can  invent  in  their  anger  and  rage.  But 
when  they  punish  those  who  have  been  detected 
in  the  act  of  sacrilege,  they  themselves  distrust 
the  power  of  their  gods.  For  why  should  they 
not  leave  to  them  especially  the  opportunity  of 
avenging  themselves,  if  they  think  that  they  are 
able  to  do  so?  Moreover,  they  also  imagine 
that  it  happened  through  the  will  of  the  deities 
that  the  sacrilegious  robbers  were  discovered  and 
arrested ;  and  their  cruelty  is  instigated  not  so 
much  by  anger  as  by  fear,  lest  they  themselves 
should  be  v'isited  with  punishment  if  they  failed 
to  avenge  the  injury  done  to  the  gods.  And,  in 
truth,  they  display  incredible  shallowness  in  Im- 
agining that  the  gods  will  injure  them  on  account 
of  the  guilt  of  others,  who  by  themselves  were 
unable  to  injure  those  very  persons  by  whom 
they  were  profaned  and  plundered.  But,  in  fact, 
they  have  often  themselves  also  inflicted  punish- 
ment on  the  sacrilegious  :  that  may  have  occurred 
even  by  chance,  which  has  sometimes  happened, 
but  not  always.  But  I  will  show  presently  how  I 
that  occurred.  Now  in  the  meantime  I  will  ask, 
Why  did  they  not  punish  so  many  and  such  great 
acts  of  sacrilege  in  Dionysius,  who  insulted  the 
gods  openly,  and  not  in  secret?'  Why  did  they 
not  repel  this  sacrilegious  man,  possessed  of  such 
power,  from  their  temples,  their  ceremonies,  and 
their  images  ?    Why,  even  when  he  had  carried 

'  Sigilla.    The  word  is  also  used  to  denote  seals,  or  signets. 
-  Eqiiuleus  :    an   instrument  of  torture  resembling  a  horse,  on 
which  slaves  were  stretched  and  tortured. 


off  their  sacred  things,  had  he  a  prosperous  voy- 
age —  as  he  himself,  according  to  his  custom, 
testified  in  joke?  Do  you  see,  he  said  to  his 
companions  who  feared  shipwreck,  how  prosper- 
ous a  voyage  the  immortal  gods  themselves  give 
to  the  sacrilegious?  But  perhaps  he  had  learnt 
from  Plato  that  the  gods  have  no  ^  power. 

What  of  Caius  Verres?  whom  his  accuser 
TuUy  compares  to  this  same  Dionysius,  and  to 
Phalaris,  and  to  all  tyrants.  Did  he  not  pillage 
the  whole  of  Sicily,  carrying  away  the  images  of 
the  gods,  and  the  ornaments  of  the  temples  ?  It 
is  idle  to  follow  up  each  particular  instance  :  I 
would  fain  make  mention  of  one,  in  which  the 
accuser,  with  all  the  force  of  eloquence  —  in  short, 
with  every  effort  of  voice  and  of  body  —  lamented 
about  Ceres  of  Catina,  or  of  Henna  :  the  one  of 
whom  was  of  such  great  sanctity,  that  it  was  un- 
lawful for  men  to  enter  the  secret  recesses  of  her 
temple ;  the  other  was  of  such  great  antiquity, 
that  all  accounts  relate  that  the  goddess  herself 
first  discovered  grain  in  the  soil  of  Henna,  and  that 
her  virgin  daughter  was  carried  away  from  the 
same  place.  Lastly,  in  the  times  of  the  Gracchi, 
when  the  state  was  disturbed  both  by  seditions 
and  by  portents,  on  its  being  discovered  in  the 
Sibylline  predictions  that  the  most  ancient  Ceres 
ought  to  be  appeased,  ambassadors  were  sent  to 
Henna.  This  Ceres,  then,  either  the  most  holy 
one,  whom  it  was  unlawful  for  men  to  behold 
even  for  the  sake  of  adoration,  or  the  most  an- 
cient one,  whom  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome 
had  appeased  with  sacrifices  and  gifts,  was  car- 
ried away  with  impunity  by  Caius  Verres  from 
her  secret  and  ancient  recesses,  his  robber  slaves 
having  been  sent  in.  The  same  orator,  in  truth, 
when  he  affirmed  that  he  had  been  entreated  by 
the  Sicilians  to  undertake  the  cause  of  the  prov- 
ince, made  use  of  these  words  :  "  That  they  had 
now  not  even  any  gods  in  their  cities  to  whom 
th^y  might  betake  themselves,  since  Verres  had 
taken  away  the  most  sacred  images  from  their 
most  venerable  shrines."  As  though,  in  truth,  if 
Verres  had  taken  them  away  from  the  cities  and 
shrines,  he  had  also  taken  them  from  heaven. 
From  which  it  appears  that  those  gods  have 
nothing  in  them  more  than  the  material  of  which 
they  are  made.  And  not  without  reason  did  the 
Sicilians  have  recourse  to  you,  O  Marcus  TuUius, 
that  is,  to  a  man  ;  since  they  had  for  three  years 
experienced  that  those  gods  had  no  power.  For 
they  would  have  been  most  foolish  if  they  had 
fled  for  protection  against  the  injuries  of  men,  to 
those  who  were  unable  to  be  angry  with  Caius 
Verres  on  their  own  behalf.  But,  it  will  be  urged, 
Verres  was  condemned  on  account  of  these  deeds. 
Therefore  he  was  not  punished  by  the  gods,  but 
by  the   energy  of  Cicero,  by  which  he  either 

3  Nihil  esse  [=  are  nothing.] 


Chap.  V.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


47 


crushed  his  defenders  or  withstood  his  influence.' 
Why  should  I  say  that,  in  the  case  of  Verres  him- 
self, that  was  not  so  much  a  condemnation  as  a 
respite  from  labour?  So  that,  as  the  immortal 
gods  had  given  a  prosperous  voyage  to  Diony- 
sius  when  he  was  carrying  off  the  spoils  of  gods, 
so  also  they  appear  to  have  bestowed  on  Verres 
quiet  repose,  in  which  he  might  with  tranquil- 
lity enjoy  the  fruits  of  his  sacrilege.  For  when 
civil  wars  afterwards  raged,  being  removed  from 
all  danger  and  apprehension,  under  the  cloak  of 
condemnation  he  heard  of  the  disastrous  misfor- 
tunes and  miserable  deaths  of  others ;  and  he 
who  appeared  to  have  fallen  while  all  retained 
their  position,  he  alone,  in  truth,  retained  his 
position  while  all  fell ;  until  the  proscription  of 
the  triumvirs,  —  that  very  proscription,  indeed, 
which  carried  off  TuUy,  the  avenger  of  the  violated 
majesty  of  the  gods,  — carried  him  off,  satiated  at 
once  with  the  enjoyment  of  the  wealth  which  he 
had  gained  by  sacrilege,  and  with  life,  and  worn 
out  by  old  age.  Moreover,  he  was  fortunate  in 
this  very  circumstance,  that  before  his  own  death 
he  heard  of  the  most  cruel  end  of  his  accuser ; 
the  gods  doubdess  providing  that  this  sacrilegious 
man  and  spoiler  of  their  worship  should  not  die 
before  he  had  received  consolation  from  revenge. 

CHAP.    V. THAT    GOD  ONLY,  THE  CREATOR  OF  ALL 

THINGS,  LS  TO  BE  WORSHIPPED,  AND  NOT  THE 
ELEMENTS  OR  HEAVENLY  BODIES  ;  AND  THE  OPIN- 
ION OF  THE  STOICS  IS  REFUTED,  WHO  THINK 
THAT  THE   STARS   AND   PLANETS   ARE   GODS. 

How  much  better,  therefore,  is  it,  leaving  vain 
and  insensible  objects,  to  turn  our  eyes  in  that 
direction  where  is  the  seat  and  dwelling-place 
of  the  true  God ;  who  suspended  the  earth  ^  on 
a  firm  foundation,  who  bespangled  the  heaven 
with  shining  stars ;  who  lighted  up  the  sun,  the 
most  bright  and  matchless  light  for  the  affairs  of 
men,  in  proof  of  His  own  single  majesty ;  who 
girded  the  earth  with  seas,  and  ordered  the  rivers 
to  flow  with  perpetual  course  ! 

"  He  also  commanded  the  plains  to  extend  themselves, 
the  valleys  to  sink  down,  the  woods  to  be  covered 
with  foliage,  the  stony  mountains  to  rise."  ^ 

All  these  things  truly  were  not  the  work  of  Jupi- 
ter, who  was  born  seventeen  hundred  years  ago ; 
but  of  the  same,  "  that  framer  of  all  things,  the 
origin  of  a  better  world,"  3  who  is  called  God, 
whose  beginning  cannot  be  comprehended,  and 
ought  not  to  be  made  the  subject  of  inquiry.  It 
is  sufficient  for  man,  to  his  full  and  perfect  wis- 
dom, if  he  understands  the  existence  of  God  : 


1  The  allusion  is  to  the  efforts  made  by  the  partisans  of  Verres  to 
prevent  Cicero  from  obtaining  the  necessary  evidence  for  the  condem- 
nation of  Verres.  But  all  these  efforts  were  unavailing:  the  evidence 
was  overwhelming,  and  before  the  trial  was  over  Verres  went  into 
exile.  „ 

2  Ps.  cxlviii.  6:  "  He  hath  established  them  for  ever  and  ever. 

3  Ovid,  Mctain.,  lib.  i,  [79.    Jussit  et  extendi  campos,  etc.]. 


the  force  and  sum  of  which  understanding  is  this, 
that  he  look  up  to  and  honour  the  common 
Parent  of  the  human  race,  and  the  Maker  of 
wonderful  things.  Whence  some  persons  of  dull 
and  obtuse  mind  adore  as  gods  the  elements, 
which  are  both  created  objects  and  are  void  of 
sensibility ;  who,  when  they  admired  the  works 
of  God,  that  is,  the  heaven  with  its  various  lights, 
the  earth  with  its  plains  and  mountains,  the  seas 
with  their  rivers  and  lakes  and  fountains,  struck 
with  admiration  of  these  things,  and  forgetting 
the  Maker  Himself,  whom  they  were  unable  to 
see,  began  to  adore  and  worship  His  works.  Nor 
were  they  able  at  all  to  understand  how  much 
greater  and  more  wonderful  He  is,  who  made 
these  things  out  of  nothing.  And  when  they  see 
that  these  things,  in  obedience  to  divine  laws, 
by  a  perpetual  necessity  are  subservient  to  the 
uses  and  interests  of  men,  they  nevertheless  re- 
gard them  as  gods,  being  ungrateful  towards  the 
divine  bounty,  so  that  they  preferred  their  own 
works  to  their  most  indulgent  God  and  Father. 
But  what  wonder  is  it  if  uncivilized  or  ignorant 
men  err,  since  even  philosophers  of  the  Stoic 
sect  are  of  the  same  opinion,  so  as  to  judge  that 
all  the  heavenly  bodies  which  have  motion  are 
to  be  reckoned  in  the  number  of  gods  ;  inasmuch 
as  the  Stoic  Lucilius  thus  speaks  in  Cicero  :  "^ 
"This  regularity,  therefore,  in  the  stars,  t^is  great 
agreement  of  the  times  in  such  various  courses 
during  all  eternity,  are  unintelligible  to  me  with- 
out the  exercise  of  mind,  reason,  and  design; 
and  when  we 'see  these  things  in  the  constella- 
tions, we  cannot  but  place  these  very  objects  in 
the  number  of  the  gods."  And  he  thus  speaks 
a  little  before  :  "  It  remains,"  he  says,  "  that  the 
motion  of  the  stars  is  voluntary;  and  he  who 
sees  these  things,  would  act  not  only  unlearnedly, 
but  also  impiously,  if  he  should  deny  it."  We 
in  truth  firmly  deny  it ;  and  we  prove  that  you, 
O  philosophers,  are  not  only  unlearned  and  im- 
pious, but  also  blind,  foolish,  and  senseless,  who 
have  surpassed  in  shallowness  the  ignorance  of 
the  uneducated.  For  they  regard  as  gods  only 
the  sun  and  moon,  but  you  the  stars  also. 

Make  known  to  us,  therefore,  the  mj'steries 
of  the  stars,  that  we  may  erect  altars  and  tem- 
ples to  each  ;  that  we  may  know  with  what  rites 
and  on  what  day  to  worship  each,  with  what 
names  and  with  what  prayers  we  should  call  on 
them  ;  unless  perhaps  we  ought  to  worship  gods 
so  innumerable  without  any  discrimination,  and 
gods  so  minute  in  a  mass.  Why  should  I  men- 
tion that  the  argument  by  which  they  infer  that 
all  the  heavenly  bodies  are  gods,  tends  to  the 
opposite  conclusion?  For  if  they  imagine  that 
they  are  gods  on  this  account,  because  they  have 
their  courses  fixed  and  in  accordance  with  reason. 


■•  {De  Xat.  Dcor.,  ii.  cap.  21.] 


48 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  II. 


they  are  in  error.  For  it  is  evident  from  this 
that  they  are  not  gods,  because  it  is  not  per- 
mitted them  to  deviate '  from  their  prescribed 
orbits.  But  if  they  were  gods,  they  would  be 
borne  hither  and  thither  in  all  directions  without 
any  necessity,  as  living  creatures  on  the  earth, 
who  wander  hither  and  thither  as  they  please, 
because  their  wills  are  unrestrained,  and  each  is 
borne  wherever  inclination  may  have  led  it. 
Therefore  the  motion  of  the  stars  is  not  volun- 
tary, but  of  necessity,  because  they  obey^  the 
laws  appointed  for  them.  But  when  he  was 
arguing  about  the  courses  of  the  stars,  while  he 
understood  from  the  very  harmony  of  things 
and  times  that  they  were  not  by  chance,  he 
judged  that  they  were  voluntary ;  as  though  they 
could  not  be  moved  with  such  order  and  arrange- 
ment, unless  they  contained  within  them  an 
understanding  acquainted  with  its  own  duty. 
Oh,  how  difficult  is  truth  to  those  who  are 
ignorant  of  it !  how  easy  to  those  who  know 
it !  If,  he  says,  the  motions  of  the  stars  are 
not  by  chance,  nothing  else  remains  but  that 
they  are  voluntary ;  nay,  in  truth,  as  it  is  plain 
that  they  are  not  by  chance,  so  is  it  clear  that 
they  are  not  voluntary.  Why,  then,  in  complet- 
ing their  courses,  do  they  preserve  their  regu- 
larity? Undoubtedly  God,  the  framer  of  the 
universe,  so  arranged  and  contrived  them,  that 
they  might  run  through  their  courses  ^  in  the 
heaven  with  a  divine  and  wonderful  order,  to 
accomplish  the  variations  of  the  successive  sea- 
sons. Was  Archimedes  ■*  of  Sicily  able  to  con- 
trive a  likeness  and  representation  of  the  universe 
in  hollow  brass,  in  which  he  so  arranged  the  sun 
and  moon,  that  they  effected,  as  it  were  every 
day,  motions  unequal  and  resembling  the  revo- 
lutions of  the  heavens,  and  that  sphere,  while  it 
revolved, 5  exhibited  not  only  the  approaches  and 
withdrawings  of  the  sun,  or  the  increase  and  wan- 
ing of  the  moon,  but  also  the  unequal  courses 
of  the  stars,  whether  fixed  or  wandering?  Was 
it  then  impossible  for  God  to  plan  and  create 
the  originals,*^  when  the  skill  of  man  was  able 
to  represent  them  by  imitation?  Would  the 
Stoic,  therefore,  if  he  should  have  seen  the  fig- 
ures of  the  stars  painted  and  fashioned  in  that 
brass,  say  that  they  moved  by  their  own  design, 
and  not  by  the  genius  of  the  artificer?  There 
is  therefore  in  the  stars  design,  adapted  to  the 


■  Exorbitare,  "  to  wander  from  their  orbits." 

2  Deserviunt,  "  they  arc  devoted  to." 

3  Spatium;  a  word  borrowed  from  the  chariot-course,  and  applied 
with  great  beauty  to  the  motions  of  the  stars. 

*  Archimedes  was  the  greatest  of  ancient  mathematicians,  and 
possessed  in  an  eminent  degree  inventive  genius.  He  constructed 
various  engines  of  war,  and  greatly  assisted  in  the  defence  of  Syra- 
cuse when  it  was  besieged  by  the  Romans.  His  most  celebrated 
work,  however,  was  the  construction  of  a  sphere,  or  "  orrery,"  repre- 
senting the  moTements  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  To  this  Lactantius 
refers. 

s  Dum  vertitur. 

'  Ilia  vera.  [Newton  showed  his  orrery  to  Halley  the  atheist, 
who  was  charmed  with  the  contrivance,  and  asked  the  name  of  the 
maker.    "  Nobody,"  was  the  ad  kominem  retort,  j 


accomplishment  of  their  courses ;  but  it  is  the 
design  of  God,  who  both  made  and  governs  all 
things,  not  of  the  stars  themselves,  which  are 
thus  moved.  For  if  it  had  been  His  will  that 
the  sun  should  remain  7  fixed,  it  is  plain  that 
there  would  be  perpetual  day.  Also  if  the  stars 
had  no  motions,  who  doubts  that  there  would 
have  been  eternal  night?  But  that  there  might 
be  vicissitudes  of  day  and  night,  it  was  His  will 
that  the  stars  should  move,  and  move  with  such 
variety  that  there  might  not  only  be  mutual  inter- 
changes of  light  and  darkness,  by  which  alter- 
nate courses  *  of  labour  and  rest  might  be  estab- 
lished, but  also  interchanges  of  cold  and  heat, 
that  the  power  and  influence  of  the  different  sea- 
sons might  be  adapted  either  to  the  production 
or  the  ripening  of  the  crops.  And  because  phi- 
losophers did  not  see  this  skill  of  the  divine 
power  in  contriving  the  movements  of  the  stars, 
they  supposed  them  to  be  living,  as  though 
they  moved  with  feet  and  of  their  own  accord, 
and  not  by  the  divine  intelligence.  But  who 
does  not  understand  why  God  contrived  them? 
Doubtless  lest,  as  the  light  of  the  sun  was  with- 
drawn, a  night  of  excessive  darkness  should  be- 
come too  oppressive  with  its  foul  and  dreadful 
gloom,  and  should  be  injurious  to  the  living. 
And  so  He  both  bespangled  the  heaven  with 
wondrous  variety,  and  tempered  the  darkness 
itself  with  many  and  minute  lights.  How  much 
more  wisely  therefore  does  Naso  judge,  than  they 
who  think  that  they  are  devoting  themselves  to 
the  pursuit  of  wisdom,  in  thinking  that  those 
lights  were  appointed  by  God  to  remove  the 
gloom  of  darkness  !  He  concludes  the  book,  in 
which  he  briefly  comprises  the  phenomena  of 
nature,  with  these  three  verses  :  — 

"  These  images,  so  many  in  number,  and  of  such  a  figure, 
God  placed  in  the  heaven;  and  having  scattered 
them  through  the  gloomy  darkness,  He  ordered 
them  to  give  a  bright  light  to  the  frosty  night." 

But  if  it  is  impossible  that  the  stars  should  be 
gods,  it  follows  that  the  sun  and  moon  cannot 
be  gods,  since  they  differ  from  the  light  of  the 
stars  in  magnitude  only,  and  not  in  their  design. 
And  if  these  are  not  gods,  the  same  is  true  of 
the  heaven,  which  contains  them  all. 

CHAP.    VI. — THAT   NEITHER  THE  WHOLE  UNIVERSE 
NOR  THE    ELEMENTS   ARE    GOD,   NOR   ARE    THEY 

POSSESSED    OF    LIFE. 

In  like  manner,  if  the  land  on  which  we  tread, 
and  which  we  subdue  and  cultivate  for  food,  is 
not  a  god,  then  the  plains  and  mountains  will 
not  be  gods ;  and  if  these  are  not  so,  it  follows 
that  the  whole  of  the  earth  cannot  appear  to  be 
God.     In  like  manner,  if  the  water,  which   is 


^  Staret. 
B  Spatia. 


Chap.  VI.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


49 


adapted  to  the  wants  '  of  living  creatures  for  the 
purpose  of  drinking  and  bathing,  is  not  a  god, 
neither  are  the  fountains  gods  from  which  the 
water  flows.  And  if  the  fountains  are  not  gods, 
neither  are  the  rivers,  which  are  collected  from 
the  fountains.  And  if  the  rivers  also  are  not 
gods,  it  follows  that  the  sea,  which  is  made  up 
of  rivers,  cannot  be  considered  as  God.  But  if 
neither  the  heaven,  nor  the  earth,  nor  the  sea, 
which  are  the  parts  of  the  world,  can  be  gods,  it 
follows  that  the  world  altogether  is  not  God  ; 
whereas  the  same  Stoics  contend  that  it  is  both 
living  and  wise,  and  therefore  God.  But  in  this 
they  are  so  inconsistent,  that  nothing  is  said  by 
them  which  they  do  not  also  overthrow.  For 
they  argue  thus  :  It  is  impossible  that  that  which 
produces  from  itself  sensible  objects  should  itself 
be  insensible.  But  the  world  produces  man,  who 
is  endowed  with  sensibility ;  therefore  it  must 
also  itself  be  sensible.  Also  they  argue  :  that 
cannot  be  without  sensibility,  a  part  of  which  is 
sensible ;  therefore,  because  man  is  sensible,  the 
world,  of  which  man  is  a  part,  also  possesses  sen- 
sibihty.  The  propositions  ^  themselves  are  true, 
that  that  which  produces  a  being  endowed  with 
sense  is  itself  sensible  ;  and  that  that  possesses 
sense,  a  part  of  which  is  endowed  with  sense. 
But  the  assumptions  by  which  they  draw  their 
conclusions  are  false ;  for  the  world  does  not 
produce  man,  nor  is  man  a  part  of  the  world. 
For  the  same  God  who  created  the  world,  also 
created  man  from  the  beginning :  and  man  is 
not  a  part  of  the  world,  in  the  same  manner  in 
which  a  limb  is  a  part  of  the  body ;  for  it  is  pos- 
sible for  the  world  to  be  without  man,  as  it  is  for 
a  city  or  house.  Now,  as  a  house  is  the  dwell- 
ing-place of  one  man,  and  a  city  of  one  people, 
so  also  the  world  is  the  abode  ^  of  the  whole 
human  race  ;  and  that  which  is  inhabited  is  one 
thing,  that  which  inhabits  another.  But  these 
persons,  in  their  eagerness  to  prove  that  which 
they  had  falsely  assumed,  that  the  world  is  pos- 
sessed of  sensibility,  and  is  God,  did  not  per- 
ceive the  consequences  of  their  own  arguments. 
For  if  man  is  a  part  of  the  world,  and  if  the 
world  is  endowed  with  sensibility  because  man  is 
sensible,  therefore  it  follows  that,  because  man 
is  mortal,  the  world  must  also  of  necessity  be 
mortal,  and  not  only  mortal,  but  also  liable  to  all 
kinds  of  disease  and  suffering.  And,  on  the 
contrary,  if  the  world  is  God,  its  parts  also  are 
plainly  immortal :    therefore   man  also   is  God, 

'  Is  subservient  to. 

^  Laclantius  speaks  after  the  manner  of  Cicero,  and  uses  the 
vrardi  proposition  to  express  that  which  logicians  call  the  major  ■prop- 
osition,  as  containing  the  major  term:  the  word  assumption  ex- 
presses that  which  is  called  the  minor  proposition,  as  containing  the 
minor  term. 

^  Thus  Cicero,  De  Fijiihiis,  iii.,  says:  "  But  they  think  that  the 
universe  is  governed  by  the  power  of  the  gods,  and  that  it  is,  as  it 
were,  a  city  and  state  common  to  men  and  gods,  and  that  every  one 
of  us  is  a  part  of  that  universe." 


because  he  is,  as  you  say,  a  part  of  the  world. 
And  if  man,  then  also  both  beasts  of  burden  and 
cattle,  and  the  other  kinds  of  beasts  and  of  birds, 
and  fishes,  since  these  also  in  the  same  manner 
are  possessed  of  sensibility,  and  are  parts  of  the 
world.  But  this  is  endurable  ;  for  the  Egyptians 
worship  even  these.  But  the  matter  comes  to 
this  :  that  even  frogs,  and  gnats,  and  ants  appear 
to  be  gods,  because  these  also  have  sensibility, 
and  are  parts  of  the  world.  Thus  arguments 
drawn  from  a  false  source  always  lead  to  foolish 
and  absurd  conclusions.  Why  should  I  mention 
that  the  same  philosophers  assert  that  the  world 
was  constructed  ^  for  the  sake  of  gods  and  men 
as  a  common  dwelling?  Therefore  the  world  is 
neither  god,  nor  li\'ing,  if  it  has  been  made  :  for 
a  living  creature  is  not  made,  but  born ;  and  if 
it  has  been  built,  it  has  been  built  as  a  house  or 
ship  is  built.  Therefore  there  is  a  builder  of  the 
world,  even  God  ;  and  the  world  which  has  been 
made  is  distinct  from  Him  who  made  it.  Now, 
how  inconsistent  and  absurd  is  it,  that  when  they 
affirm  that  the  heavenly  fires  5  and  the  other  ele- 
ments of  the  world  are  gods,  they  also  say  that 
the  world  itself  is  God  !  How  is  it  possible  that 
out  of  a  great  heap  of  gods  one  God  can  be 
made  up?  If  the  stars  are  gods,  it  follows  that 
the  world  is  not  God,  but  the  dwelling-place  of 
gods.  But  if  the  world  is  God,  it  follows  that 
all  the  things  which  are  in  it  are  not  gods,  but 
members^  of  God",  which  clearly  cannot  by  them- 
selves 7  take  the  name  of  God.  For  no  one  can 
rightly  say  that  the  members  of  one  man  are 
many  men ;  but,  however,  there  is  no  similar 
comparison  between  a  living  being  and  the 
world.  For  because  a  living  being  is  endowed 
with  sensibility,  its  members  also  have  sensibility  ; 
nor  do  they  become  senseless  ^  unless  they  are 
separated  from  the  body.  But  what  resemblance 
does  the  world  present  to  this?  Truly  they 
themselves  tell  us,  since  they  do  not  deny  that  it 
was  made,  that  it  might  be,  as  it  were,  a  common 
abode  for  gods  and  men.  If,  therefore,  it  has 
been  constructed  as  an  abode,  it  is  neither  itself 
God,  nor  are  the  elements  which  are  its  parts  ;  be- 
cause a  house  cannot  bear  rule  over  itself,  nor  can 
the  parts  of  which  a  house  consists.  Therefore 
they  are  refuted  not  only  by  the  truth,  but  even 
by  their  own  words.  For  as  a  house,  made  for 
the  purpose  of  being  inhabited,  has  no  sensibility 
by  itself,  and  is  subject  to  the  master  who  built 
or  inhabits  it ;  so  the  world,  having  no  sensibility 
of  itself,  is  subject  to  God  its  Maker,  who  made 
it  for  His  own  use. 


*  If  the  world  was  created  out  of  nothing,  as  Christians  are  taught 
to  believe,  it  was  not  born;  for  birth  {yivi<j<.<i)  takes  place  when 
matter  assumes  another  substantial  form.  —  Betl'LEIUS. 

5  The  stars. 

<>  Membra,  "  limbs,"  "parts." 

7  Sola,  "  alone."    Anotner  reading  is  solius,  "  of  the  only  God." 

*  Brutescunt. 


50 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  II. 


CHAP.    VII. OF     GOD,    AND     THE     RELIGIOUS    RITES 

OF      THE      FOOLISH  ;      OF      AVARICE,     AXD     THE 
AUTHORITY   OF  ANCESTORS. 

The  foolish,  therefore,  err  in  a  twofold  man- 
ner :  first,  in  preferring  the  elements,  that  is,  the 
works  of  God,  to  God  Himself ;  secondly,  in 
worshipping  the  figures  of  the  elements  them- 
selves under  human  form.  For  they  form  the 
images  of  the  sun  and  moon  after  the  fashion  of 
men  ;  also  those  of  fire,  and  earth,  and  sea,  which 
they  call  Vulcan,  Vesta,  and  Neptune.  Nor  do 
they  openly  sacrifice  to  the  elements  themselves. 
Men  are  possessed  with  so  great  a  fondness  for 
representations,'  that  those  things  which  are  true 
are  now  esteemed  of  less  value  :  they  are  de- 
lighted, in  fact,  with  gold,  and  jewels,  and  ivory. 
The  beauty  and  brilliancy  of  these  things  dazzle 
their  eyes,  and  they  think  that  there  is  no  religion 
where  these  do  not  shine.  And  thus,  under  pre- 
tence of  toorshippiijg  the  gods,  avarice  and  desire 
are  worshipped.  For  they  believe  that  the  gods 
love  whatever  they  themselves  desire,  whatever 
it  is,  on  account  of  which  thefts  and  robberies 
and  murders  daily  rage,  on  account  of  which 
wars  overthrow  nations  and  cities  throughout  the 
whole  world.  Therefore  they  consecrate  their 
spoils  and  plunder  to  the  gods,  who  must  un- 
doubtedly be  weak,  and  destitute  of  the  highest 
excellence,  if  they  are  subject  to  desires.  For 
why  should  we  think  them  celestial  if  they  long 
for  anything  from  the  earth,  or  happy  if  they  are 
in  want  of  anything,  or  uncorrupted  if  they  take 
pleasure  in  those  things  in  the  pursuit  of  which 
the  desire  of  men  is  not  unreservedly  con- 
demned? They  approach  the  gods,  therefore, 
not  so  much  on  account  of  religion,  which  can 
have  no  place  in  badly  acquired  and  corruptible 
things,  as  that  they  may  gaze  upon  ^  the  gold, 
and  view  the  brilliancy  of  polished  marble  or 
ivory,  that  they  may  survey  with  unwearied 
contemplation  garments  adorned  with  precious 
stones  and  colours,  or  cups  studded  with  glitter- 
ing jewels.  And  the  more  ornamented  are  the 
temples,  and  the  more  beautiful  the  images,  so 
much  the  greater  majesty  are  they  believed  to 
have  :  so  entirely  is  their  religion  confined  ^  to 
that  which  the  desire  of  men  admires. 

These  are  the  religious  institutions  handed 
down  to  them  by  their  ancestors,  which  they 
persist  in  maintaining  and  defending  with  the 
greatest  obstinacy.  Nor  do  they  consider  of 
what  character  they  are  ;  but  they  feel  assured 
of  their  excellence  and  truth  on  this  account, 
'because  the  ancients  have  handed  them  down  ; 
and  so  great  is  the  authority  of  antiquity,  that  it 
is  said  to  be  a  crime  to  inquire  into  it.  And 
thus  it  is   everj-'where   believed   as   ascertained 


'  Imaginum. 

*  L^t  oculis  hauriant. 

3  Nihil  aliud  est. 


truth.  In  short,  in  Cicero,-*  Cotta  thus  speaks 
to  Lucilius  :  "  You  know,  Balbus,  what  is  the 
opinion  of  Cotta,  what  the  opinion  of  the  pontiff. 
Now  let  me  understand  what  are  your  sentiments  : 
for  since  you  are  a  philosopher,  I  ought  to  receive 
from  you  a  reason  for  your  religion  ;  but  in  the 
case  of  our  ancestors  it  is  reasonable  to  believe 
them,  though  no  reason  is  alleged  by  them."  If 
you  believe,  why  then  do  you  require  a  reason, 
which  may  have  the  effect  of  causing  you  not  to 
believe  ?  But  if  you  require  a  reason,  and  think 
that  the  subject  demands  inquiry,  then  you  do 
not  believe  ;  for  you  make  inquiry  with  this  view, 
that  you  may  follow  it  when  you  have  ascertained 
it.  Behold,  reason  teaches  you  that  the  religious 
institutions  of  the  gods  are  not  true  :  what  will 
you  do?  Will  you  prefer  to  follow  antiquity  or 
reason  ?  And  this,  indeed,  was  not  imparted  5 
to  you  by  another,  but  was  found  out  and  chosen 
by  yourself,  since  you  have  entirely  uprooted  all 
religious  systems.  If  you  prefer  reason,  you 
must  abandon  the  institutions  and  authority  of 
our  ancestors,  since  nothing  is  right  but  that 
which  reason  prescribes.  But  if  piety  advises 
you  to  follow  your  ancestors,  then  admit  that 
they  were  foolish,  who  complied  with  religious 
institutions  invented  contrary  to  reason ;  and 
that  you  are  senseless,  since  you  worship  that 
which  you  have  proved  to  be  false.  But  since 
the  name  of  ancestors  is  so  greatly  objected  to 
us,  let  us  see,  I  pray,  who  those  ancestors  were 
from  whose  authority  it  is  said  to  be  impious  to 
depart.^ 

Romulus,  when  he  was  about  to  found  the 
city,  called  together  the  shepherds  among  whom 
he  had  grown  up ;  and  since  their  number 
appeared  inadequate  to  the  founding  of  the  city, 
he  established  an  asylum.  To  this  all  the  most 
abandoned  men  flocked  together  indiscriminately 
from  the  neighbouring  places,  without  any  dis- 
tinction of  condition.  Thus  he  brought  together 
the  people  from  all  these  ;  and  he  chose  into  the 
senate  those  who  were  oldest,  and  called  them 
Fathers,  by  whose  advice  he  might  direct  all 
things.  And  concerning  this  senate,  Propertius 
the  elegiac  poet  thus  speaks  :  — 

"  The  trum))et  used  to  call  the  ancient  Quirites  to  an 
assembly ; '  those  hundred  in  the  field  often 
formed  the  senate.  The  senate-house,  which  now 
is  raised  aloft  and  shines  with  the  well-robed  sen- 
ate, received  the  Fathers  clothed  in  skins,  rustic 
spirits." 

These  are  the  Fathers  whose  decrees  learned  and 
sagacious  men  obey  with  the  greatest  devotion ; 
and  all  posterity  must  judge  that  to  be  true  and 
unchangeable  which  an  hundred  old  men  clothed 
in  skins  established  at  their  will ;  who,  however, 


■»  Cicero,  De  Nat.  Dear.,  iii.  2. 

5  Insinuata. 

6  [Sec  Clement,  vol.  ii.  cap.  10,  p.  197,  this  series.] 

7  Ad  verba. 


Chap.  VIIL] 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


51 


as  has  been  mentioned  in  the  first  book,"  were 
enticed  by  PompiUus  to  beheve  the  truth  of 
those  sacred  rites  which  he  himself  deUvered. 
Is  there  any  reason  why  their  authority  should 
be  so  highly  esteemed  by  posterity,  since  during 
their  life  no  one  either  high  or  low  judged  them 
worthy  of  affinity?^ 

CHAP.  VIII. OF   THE  USE  OF  REASON  IN  RELIGION  ; 

AND    OF    DREAMS,   AUGURIES,  ORACLES,  AND    SIMI- 
LAR   PORTENTS. 

It  is  therefore  right,  especially  in  a  matter  on 
which  the  whole  plan  of  life  turns,  that  every 
one  should  place  confidence  in  himself,  and  use 
his  own  judgment  and  individual  capacity  for 
the  investigation  and  weighing  of  the  truth, 
rather  than  through  confidence  in  others  to  be 
deceived  by  their  errors,  as  though  he  himself 
were  without  understanding.  God  has  given 
wisdom  to  all  alike,^  that  they  might  be  able 
both  to  investigate  things  which  they  have  not 
heard,  and  to  weigh  things  which  they  have 
heard.  Nor,  because  they  preceded  us  in  time, 
did  they  also  outstrip  us  in  wisdom  ;  for  if  this 
is  given  equally  to  all,  we  cannot  be  anticipated  -^ 
in  it  by  those  who  precede  us.  It  is  incapable 
of  diminution,  as  the  light  and  brilliancy  of  the 
sun  ;  because,  as  the  sun  is  the  light  of  the  eyes, 
so  is  wisdom  the  light  of  man's  heart.  Where- 
fore, since  wisdom  —  that  is,  the  inquiry  after 
truth  —  is  natural  to  all,  the)'  deprive  themselves 
of  wisdom,  who  without  any  judgment  approve 
of  the  discoveries  of  their  ancestors,  and  like 
sheep  are  led  by  others.  But  this  escapes  their 
notice,  that  the  name  of  ancestors  being  intro- 
duced, they  think  it  impossible  that  they  them- 
selves should  have  more  knowledge  because  they 
are  called  descendants,  or  that  the  others  should 
be  unwise  because  they  are  called  ancestors. 5 
What,  therefore,  prevents  us  from  taking  a  prece- 
dent*^ from  them,  that  as  they  handed  down  to 
posterity  their  false  inventions,  so  we  who  have 
discovered  the  truth  may  hand  down  better 
things  to  our  posterity?  There  remains  there- 
fore a  great  subject  of  inquiry,  the  discussion  of 
which  does  not  come  from  talent,  but  from 
knowledge :  and  this  must  be  explained  at 
greater  length,  that  nothing  at  all  may  be  left 
in  doubt.  For  perhaps  some  one  may  have 
recourse  to  those  things  which  are  handed  down 


*  Twenty-second  chapter. 

2  Relationship  by  marriage.  The  .ilhision  is  to  the  well-V:nown 
Etnry,  that  all  the  neighbouring  towns  refused  to  intermarry  with  the 
Romans. 

3  Pro  virili  portione.  The  phrase  properly  denotes  the  share 
that  falls  to  a  person  in  the  division  of  an  inheritance,  hence  equality. 

■♦  It  cannot  be  forestalled  or  preoccupied. 

5  Majores.  There  is  a  pl,ay  upon  the  words  for  ancestors  and 
descendants  in  Latin  which  our  translation  docs  not  reprodure.  The 
word  translated  ancestors  may  also  mean  "  men  who  are  greater  or 
superior:  "  the  word  translated  descendants  may  mean  "  men  who  are 
less  or  inferior." 

*  Exemplum,  "  an  example  for  imitation." 


by  many  and  undoubted  authorities  ;  that  those 
very  persons,  whom  we  have  shown  to  be  no 
gods,  have  often  displayed  their  majesty  both  by 
prodigies,  and  dreams,  and  auguries,  and  oracles. 
And,  indeed,  many  wonderful  things  may  be 
enumerated,  and  especially  this,  that  Accius 
Navius,  a  consummate  augur,  when  he  was  warn- 
ing Tarquinius  Priscus  to  undertake  the  com- 
mencement of  nothing  new  without  the  previous 
sanction  of  auguries,''  and  the  king,  detracting 
from  ^  the  credit  due  to  his  art,  told  him  to  con- 
sult the  birds,  and  then  to  announce  to  him 
whether  it  was  possible  for  that  which  he  himself 
had  conceived  in  his  mind  to  be  accomplished, 
and  Navius  affirmed  that  it  was  possible  ;  then 
take  this  whetstone,  he  said,  and  divide  it  with 
a  razor.  But  the  other  without  any  hesitation 
took  and  cut  it. 

In  the  next  place  is  the  fact  of  Castor  and 
Pollux  having  been  seen  in  the  Latin  war  at  the 
lake  of  Juturna  washing  off  the  sweat  of  their 
horses,  when  their  temple  which  adjoins  the 
fountain  had  been  open  of  its  own  accord.  In 
the  Macedonian  war  the  same  deities,  mounted 
on  white  horses,  are  said  to  have  presented 
themselves  to  Publius  Vatienus  as  he  went  to 
Rome  at  night,  announcing  that  King  Perseus 
had  been  vanquished  and  taken  captive  on  that 
clay,  the  truth  of  which  was  proved  by  letters 
received  from  Paulus^  a  few  days  afterwards. 
That  also  is  wonderful,  that  the  statue  of  Fortune, 
in  the  form  '°  of  a  woman,  is  reported  to  have 
spoken  more  than  once  ;  also  that  the  statue  of 
Juno  Moneta,"  when,  on  the  capture  of  Veii,  one 
of  the  soldiers,  being  sent  to  remove  it,  sportively 
and  in  jest  asked  whether  she  wished  to  remove 
to  Rome,  answered  that  she  wished  it.  Claudia 
also  is  set  forth  as  an  example  of  a  miracle. 
For  when,  in  accordance  with  the  Sibylline 
books,  the  Idsean  mother  was  sent  for,  and  the 
ship  in  which  she  was  conveyed  had  grounded 
on  a  shoal  of  the  river  Tiber,  and  could  not  be 
moved  by  any  force,  they  report  that  C'laudia, 
who  had  been  always  regarded  as  unchaste  on 
account  of  her  excess  in  personal  adornment, 
with  bended  knees  entreated  the  goddess,  if  she 
judged  her  to  be  chaste,  to  follow  her  giidle; 
and  thus  the  shij),  which  could  not  be  moved  by 
all  the  strong  men,'-'  was  moved  by  a  single 
woman.  It  is  equally  wonderful,  that  during 
the  prevalence  of  a  pestilence,  yEscula])ius, 
being  called  from  Kpidaurus,  is  said  to  have 
released  the  city  of  Rome  from  the  long-con- 
tinued plague. 


7  Until  he  had  consulted  auguries. 

8  Elevans,  "  disparaging,"  or  "diminishing  from." 

9  Panlus  yEmilius,  who  subdued  Macedonia. 
•o  Muliebre.     Others  read  Kortuna;  mtdiebris. 

"  The  name  is  said  to  be  derived  from  >«o«f«(i't',  "  giving  warn- 
ing," or  "  admonition." 

'-  The  youth  of  military  age. 


52 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  II. 


Sacrilegious  persons  can  also  be  mentioned, 
by  the  immediate  punishment  of  whom  the  gods 
are  believed  to  have  avenged  the  injury  done 
to  them.  Appius  Claudius  the  censor  having, 
against  the  advice  of  the  oracle,  transferred  the 
sacred  rites  of  Hercules  to  the  public  slaves," 
was  deprived  of  his  eyesight ;  and  the  Potitian 
gens,  which  abandoned  ^  its  privilege,  within  the 
space  of  one  year  became  extinct.  Likewise 
the  censor  Fulvius,  when  he  had  taken  away  the 
marble  tiles  from  the  temple  of  the  Lacinian^ 
Juno,  to  cover  the  temple  of  the  equestrian 
Fortuna,  which  he  had  built  at  Rome,  was 
deprived  of  his  senses,  and  having  lost  his  two 
sons  who  were  serving  in  lUyricum,  was  con- 
sumed with  the  greatest  grief  of  mind.  Turullius 
also,  the  lieutenant  of  Mark  Antony,  when  he 
had  cut  down  a  grove  of  .-Esculapius  in  Cos,* 
and  built  a  fleet,  was  afterwards  slain  at  the 
same  place  by  the  soldiers  of  Csesar.  To  these 
examples  is  added  Pyrrhus,  who,  having  taken 
away  money  from  the  treasure  of  the  Locrian 
Proserpine,  was  shipwrecked,  and  dashed  against 
the  shores  near  to  the  temple  of  the  goddess,  so 
that  nothing  was  found  uninjured  except  that 
money.  Ceres  of  Miletus  also  gained  for  herself 
great  veneration  among  men.  For  when  the 
city  had  been  taken  by  Alexander,  and  the  sol- 
diers had  rushed  in  to  plunder  her  temple,  a 
flame  of  fire  suddenly  thrown  upon  them  blinded 
them  all. 

There  are  also  found  dreams  which  seem  to 
show  the  power  of  the  gods.  For  it  is  said  that 
Jupiter  presented  himself  to  Tiberius  Atinius,  a 
plebeian,  in  his  sleep,  and  enjoined  him  to  an- 
nounce to  the  consuls  and  senate,  that  in  the 
last  Circensian  5  games  a  public  dancer  had  dis- 
pleased him,  because  a  certain  Antonius  Maxi- 
mus  had  severely  scourged  a  slave  under  the 
furca  ^  in  the  middle  of  the  circus,  and  had  led 
him  to  punishment,  and  that  on  this  account 
the  games  ought  to  be  repeated.  And  when  he 
had  neglected  this  command,  he  is  said  on  the 
same  day  to  have  lost  his  son,  and  to  have  been 
himself  seized  by  a  severe  disease ;  and  that 
when  he  again  perceived  the  same  image  asking 
whether  he  had  suffered  sufficient  punishment 
for  the  neglect  of  his  command,  he  was  carried 
on  a  litter  to  the  consuls  ;  and  having  explained 
the  whole  matter  in  the  senate,  he  regained 
strength  of  body,  and  returned  to  his  house  on 
foot.     And  that  dream  also  was  not  less  wonder- 


*  The  circumstance  is  related  by  Livj-,  book  ix.  c.  29. 

2  Prodidit,  "  betrayed." 

3  Lacinian,  so  called  from  the  promontory  Lacinia,  near  Croton. 

<  The  island  of  Cos  lies  off  the  coast  of  Caria;  it  had  a  celebrated 
temple  of  ilisculapius. 

5  The  Circensian  games  were  instituted  by  Romulus,  according 
to  the  legend,  when  he  wished  to  attract  the  Sabine  population  to 
Rome  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  wives  for  his  people.  They  were 
afterwards  celebrated  with  great  enthusiasm, 

*  Furca,  an  instrument  of  punishment  to  which  the  slave  was 
bound  and  scourged. 


ful,  to  which  it  is  said  that  Augustus  Csesar  owed 
his  preservation.  For  when  in  the  civil  war  with 
Brutus  he  was  afflicted  with  a  severe  disease, 
and  had  determined  to  abstain  from  battle,  the 
image  of  Minerva  presented  itself  to  his  physi- 
cian Artorius,  advising  him  that  Caesar  should 
not  confine  himself  to  the  camp  on  account  of 
his  bodily  infirmity.  He  was  therefore  carried 
on  a  litter  to  the  army,  and  on  the  same  day  the 
canip  was  taken  by  Brutus.  Many  other  ex- 
amples of  a  similar  nature  may  be  brought  for- 
ward ;  but  I  fear  that,  if  I  shall  delay  too  long 
in  the  setting  forth  of  contrary  subjects,  I  may 
either  appear  to  have  forgotten  my  purpose,  or 
may  incur  the  charge  of  loquacity. 

CHAP.     IX.  —  OF    THE     DEVIL,     THE    WORLD,     GOD, 
PROVIDENCE,    IMAN,    AND    HIS    WISDOM. 

I  will  therefore  set  forth  the  method  of  all 
these  things,  that  difficult  and  obscure  subjects 
may  be  more  easily  understood ;  and  I  will 
bring  to  light  all  these  deceptions  ^  of  the  pre- 
tended deity,  led  by  which  men  have  departed 
very  far  from  the  way  of  truth.  But  I  will  re- 
trace the  matter  far  back  from  its  source  ;  that 
if  any,  unacquainted  with  the  truth  and  ignorant, 
shall  apply  himself  to  the  reading  of  this  book, 
he  may  be  instructed,  and  may  understand  what 
can  in  truth  be  "  the  source  and  origin  of  these 
evils  ;  "  and  having  received  light,  may  perceive 
his  own  errors  and  those  of  the  whole  human 
race. 

Since  God  was  possessed^  of  the  greatest 
foresight  for  planning,  and  of  the  greatest  skill 
for  carrying  out  in  action,  before  He  commenced 
this  business  of  the  world,  —  inasmuch  as  there 
was  in  Him,  and  always  is,  the  fountain  of  full 
and  most  complete  goodness,  —  in  order  that 
goodness  might  spring  as  a  stream  from  Him, 
and  might  flow  forth  afar,  He  produced  a  Spirit 
like  to  Himself,  who  might  be  endowed  with  the 
perfections  of  God  the  Father.  But  how  He 
willed  that,  I  will  endeavour  to  show  in  the 
fourth  book,9  Then  He  made  another  being, 
in  whom  the  disposition  of  the  divine  origin  did 
not  remain.  Therefore  he  was  infected  with  his 
own  envy  as  with  poison,  and  passed  from  good 
to  evil ;  and  at  his  own  will,  which  had  been 
given  to  him  by  God  unfettered,'"  he  acquired 
for  himself  a  contrary  name.  From  which  it 
appears  that  the  source  of  all  evils  is  envy.  For 
he  envied  his  predecessor,"  who  through  his 
stedfastness  '^  is  acceptable  and  dear  to  God  the 
Father.     This   being,  who    from   good   became 

^  The  tricks  of  a  juggler. 

8  Most  prudent. 

9  Chap,  vi.,  infra. 
'°  Free. 

"  The  Son  of  God,  afterwards  spoken  of. 

'-  By  perseverance  There  seems  to  be  a  contrast  between  the 
Son,  who  remained  stedfast,  and  the  evil  spirits  who  fell. 


Chap.  IX.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


53 


evil  by  his  own  act,  is  called  by  the  Greeks 
diabolus : '  we  call  him  accuser,  because  he  re- 
ports to  God  the  faults  to  which  he  himself 
entices  us.  God,  therefore,  when  He  began  the 
fabric  of  the  world,  set  over  the  whole  work  that 
first  and  greatest  Son,  and  used  Him  at  the  same 
time  as  a  counsellor  and  artificer,  in  planning, 
arranging,  and  accomplishing,  since  He  is  com- 
plete both  in  knowledge,^  and  judgment,  and 
power ;  concerning  whom  I  now  speak  more 
sparingly,  because  in  another  place  ^  both  His 
excellence,  and  His  name,  and  His  nature  must 
be  related  by  us.  Let  no  one  inquire  of  what 
materials  God  made  these  works  so  great  and 
wonderful :  for  He  made  all  things  out  of  noth- 
ing. 

Nor  are  the  poets  to  be  listened  to,  who  say 
that  in  the  beginning  was  a  chaos,  that  is,  a  con- 
fusion of  matter  and  the  elements  ;  but  that  God 
afterwards  divided  all  that  mass,  and  having  sep- 
arated each  object  from  the  confused  heap,  and 
arranged  them  in  order.  He  constructed  and 
adorned  the  world.  Now  it  is  easy  to  reply  to 
these  persons,  who  do  not  understand  the  power 
of  God  :  for  they  believe  that  He  can  produce 
nothing,  except  out  of  materials  already  existing-* 
and  prepared  ;  in  which  error  philosophers  also 
were  involved.  For  Cicero,  while  discussing  the 
nature  of  the  gods,5  thus  speaks  :  "  First  of  all, 
therefore,  it  is  not  probable  ^  that  the  matter  ? 
from  which  all  things  arose  was  made  by  divine 
providence,  but  that  it  has,  and  has  had,  a  force 
and  nature  of  its  own.  As  therefore  the  builder, 
when  he  is  about  to  erect  any  building,  does  not 
himself  make  the  materials,  but  uses  those  which 
are  already  prepared,  and  the  statuary  **  also  uses 
the  wax  ;  so  that  divine  providence  ought  to  have 
had  materials  at  hand,  not  of  its  own  production, 
but  already  prepared  for  use.  But  if  matter  was 
not  made  by  God,  then  neither  was  the  earth, 
and  water,  and  air,  and  fire,  made  by  God."  Oh, 
how  many  faults  there  are  in  these  ten  lines  ! 
First,  that  he  who  in  almost  all  his  other  disputa- 
tions and  books  was  a  maintainer  of  the  divine 
providence,  and  who  used  very  acute  arguments 
in  assailing  those  who  denied  the  existence  of  a 
providence,  now  himself,  as  a  traitor  or  deserter, 
endeavoured  to  take  away  providence  ;  in  whose 
case,  if  you  wish  to  oppose  '^  him,  neither  consid- 
eration nor  labour  is  required  :  it  is  only  neces- 


1  i5iaBoAo9,  "  slanderer  or  accuser."  The  Greek  and  Latin  words 
employed  by  Lactantius  have  the  same  meaning. 

2  Providence. 

3  Book  iv.  ch.  vi.,  etc.  [Deus,  igitur,  machinator  constitutorque 
rerum,  etc  ] 

■*  Lying  under;  answering  to  the  Greek  expression  \n!OKn.y.ivr\ 
iiA)),  subject  matter. 

5  Not  now  found  in  the  treatise  which  bears  this  title. 

*>  Capable  of  proof. 

''  Materia;  perhaps  from  "  mater,"  mother  stuff — matter  out  of 
which  anything  is  composed. 

8  The  moulder.  The  ancients  made  statues  of  wax  or  clay,  as  well 
as  of  wood,  ivory,  and  marble. 

9  Contradict. 


sary  to  remind  him  of  his  own  words.  For  it 
will  be  impossible  for  Cicero  to  be  more  strongly 
refuted  by  any  one  than  by  Cicero  himself.  But 
let  us  make  this  concession  to  the  custom  and 
practice  of  the  Academics, '°  that  men  are  per- 
mitted to  speak  with  great  freedom,  and  to  en- 
tertain what  sentiments  they  may  wish.  Let  us 
examine  the  sentiments  themselves.  It  is  not 
probable,  he  says,  that  matter  was  made  by  God. 
By  what  arguments  do  you  prove  this  ?  For  you 
gave  no  reason  for  its  being  improbable.  There- 
fore, on  the  contrary,  it  appears  to  me  exceed- 
ingly probable  ;  nor  does  it  appear  so  without 
reason,  when  I  reflect  that  there  is  something 
more  in  God,  whom  you  verily  reduce  to  the 
weakness  of  man,  to  whom  you  allow  nothing 
else  but  the  mere  workmanship.  In  what  re- 
spect, then,  will  that  divine  power  differ  from  man, 
if  God  also,  as  man  does,  stands  in  need  of  the 
assistance  of  another?  But  He  does  stand  in 
need  of  it,  if  He  can  construct  nothing  unless 
He  is  furnished  with  materials  by  another.  But 
if  this  is  the  case,  it  is  plain  that  His  power 
is  imperfect,  and  he  who  prepared  the  material" 
must  be  judged  more  powerful.  By  what  name, 
therefore,  shall  he  be  called  who  excels  God  in 
power  ?  —  since  it  is  greater  to  make  that  which 
is  one's  own,  than  to  arrange  those  things  which 
are  another's.  But  if  it  is  impossible  that  any- 
thing should  be  more  powerful  than  God,  who 
must  necessarily  be  of  perfect  strength,  power, 
and  intelligence,  it  follows  that  He  who  made  the 
things  which  are  composed  of  matter,  made  mat- 
ter also.  For  it  was  neither  possible  nor  befitting 
that  anything  should  exist  without  the  exercise 
of  God's  power,  or  against  His  will.  But  it  is 
probable,  he  says,  tliat  matter  has,  and  always 
has  had,  a  force  and  nature  of  its  own.'^  A\'hat 
force  could  it  have,  without  any  one  to  give  it? 
what  nature,  without  any  one  to  produce  it?  If 
it  had  force,  it  took  that  force  from  some  one. 
But  from  whom  could  it  take  it,  unless  it  were 
from  God  ?  Moreover,  if  it  had  a  nature,  which 
plainly  is  so  called  from  being  produced,  it  must 
have  been  produced.  But  from  whom  could  it 
have  derived  its  existence,  except  God?  For 
nature,  from  which  you  say  that  all  things  had 
their  origin,  if  it  has  no  understanding,  can  make 
nothing.  iJut  if  it  has  the  power  of  producing 
and  making,  then  it  has  understanding,  and  must 
be  God.  For  that  force  can  be  called  by  no 
other  name,  in  which  there  is  both  the  foresight  '^ 
to  plan,  and  the  skill  and  power  to  carry  into 
effect.  Therefore  Seneca,  the  most  inlelligcnt 
of  all  the  Stoics,  says  better,  who  saw  "  that  na- 
ture was  nothing  else  but  God."     Therefore  he 


'o  .Minding  to  the  well-known  practice  of  the  Academics,  viz.,  of 
arguing  on  both  sides  of  a  question. 

"  'Ihe  founder  or  preparer  of  the  material. 


'^  [Quam  vhn  potuit  habere  nuUo  dante?] 
13  tr     ■ 


Providentia 


54 


THE    DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  II. 


says,  "  Shall  we  not  praise  God,  who  possesses 
natural  excellence?"  For  He  did  not  learn  it 
from  any  one.  Yes,  truly,  we  will  praise  Him  ; 
for  although  it  is  natural  to  Him,  He  gave  it  to 
Himself,'  since  God  Himself  is  nature.  When, 
therefore,  you  assign  the  origin  of  all  things  to 
nature,  and  take  it  from  God,  you  are  in  the 
same  difficulty :  — 

"  You  pay  your  debt  by  borrowing,^  Geta." 

For  while  simply  changing  the  name,  you  clearly 
admit  that  it  was  made  by  the  same  person  by 
whom  you  deny  that  it  was  made. 

There  follows  a  most  senseless  comparison. 
"  As  the  builder,"  he  says,  "  when  he  is  about  to 
erect  any  building,  does  not  himself  make  the 
materials,  but  uses  those  which  are  already  pre- 
pared, and  the  statuary  also  the  wax ;  so  that 
divine  providence  ought  to  have  had  materials 
at  hand,  not  of  its  own  production,  but  already 
prepared  for  use."  Nay  rather  it  ought  not ;  for 
God  will  have  less  power  if  He  makes  from  ma- 
terials already  provided,  which  is  the  part  of  man. 
The  builder  will  erect  nothing  without  wood,  for 
he  cannot  make  the  wood  itself;  and  not  to  be 
able  to  do  this  is  the  part  of  human  weakness. 
But  God  Himself  makes  the  materials  for  Him- 
self, because  He  has  the  power.  For  to  have 
the  power  is  the  property  of  God  ;  for  if  He  is 
not  able.  He  is  not  God.  Man  produces  his 
toorks  out  of  that  which  already  exists,  because 
through  his  mortality  he  is  weak,  and  through 
his  weakness  his  power  is  limited  and  moderate  ; 
but  God  produces  His  works  out  of  that  which 
has  no  existence,  because  through  His  eternity 
He  is  strong,  and  through  His  strength  His 
power  is  immense,  which  has  no  end  or  limit, 
like  the  life  of  the  Maker  Himself.  What  won- 
der, then,  if  God,  when  He  was  about  to  make 
the  world,  first  prepared  the  material  from  which 
to  make  it,  and  prepared  it  out  of  that  which  had 
no  existence  ?  Because  it  is  impossible  for  God 
to  borrow  anything  from  another  source,  inas- 
much as  all  things  are  in  Himself  and  from  Him- 
self. For  if  there  is  anything  before  Him,  and 
if  anything  has  been  made,  but  x\o\.  by  Him,  He 
will  therefore  lose  both  the  power  and  the  name 
of  God.  But  it  may  be  said  matter  was  never 
made,  like  God,  who  out  of  matter  made  this 
world.  In  that  case,  it  follows  that  two  eternal 
prmciples  are  established,  and  those  indeed  op- 
posed to  one  another,  which  cannot  happen  with- 
out discord  and  destruction.  For  those  things 
which  have  a  contrary  force  and  method  must 
of  necessity  come  into  coUision.     In  this  manner 

'  Sibi  illam  dedit.  There  is  another  reading,  ilia  slbi  illam  dedit, 
but  it  does  not  give  so  good  a  sense. 

2  A  proverbial  expression,  signifying  "  to  get  out  of  one  difficulty 
by  getting  into  another."  The  passage  in  the  text  is  a  quotation  from 
Terence,  Phorm.,  v.  2.  15.  [Not  in  some  editions  of  our  author;  e.g., 
Basil,  1521.J 


it  will  be  impossible  that  both  should  be  eternal, 
if  they  are  opposed  to  one  another,  because  one 
must  overpower  the  other.  Therefore  the  nature 
of  that  which  is  eternal  cannot  be  otherwise  than 
simple,  so  that  all  things  descended  from  that 
source  as  from  a  fountain.  Therefore  either  God 
proceeded  from  matter,  or  matter  from  God. 
Which  of  these  is  more  true,  is  easily  understood. 
For  of  these  two,  one  is  endued  with  sensibility, 
the  other  is  insensible.  The  power  of  making 
anything  cannot  exist,  except  in  that  which  has 
sensibility,  intelligence,  reflection,  and  the  power 
of  motion.  Nor  can  anything  be  begun,  or  made, 
or  completed,  unless  it  shall  have  been  foreseen 
by  reason  how  it  shall  be  made  before  it  exists, 
and  how  it  shall  endure  ^  after  it  has  been  made. 
In  short,  he  only  makes  anything  who  has  the 
will  to  make  it,  and  hands  to  complete  that  which 
he  has  willed.  But  that  which  is  insensible  al- 
ways lies  inactive  and  torpid  ;  nothing  can  origi- 
nate in  that  source  where  there  is  no  voluntary 
motion.  For  if  every  animal  is  possessed  of 
reason,  it  is  certain  that  it  cannot  be  produced 
from  that  which  is  destitute  of  reason,  nor  can 
that  which  is  not  present  in  the  original  source  ^ 
be  received  from  any  other  quarter.  Nor,  how- 
ever, let  it  disturb  any  one,  that  certain  animals 
appear  to  be  born  from  the  earth.  For  the  earth 
does  not  give  birth  to  these  of  itself,  but  the 
Spirit  of  God,  without  which  nothing  is  pro- 
duced. Therefore  God  did  not  arise  from  mat- 
ter, because  a  being  endued  with  sensibility  can 
never  spring  from  one  that  is  insensible,  a  wise 
one  from  one  that  is  irrational,  one  that  is  inca- 
pable of  suffering  from  one  that  can  suffer,  an  in- 
corporeal being  from  a  corporeal  one  ;  but  matter 
is  rather  from  God.  For  whatever  consists  of  a 
body  solid,  and  capable  of  being  handled,  admits 
of  an  external  force.  That  which  admits  of 
force  is  capable  of  dissolution ;  that  which  is 
dissolved  perishes ;  that  which  perishes  must 
necessarily  have  had  an  origin ;  that  which  had 
an  origin  had  a  source  5  from  which  it  originated, 
that  is,  some  maker,  who  is  intelligent,  foresee- 
ing, and  skilled  in  making.  There  is  one  as- 
suredly, and  that  no  other  than  God.  And  since 
He  is  possessed  of  sensibility,  intelligence,  provi- 
dence, power,  and  vigour,  He  is  able  to  create 
and  make  both  animated  and  inanimate  objects, 
because  He  has  the  means  of  making  everything. 
But  matter  cannot  always  have  existed,  for  if  it 
had  existed  it  would  be  incapable  of  change. 
For  that  which  always  was,  does  not  cease  always 
to  be ;  and  that  which  had  no  beginning  must 
of  necessity  be  without  an  end.  Moreover,  it  is 
easier  for  that  which  had  a  beginning  to  be  with- 
out an  end,  than  for  that  which  had  no  beginning 


3  Stand  firm  and  stedfast. 

^  Which  does  not  exist  there,  from  whence  it  is  sought. 

5  Fountain. 


Chap.  IX.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


55 


to  have  an  end.  Therefore  if  matter  was  not 
made,  nothing  can  be  made  from  it.  But  if 
nothing  can  be  made  from  it,  then  matter  itself 
can  liave  no  existence.  For  matter  is  that  out 
of  which  something  is  made.  But  everything 
out  of  which  anything  is  made,  inasmuch  as  it 
has  received  the  hand  of  the  artificer,  is  de- 
stroyed,' and  begins  to  be  some  other  thing. 
Therefore,  since  matter  had  an  end,  at  the  time 
when  the  world  was  made  out  of  it,  it  also  had 
a  beginning.  For  that  which  is  destroyed  '  was 
previously  built  up  ;  that  which  is  loosened  was 
previously  bound  up ;  that  which  is  brought 
to  an  end  was  begun.  If,  then,  it  is  inferred 
from  its  change  and  end,  that  matter  had  a 
beginning,  from  whom  could  that  beginning 
have  been,  except  from  God?  God,  therefore, 
is  the  only  being  who  was  not  made  ;  and  there- 
fore He  can  destroy  other  things,  but  He  Him- 
self cannot  be  destroyed.  That  which  was  in 
Him  will  always  be  permanent,  because  He  has 
not  been  produced  or  sprung  from  any  other 
source ;  nor  does  His  birth  depend  on  any  other 
object,  which  being  changed  may  cause  His  dis- 
solution. He  is  of  Himself,  as  we  said  in  the 
first  book ;  ^  and  therefore  He  is  such  as  He 
willed  that  He  should  be,  incapable  of  suffering, 
unchangeable,  incorruptible,  blessed,  and  eternal. 
But  now  the  conclusion,  with  which  TuUy 
finished  the  sentiment,  is  much  more  absurd.^ 
"  But  if  matter,"  he  says,  "  was  not  made  by 
God,  the  earth  indeed,  and  water,  and  air,  and 
fire,  were  not  made  by  God."  How  skilfully 
he  avoided  the  danger !  For  he  stated  the 
former  point  as  though  it  required  no  proof, 
whereas  it  was  much  more  uncertain  than  that 
on  account  of  which  the  statement  was  made. 
If  matter,  he  says,  was  not  made  by  God,  the 
world  was  not  made  by  God.  He  preferred  to 
draw  a  false  inference  from  that  which  is  false, 
than  a  true  one  from  that  which  is  true.  And 
though  uncertain  things  ought  to  be  proved 
from  those  which  are  certain,  he  drew  a  proof 
from  an  uncertainty,  to  overthrow  that  wliich  was 
certain.  For,  that  the  world  was  made  by  di- 
vine providence  (not  to  mention  Trismegistus, 
who  proclaims  this ;  not  to  mention  the  verses 
of  the  Sibyls,  who  make  the  same  announce- 
ment ;  not  to  mention  the  prophets,-*  who  with 
one  impulse  and  with  harmonious  5  voice  bear 
witness  that  the  world  was  made,''  and  that  it 


'  Distruitur,  "  pulled  to  pieces."    The  word  is  thus  used  by  Cicero. 

^  Ch.  3  and  7.      [See  pp.  11,  17,  sii/'ra.'^ 

3  [Multo  absurdior.] 

*  Lactantius  seems  to  refer  not  to  the  true  prophets,  but  to  those 
of  other  nations,  such  as  Orpheus  and  Zoroaster,  or  the  magi  of  the 
Persians,  the  gymnosophists  of  the  Indians,  or  the  Druids  of  the 
Gauls.  St.  Augustine  often  makes  mention  of  tliese.  It  would  seem 
inconsistent  to  mention  Moses  and  the  prophets  of  God  with  the 
prophets  of  the  heathens.  [Compare,  however,  "  Christian  analogies," 
etc.,  in  Justin.     See  vol.  i.  169;  also  Ibid.,  pp.  182,  2S3-286.] 

5   Pari  voce. 

^  The  work  of  the  world,  and  the  workmanship  of  God. 


was  the  workmanship  of  God),  even  the  phi- 
losophers almost  universally  agree ;  for  this  is 
the  opinion  of  the  Pythagoreans,  the  Stoics,  and 
the  Peripatetics,  who  are  the  chief  of  every  sect.^ 
In  short,  from  those  first  seven  wise  men,^  even 
to  Socrates  and  Plato,  it  was  held  as  an  acknowl- 
edged and  undoubted  fact ;  until  many  ages 
afterwards  9  the  crazy  Epicurus  lived,  who  alone 
ventured  to  deny  that  which  is  most  evident, 
doubtless  through  the  desire  of  discovering 
novelties,  that  he  might  found  a  sect  in  his 
own  name.  And  because  he  could  find  out 
nothing  new,  that  he  might  still  appear  to  disa- 
gree with  the  others,  he  wished  to  overthrow 
old  opinions.  But  in  this  all  the  philosophers 
who  snarled  '°  around  him,  refuted  him.  It  is 
more  certain,  therefore,  that  the  world  was  ar- 
ranged by  providence,  than  that  matter  was 
collected  "  by  providence.  Wherefore  he  ought 
not  to  have  supposed  that  the  world  was  not 
made  by  divine  providence,  because  its  matter 
was  not  made  by  divine  providence ;  but  be- 
cause the  world  was  made  by  divine  providence, 
he  ought  to  have  cojicluded  that  matter  also  was 
made  by  the  Deity.  For  it  is  more  credible 
that  matter  was  made  by  God,  because  He  is 
all-powerful,  than  that  the  world  was  not  made 
by  God,  because  nothing  can  be  made  without 
mind,  intelligence,  and  design.  But  this  is  not 
the  fault  of  Cicero,  but  of  the  sect.  For  when 
he  had  undertaken  a  disputation,  by  which  he 
might  take  away  the  nature  of  the  gods,  respect- 
ing which  philosophers  prated,  in  his  ignorance 
of  the  truth  he  imagined  that  the  Deity  must 
altogether  be  taken  away.  He  was  able  there- 
fore to  take  away  the  gods,  for  they  had  no 
existence.  But  when  he  attempted  to  overthrow 
the  divine  providence,  which  is  in  the  one  God, 
because  he  had  begun  to  strive  against  the  truth, 
his  arguments  failed,  and  he  necessarily  fell  into 
this  pitfall,  from  which  he  was  unable  to  with- 
draw himself.  Here,  then,  I  hold  him  firmly 
fixed  ;  I  hold  him  fastened  to  the  spot,  since 
Lucilius,  who  disputed  on  the  other  side,  was 
silent.  Here,  then,  is  the  turning-point ;  '^  on 
this  everything  depends.  Let  Cotta  disentangle 
himself,  if  he  can,  from  this  difficulty ;  '^  let  him 
bring  forward  arguments  by  which  he  may  prove 
that  matter  has  always  existed,  which  no  provi- 
dence made.  Let  him  show  how  anything  pon- 
derous and  heavy  either  could  exist  without  an 
author  or  could  be  changed,  and  how  that  which 


'  Qui  sunt  principes  omnis  disciplinac.  There  is  another  reading: 
qua;  sunt  principes  omnium  disciplina;,  "  which  are  the  leading  sects 
of  all." 

8  Thales  said  that  the  world  was  the  work  of  God. 

9  This  statement  is  mcorrect,  as  Plato  was  born  B.C.  430,  and 
Epicunis  B.C.  337. 

'°  There  is  probably  an  allusion  to  the  Cynics. 
»  Conglobatain.     Another  reading  is,  quim  materia  provideutiam 
conglobatam. 
'-  Hinge. 
"  Abyss. 


56 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  II. 


always  was  ceased  to  be,  so  that  that  which 
never  was  might  begin  to  be.  And  if  he  shall 
prove  these  things,  then,  and  not  till  then,  will 
I  admit  that  the  world  itself  was  not  established 
by  divine  providence,  and  yet  in  making  this 
admission  I  shall  hold  him  fast  by  another  snare. 
For  he  will  turn  round  again  to  the  same  point, 
to  which  he  will  be  unwilling  to  return,  so  as  to 
say  that  both  the  matter  of  which  the  world 
consists,  and  the  world  which  consists  of  matter, 
existed  by  nature ;  though  I  contend  that  na- 
ture itself  is  God.  For  no  one  can  make  won- 
derful things,  that  is,  things  existing  with  the 
greatest  order,  except  one  who  has  intelligence, 
foresight,  and  power.  And  thus  it  will  come  to 
be  seen  that  God  made  all  things,  and  that  noth- 
ing at  all  can  exist  which  did  not  derive  its  origin 
from  God. 

But  the  same,  as  often  as  he  follows  the  Epi- 
cureans,' and  does  not  admit  that  the  world  was 
made  by  God,  is  wont  to  inquire  by  what  hands, 
by  what  machines,  by  what  levers,  by  what  con- 
trivance. He  made  this  work  of  such  magnitude. 
He  might  see,  if  he  could  have  lived  at  that 
time  in  which  God  made  it.  But,  that  man 
might  not  look  into  the  works  of  God,  He  was 
unwilling  to  bring  him  into  this  world  until  all 
things  were  completed.  But  he  could  not  be 
brought  in  :  for  how  could  he  exist  while  the 
heaven  above  was  being  built,  and  the  founda- 
tions of  the  earth  beneath  were  being  laid  ;  when 
humid  things,  perchance,  either  benumbed  with 
excessive  stiffness  were  becoming  congealed,  or 
seethed  with  fiery  heat  and  rendered  solid  were 
growing  hard?  Or  how  could  he  live  when  the 
sun  was  not  yet  established,  and  neither  corn 
nor  animals  were  produced  ?  Therefore  it  was 
necessary  that  man  should  be  last  made,  when 
the  finishing  ^  hand  had  now  been  applied  to  the 
world  and  to  all  other  things.  Finally,  the 
sacred  writings  teach  that  man  was  the  last  work 
of  God,  and  that  he  was  brought  into  this  world 
as  into  a  house  prepared  and  made  ready ;  for 
all  things  were  made  on  his  account.  The  poets 
also  acknowledge  the  same.  Ovid,  having  de- 
scribed the  completion  of  the  world,  and  the 
formation  of  the  other  animals,  added  :  3  — 

"  An  animal  more  sacred  than  these,  and  more  capacious 
of  a  lofty  mind,  was  yet  wanting,  and  which  might 
exercise  dominion  over  the  rest.  Man  was  pro- 
duced." 

So  impious  must  we  think  it  to  search  into  those 
things  which  God  wished  to  be  kept  secret ! 
But  his  inquiries  were  not  made  through  a  de- 
sire of  hearing  or  learning,  but  of  refuting ;  for 
he  was  confident  that  no  one  could  assert  that.* 
As  though,  in  truth,  it  were  to  be  supposed  that 


■  As  often  as  he  is  an  Epicurean. 

^  The  last  hand. 

3  MetainorJ>h.,  book  i. 


these  things  were  not  made  by  God,  because  it 
cannot  be  plainly  seen  in  what  manner  they 
were  created  !  If  you  had  been  brought  up  in 
a  well-built  and  ornamented  house,  and  had 
never  seen  a  workshop,^  would  you  have  sup- 
posed that  that  house  was  not  built  by  man, 
because  you  did  not  know  how  it  was  built? 
You  would  assuredly  ask  the  same  question 
about  the  house  which  you  now  ask  about  the 
world  —  by  what  hands,  with  what  implements, 
man  had  contrived  such  great  works ;  and  es- 
pecially if  you  should  see  large  stones,  immense 
blocks,5  vast  columns,  the  whole  work  lofty  and 
elevated,  would  not  these  things  appear  to  you 
to  exceed  the  measure  of  human  strength,  be- 
cause you  would  not  know  that  these  things 
were  made  not  so  much  by  strength  as  by  skill 
and  ingenuity? 

But  if  man,  in  whom  nothing  is  perfect,  nev- 
ertheless effects  more  by  skill  than  his  feeble 
strength  would  permit,  what  reason  is  there  why 
it  should  appear  to  you  incredible,  when  it  is 
alleged  that  the  world  was  made  by  God,  in 
whom,  since  He  is  perfect,  wisdom  can  have  no 
limit,  and  strength  no  measure?  His  works  are 
seen  by  the  eyes ;  but  how  He  made  them  is 
not  seen  even  by  the  mind,  because,  as  Hermes 
says,  the  mortal  cannot  draw  nigh  to  (that  is, 
approach  nearer,  and  follow  up  with  the  under- 
standing) the  immortal,  the  temporal^  to  the 
eternal,  the  corruptible  to  the  incorruptible. 
And  on  this  account  the  earthly  animal  is  as 
yet  incapable  of  perceiving  7  heavenly  things, 
because  it  is  shut  in  and  held  as  it  were  in  cus- 
tody by  the  body,  so  that  it  cannot  discern  all 
things  with  free  and  unrestrained  perception. 
Let  him  know,  therefore,  how  foolishly  he  acts, 
who  inquires  into  things  which  are  indescribable. 
For  this  is  to  pass  the  limits  of  one's  own  con- 
dition, and  not  to  understand  how  far  it  is  per- 
mitted man  to  approach.  In  short,  when  God 
revealed  the  truth  to  man.  He  wished  us  only 
to  know  those  things  which  it  concerned  man 
to  know  for  the  attainment  of  life  ;  but  as  to  the 
things  which  related  to  a  profane  and  eager 
curiosity*^  He  was  silent,  that  they  might  be 
secret.  Why,  then,  do  you  inquire  into  things 
which  you  cannot  know,  and  if  you  knew  them 
you  would  not  be  happier.  It  is  perfect  wisdom 
in  man,  if  he  knows  that  there  is  but  one  God, 
and  that  all  things  were  made  by  Him. 

CHAP.    X.  OF   THE  WORLD,    AND    ITS    PARTS,    THE 

ELEMENTS   AND    SEASONS. 

Now,  having  refuted  those  who  entertain  false 
sentiments   respecting  the  world   and  God    its 

*  Fabrica.  The  word  is  also  used  to  denote  the  exercise  of  skill 
in  workmanship. 

5  Caiiiienta,  rough  stones  from  the  quarry. 

6  Pertaining  to  time,  as  opposed  to  eternal. 

7  Looking  into. 

8  A  curious  and  profane  eagerness. 


Chap.  X.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


57 


Maker,  let  us  return  to  the  divine  workmanship 
of  the  world,  concerning  which  we  are  informed 
in  the  sacred '  writings  of  our  holy  religion. 
Therefore,  first  of  all,  God  made  the  heaven, 
and  suspended  it  on  high,  that  it  might  be 
the  seat  of  God  Himself,  the  Creator.  Then 
He  founded  the  earth,  and  placed  it  under  the 
heaven,  as  a  dwelling-place  for  man,  with  the 
other  races  of  animals.  He  willed  that  it  should 
be  surrounded  and  held  together  by  water.  But 
He  adorned  and  filled  His  own  dwelling-place 
with  bright  lights  ;  He  decked  it  with  the  sun, 
and  the  shining  orb  of  the  moon,  and  with  the 
glittering  signs  of  the  twinkling  stars ;  but  He 
placed  on  the  earth  the  darkness,  which  is  con- 
trary to  these.  For  of  itself  the  earth  contains 
no  light,  unless  it  receives  it  from  the  heaven, 
in  which  He  placed  perpetual  light,  and  the 
gods  above,  and  eternal  life  ;  and,  on  the  con- 
trary, He  placed  on  the  earth  darkness,  and  the 
inhabitants  of  the  lower  regions,  and  death. 
For  these  things  are  as  far  removed  from  the 
former  ones,  as  evil  things  are  from  good,  and 
vices  from  virtues.  He  also  established  two 
parts  of  the  earth  itself  opposite  to  one  another, 
and  of  a  different  character,  —  namely,  the  east 
and  the  west ;  and  of  these  the  east  is  assigned 
to  God,  because  He  Himself  is  the  fountain  of 
light,  and  the  enlightener^  of  all  things,  and  be- 
cause He  makes  us  rise  to  eternal  life.  But  the 
west  is  ascribed  to  that  disturbed  and  depraved 
mind,  because  it  conceals  the  light,  because  it 
always  brings  on  darkness,  and  because  it  makes 
men  die  and  perish  in  their  sins.  For  as  light 
belongs  to  the  east,  and  the  whole  course  of  life 
depends  upon  the  light,  so  darkness  belongs  to 
the  west :  but  death  and  destruction  are  con- 
tained in  darkness.^  Then  He  measured  out  in 
the  same  way  the  other  parts,  —  namely,  the 
south  and  the  north,  which  parts  are  closely 
united  with  the  two  former.  For  that  which  is 
more  glowing  with  the  warmth  of  the  sun,  is 
nearest  to  and  closely  united  with  the  east ;  but 
that  which  is  torpid  with  colds  and  perpetual  ice 
belongs  to  the  same  division  as  the  extreme  west. 
For  as  darkness  is  opposed  tojight,  so  is  cold 
to  heat.  As,  therefore,  heat  is  nearest  to  light, 
so  is  the  south  to  the  east ;  and  as  cold  is  nearest 
to  darkness,  so  is  the  northern  region  to  the  west. 
And  He  assigned  to  each  of  these  parts  its  own 
time,  —  namely,  the  spring  to  the  east,  the  sum- 
mer to  the  southern  region,  the  autumn  belongs 
to  the  west,  and  the  winter  to  the  north.  In 
these  two  parts  also,  the  southern  and  the  north- 
ern, is  contained  a  figure  of  life  and  death,  be- 

•  Secret  writings. 
...^  [■^pos.  Const,  (so-called),  book  ii.  cap.  57.    See  Bingham,  book 
viii.  cap.  3,  sec.  3;   also  vol.  ii.   note  1,  p.  535,  this  scries,  and  vol. 
iii.    note    1,   p.    31.      So   Cyril   of  Jerusalem,  Augustine,   and   later 
Fathers.      I'.ingh.-xm,  book  xiii.  cap.  8,  sec.  15.] 

■5  [In  baptism,  the  renunciations  were  made  with  face  turned  to 
the  west.     Bingham,  book  xi,  cap.  7,  sec.  4.] 


cause  life  consists  in  heat,  death  in  cold.  And 
as  heat  arises  from  fire,  so  does  cold  from  water. 
And  according  to  the  division  of  these  parts 
He  also  made  day  and  night,  to  complete  by 
alternate  succession  with  each  other  the  courses  * 
and  perpetual  revolutions  of  time,  which  we  call 
years.  The  day,  which  the  first  east  supplies, 
must  belong  to  God,  as  all  things  do,  which  are 
of  a  better  character.  But  the  night,  which  the 
extreme  west  brings  on,  belongs,  indeed,  to  him 
whom  we  have  said  to  be  the  rival  of  God. 

And  even  in  the  making  of  these  God  had  re- 
gard to  the  future ;  for  He  made  them  so,  that 
a  representation  of  true  religion  and  of  false 
superstitions  might  be  shown  from  these.  For 
as  the  sun,  which  rises  daily,  although  it  is  but 
one,  —  from  which  Cicero  would  have  it  appear 
that  it  was  called  Sol, 5  because  the  stars  are  ob- 
scured, and  it  alone  is  seen,  —  yet,  since  it  is  a 
true  light,  and  of  perfect  fulness,  and  of  most 
powerful  heat,  and  enhghtens  all  things  with  the 
brightest  splendour  ;  so  God,  although  He  is  one 
only,  is  possessed  of  perfect  majesty,  and  might, 
and  splendour.  But  night,  which  we  say  is  as- 
signed to  that  depraved  adversary  of  God,''  shows 
by  a  resemblance  the  many  and  various  supersti- 
tions which  belong  to  him.  P'or  although  innu- 
merable stars  appear  to  glitter  and  shine, ^  yet, 
because  they  are  not  full  and  solid  lights,  and 
send  forth  no  heat,  nor  overpower  the  darkness 
by  their  multitude,  therefore  these  two  things 
are  found  to  be  of  chief  importance,  which  have 
power  differing  from  and  opposed  to  one  another 
—  heat  and  moisture,  which  God  wonderfully 
designed  for  the  support  and  production  of  all 
things.  For  since  the  power  of  God  consists  in 
heat  and  fire,  if  He  had  not  tempered  its  ardour 
and  force  by  mingling  matter  of  moisture  and 
cold,  nothing  could  have  been  born  or  have  ex- 
isted, but  whatever  had  begun  to  exist  must 
immediately  have  been  destroyed  by  conflagra- 
tion. From  which  also  some  philosojihers  and 
poets  said  that  the  world  was  made  up  of  a  dis- 
cordant concord ;  but  they  did  not  thorcjughly 
understand  the  matter.  Heraclitus  said  that  all 
things  were  i)roduced  from  fire  ;  'I'hales  of  Mile- 
tus from  water.  Each  saw  something  o/  the 
truth,  and  yet  each  was  in  error :  for  if  one  ele- 
ment only  had  existed,  water  could  not  have 
been  produced  from  fire,  nor,  on  the  other  hand, 
could  fire  from  water ;  but  it  is  more  true  that 
all  things  were  produced  from  a  mingling  of  the 
two.  Fire,  indeed,  cannot  be  mixed  with  water, 
because  they  are  opposed  to  each  other  ;  and  if 
l^ey  came  into  collision,  the  one  which  proved 
superior  must  destroy  the  other.     But  their  sub- 


■<  Spatia;  an  expression  derived  from  the  chariot-race. 

5  A  play  upon  the  words  Sol,  the  sun,  and  solus,  alone. 

6  Antithens,  one  who  takes  the  place  of  God;  as  Antichrist,  ofTt- 
XpiTT-i-,  one  who  sets  himself  in  the  place  of  Christ. 

7  Emit  rays. 


58 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  II. 


Stances  may  be  mingled.  The  substance  of  fire 
is  heat ;  of  water,  moisture.  Rightly  therefore 
does  Ovid  say  :  '  — 

"  For  when  moisture  and  heat  have  become  mingled, 
they  conceive,  and  all  things  arise  from  these  two. 
And  though  fire  is  at  variance  with  water,  moist 
vapour  produces  all  things,  and  discordant  con- 
cord ^  is  adapted  to  production." 

For  the  one  element  is,  as  it  were,  masculine ; 
the  other,  as  it  were,  feminine  :  the  one  active, 
the  other  passive.  And  on  this  account  it  was 
appointed  by  the  ancients  that  marriage  contracts 
should  be  ratified  by  the  solemnity  •'  of  fire  and 
water,  because  the  young  of  animals  are  furnished 
wth  a  body  by  heat  and  moisture,  and  are  thus 
animated  to  life. 

For,  since  every  animal  consists  of  soul  ^  and 
body,  the  material  of  the  body  is  contained  in 
moisture,  that  of  the  soul  in  heat :  which  we 
may  know  from  the  offspring  of  birds  ;  for  though 
these  are  full  of  thick  moisture,  unless  they  are 
cherished  by  creative  5  heat,  the  moisture  cannot 
become  a  body,  nor  can  the  body  be  animated 
with  life.  Exiles  also  were  accustomed  to  be 
forbidden  the  use  of  fire  and  water :  for  as  yet 
it  seemed  unlawful  to  inflict  capital  punishment 
on  any,  however  guilty,  inasmuch  as  they  were 
men.  When,  therefore,  the  use  of  those  things 
in  which  the  life  of  men  consists  was  forbidden, 
it  was  deemed  to  be  equivalent  to  the  actual 
infliction  of  death  on  him  who  had  been  thus 
sentenced.  Of  such  importance  were  these  two 
elements  considered,  that  they  believed  them  to 
be  essential  for  the  production  of  man,  and  for 
the  sustaining  of  his  life.  One  of  these  is  com- 
mon to  us  with  the  other  animals,  the  other  has 
been  assigned  to  man  alone.  For  we,  being  a 
heavenly  and  immortal  race,^  make  use  of  fire, 
which  is  given  to  us  as  a  proof  of  immortality, 
since  fire  is  from  heaven ;  and  its  nature,  inas- 
much as  it  is  moveable  and  rises  upward,  contains 
the  principle  of  life.  But  the  other  animals,  in- 
asmuch as  they  are  altogether  mortal,  make  use 
of  water  only,  which  is  a  corporeal  and  earthly 
element.  And  the  nature  of  this,  because  it  is 
moveable,  and  has  a  downward  inclination,  shows 
a  figure  of  death.  Therefore  the  cattle  do  not 
look  up  to  heaven,  nor  do  they  entertain  reli- 
gious sentiments,  since  the  use  of  fire  is  removed 
from  them.  P>ut  from  what  source  or  in  what 
manner  God  lighted  up  or  caused  ^  to  flow  these 
two  principal  elements,  fire  and  water,  He  who 
made  them  alone  can  know.^ 


'  Metamorph.,  i.  430. 
^  [Discors  Concordia.] 

3  Sacramento.     Torches  were  lighted  at  marriage  ceremonies,  afcd 
the  bride  was  sprinkled  with  water. 

*  The  living  principle. 
S  The  artificer. 

*  Animal. 

'  Eliquaverit,  "  strained  off,"  "  made  liquid." 

*  [So  Izaak  Walton:  "  Known  only  to  Him  whose  name  is  Won- 
derful."] 


CHAP.    XI. OF    LIVING  CRE.^TURES,  OF  M.^N  ;    PRO- 
METHEUS,   DEUCALION,    THE    PARC^. 

Therefore,  having  finished  the  world.  He  com- 
manded that  animals  of  various  kinds  and  of  dis- 
similar forms  should  be  created,  both  great  and 
smaller.  And  they  were  made  in  pairs,  that  is, 
one  of  each  sex ;  from  the  offspring  of  which 
both  the  air  and  the  earth  and  the  seas  were 
filled.  And  God  gave  nourishment  to  all  these 
by  their  kinds  9  from  the  earth,  that  they  might 
be  of  service  to  men  :  some,  for  instance,  were 
for  food,  others  for  clothing ;  but  those  which 
are  of  great  strength  He  gave,  that  they  might 
assist  in  cultivating  the  earth,  whence  they  were 
called  beasts  of  burthen. '°  And  thus,  when  all 
things  had  been  settled  with  a  wonderful  arrange- 
ment. He  determined  to  prepare  for  Himself 
an  eternal  kingdom,  and  to  create  innumerable 
souls,  on  whom  He  might  bestow  immortality. 
Then  He  made  for  Himself  a  figure  endowed 
with  perception  and  intelligence,  that  is,  after 
the  likeness  of  His  own  image,  than  which  noth- 
ing can  be  more  perfect :  He  formed  man  out 
of  the  dust  of  the  ground,  from  which  he  was 
called  man,"  because  He  was  made  from  the 
earth.  Finally,  Plato  says  that  the  human  form  " 
was  godlike  ;  as  does  the  Sibyl,  who  says,  — 

"Thou    art    my   image,   O    man,   possessed    of    right 
reason."  " 

The  poets  also  have  not  given  a  different  account 
respecting  this  formation  of  man,  however  they 
may  have  corrupted  it ;  for  they  said  that  man 
was  made  by  Prometheus  from  clay.  They  were 
not  mistaken  in  the  matter  itself,  but  in  the  name 
of  the  artificer.  For  they  had  never  come  into 
contact  with  a  line  of  the  truth ;  but  the  things 
which  were  handed  down  by  the  oracles  of  the 
prophets,  and  contained  in  the  sacred  book  '*  of 
God ;  those  things  collected  from  fables  and 
obscure  opinion,  and  distorted,  as  the  truth  is 
wont  to  be  corrupted  by  the  multitude  when 
spread  abroad  by  various  conversations,  every 
one  adding  something  to  that  which  he  had 
heard,  —  those  things  they  comprised  in  their 
poems  ;  and  in  this,  indeed,  they  acted  foolishly, 
in  that  they  attributed  so  wonderful  and  divine 
a  work  to  man.  For  what  need  was  there  that 
man  should  be  formed  of  clay,  when  he  might 
be  generated  in  the  same  way  in  which  Prome- 
theus himself  was  born  from  lapetus?  For  if 
he  was  a  man,  he  was  able  to  beget  a  man,  but 
not  to  make  one.    But  his  punishment  on  Mount 


aid.' 


9  By  species. 
'°  Jumenta,  "  beasts  of  burthen,"  .as  though  derived  from  juvo,  "  to 

'■  Homo,  "  man,"  from  humus,  "  the  ground."     [P.  56,  supraJX 

'2  This  image,  or  likeness  of  God,  in  which  man  was  originally 
created,  is  truly  described  not  by  Plato,  but  by  St.  Paul:  2  Cor.  iv. 
6;  Col.  iii    10;   Eph.  iv.  24. 

'3  Another  reading  is,  "  Man  is  my  image." 

'*  Sacrario,  "  the  shrine." 


Chap.  XL] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


59 


Caucasus  declares  that  he  was  not  of  the  gods. 
But  no  one  reckoned  his  father  lapetus  or  his 
uncle  '  Titan  as  gods,  because  the  high  dignity 
of  the  kingdom  was  in  possession  of  Saturn  only, 
by  which  he  obtained  divine  honours,  together 
with  all  his  descendants.  This  invention  of  the 
poets  admits  of  refutation  by  many  arguments. 
It  is  agreed  by  all  that  the  deluge  took  place  for 
the  destruction  of  wickedness,  and  for  its  re- 
moval from  the  earth.  Now,  both  philosophers 
and  poets,  and  writers  of  ancient  history,  assert 
the  same,  and  in  this  they  especially  agree  with 
the  language  of  the  prophets.  If,  therefore,  the 
flood  took  place  for  the  purpose  of  destroying 
wickedness,  which  had  increased  through  the 
excessive  multitude  of  men,  how  was  Prometheus 
the  maker  of  man,  when  his  son  Deucalion  is 
said  by  the  same  writers  to  have  been  the  only 
one  who  was  preserved  on  account  of  his  right- 
eousness ?  How  could  a  single  descent  ^  and  a 
single  generation  have  so  quickly  filled  the  world 
with  men  ?  But  it  is  plain  that  they  have  cor- 
rupted this  also,  as  they  did  the  former  account ; 
since  they  were  ignorant  both  at  what  time  the 
flood  happened  on  the  earth,  and  who  it  was 
that  deserved  on  account  of  his  righteousness  to 
be  saved  when  the  human  race  perished,  and 
how  and  with  whom  he  was  saved  :  all  of  which 
are  taught  by  the  inspired  3  writings.  It  is  plain, 
therefore,  that  the  account  which  they  give  re- 
specting the  work  of  Prometheus  is  false. 

But  because  I  had  said-*  that  the  poets  are 
not  accustomed  to  speak  that  which  is  alto- 
gether untrue,  but  to  wrap  up  in  figures  and 
thus  to  obscure  their  accounts,  I  do  not  say  that 
they  spoke  falsely  in  this,  but  that  first  of  all 
Prometheus  made  the  image  of  a  man  of  rich 
and  soft  clay,  and  that  he  first  originated  the  art 
of  making  statues  and  images  ;  inasmuch  as  he 
lived  in  the  times  of  Jupiter,  during  which  tem- 
ples began  to  be  built,  and  new  modes  of  wor- 
shipping the  gods  introduced.  And  thus  the 
truth  was  corrupted  by  falsehood ;  and  that 
which  was  said  to  have  been  made  by  God  be- 
gan also  to  be  ascribed  to  man,  who  imitated 
the  divine  work.  But  the  making  of  the  true 
and  living  man  from  clay  is  the  work  of  God. 
And  this  also  is  related  by  Hermes,5  who  not 
only  says  that  man  was  made  by  God,  after  the 
image  of  God,  but  he  even  tried  to  explain  in 
how  skilful  a  manner  He  formed  each  limb  in 
the  human  body,  since  there  is  none  of  them 
which  is  not  as  available  for  the  necessity  of  use 
as  for  beauty.  But  even  the  Stoics,  when  they 
discuss  the  subject  of  providence,  attempt  to  do 

'  Father's  brother. 

2  Gradus. 

3  Prophetical  writings. 

*  Book  i.  [ch.  II,  p.  22,  s/i^ra], 

5  The  title  i>  irmiovpyus,  the  Architect,  or  Creator,  is  used  by 
Plato  and  Hermes. 


this ;  and  TuUy  followed  them  in  many  places. 
But,  however,  he  briefly  treats  of  a  subject  so 
copious  and  fruitful,  which  I  now  pass  over  on 
this  account,  because  I  have  lately  written  a  par- 
ticular book  on  this  subject  to  my  disciple  De- 
metrianus.  But  I  cannot  here  omit  that  which 
some  erring  philosophers  say,  that  men  and  the 
other  animals  arose  from  the  earth  without  any 
author;  whence  that  expression  of  Virgil  :^  — 

"And  the  earth-born  '  race  of  men  raised  its  head  from 
the  hard  fields." 

And  this  opinion  is  especially  entertained  by 
those  who  deny  the  existence  of  a  div///e  provi- 
dence. For  the  Stoics  attribute  the  formation 
of  animals  to  divine  skill.  But  Aristode  freed 
himself  from  labour  and  trouble,  by  saying  that 
the  world  always  existed,  and  therefore  that  the 
human  race,  and  the  other  things  which  are  in 
it,  had  no  beginning,  but  always  had  been,  and 
always  would  be.  But  when  we  see  that  each 
animal  separately,  which  had  no  previous  exist- 
ence, begins  to  exist,  and  ceases  to  exist,  it  is 
necessary  that  the  whole  race  must  at  some  time 
have  begun  to  exist,  and  must  cease  at  some 
time  because  it  had  a  beginning. 

For  all  things  must  necessarily  be  comprised 
in  three  periods  of  time  —  the  past,  the  present, 
and  the  future.  The  commencement**  belongs 
to  the  past,  existence  to  the  present,  dissolution 
to  the  future.  And  all  these  things  are  seen  in 
the  case  of  men  individually  :  for  we  begin  when 
we  are  born  ;  and  we  exist  while  we  live  ;  and 
we  cease  when  we  die.  On  which  account  they 
would  have  it  that  there  are  three  Parcoe  :  ^  one 
who  warps  the  web  of  life  for  men ;  the  second, 
who  weaves  it ;  the  third,  who  cuts  and  finishes 
it.  But  in  the  whole  race  of  men,  because  the 
present  time  only  is  seen,  yet  from  it  the  past 
also,  that  is,  the  commencement,  and  the  future, 
that  is,  the  dissolution,  are  inferred.  For  since 
it  exists,  it  is  evident  that  at  some  time  it  began 
to  exist,  for  nothing  can  exist  without  a  begin- 
ning ;  and  because  it  had  a  beginning,  it  is  evi- 
dent that  it  will  at  some  time  have  an  end. 
For  that  cannot,  as  a  whole,  be  immortal,  which 
consists  of  mortals.  For  as  we  all  die  individ- 
ually, it  is  possible  that,  by  some  calamity,  all  may 
perish  simultaneously :  either  through  the  un- 
productiveness of  the  earth,  which  sometimes 
happens  in  particular  cases ;  or  through  the  gen- 
eral spread  of  pestilence,  which  often  desolates 
separate  cities  and  countries  ;  or  by  the  confla- 
gration of  the  world,  as  is  said  to  have  hap- 
pened in  the  case  of  l^haethon  ;  or  by  a  deluge, 
as  is  reported  in  the  time  of  Deucalion,  when 


*  (7for^.,  ii.  341.     [Terrea  progenies  diiris  caput  extulit  arvis.] 
7  Tcrrea.     Another  reading  is  ferrea,  "  the  race  of  iron." 
'  The  origin. 

9  The  fable  of  the  three  Parcse  —  Clotho,  Lachesis,  and  Atropos 
—  is  derived  from  Hesiod. 


6o 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  II. 


the  whole  race  was  destroyed  with  the  exception 
of  one  man.  And  if  this  deluge  happened  by 
chance,  it  might  assuredly  have  happened  that 
he  who  was  the  only  survivor  should  perish. 
But  if  he  was  reserved  by  the  will  of  divine 
providence,  as  it  cannot  be  denied,  to  recruit 
mankind,  it  is  evident  that  the  life  and  the  de- 
struction of  the  human  race  are  in  the  power  of 
God.  And  if  it  is  possible  for  it  to  die  altogether, 
because  it  dies  in  parts,  it  is  evident  that  it  had 
an  origin  at  some  time ;  and  as  the  liability  to 
decay '  bespeaks  a  beginning,  so  also  it  gives 
proof  of  an  end.  And  if  these  things  are  true, 
Aristotle  will  be  unable  to  maintain  that  the 
world  also  itself  had  no  beginning.  But  if  Plato 
and  Epicurus  extort  this  from  Aristotle,  yet 
Plato  and  Aristotle,  who  thought  that  the  world 
would  be  everlasting,  will,  notwithstanding  their 
eloquence,  be  deprived  of  this  also  by  Epicurus, 
because  it  follows,  that,  as  it  had  a  beginning,  it 
must  also  have  an  end.  But  we  will  speak  of 
these  things  at  greater  length  in  the  last  book. 
Now  let  us  revert  to  the  origin  of  man. 

CHAP.    Xn. THAT   ANIxMALS  WERE    NOT    PRODUCED 

SPONTANEOUSLY,  BUT  BY  A  DIVINE  ARRANGE- 
MENT, OF  WHICH  GOD  WOULD  HAVE  GIVEN  US 
THE  KNOWLEDGE,  IF  IT  WERE  ADVANTAGEOUS 
FOR   US  TO   KNOW   IT. 

They  say  that  at  certain  changes  of  the 
heaven,  and  motions  of  the  stars,  there  existed  a 
kind  of  maturity  ^  for  the  production  of  animals  ; 
and  thus  that  the  new  earth,  retaining  the  pro- 
ductive seed,  brought  forth  of  itself  certain  ves- 
sels ^  after  the  hkeness  of  wombs,  respecting 
which  Lucretius  **  says,  — 

"  Wombs  grew  attached  to  the  earth  by  roots ; " 

and  that  these,  when  they  had  become  mature, 
being  rent  by  the  compulsion  of  nature,  pro- 
duced tender  animals  ;  afterwards,  that  the  earth 
itself  abounded  with  a  kind  of  moisture  which 
resembled  milk,  and  that  animals  were  sup- 
ported by  this  nourishment.  How,  then,  were 
they  able  to  endure  or  avoid  the  force  of  the 
cold  or  of  heat,  or  to  be  born  at  all,  since  the 
sun  would  scorch  them  or  the  cold  contract 
them?  But,  they  say,  at  the  beginning  of  the 
world  there  was  no  winter  nor  summer,  but  a 
perpetual  spring  of  an  equable  temperature. 5 
Why,  then,  do  we  see  that  none  of  these  things 
now  happens  ?  Because,  they  say,  it  was  neces- 
sary that  it  should  once  happen,  that  'animals 
might  be  born;  but  after  they  began  to  exist, 
and  the  power  of  generation  was  given  to  them, 
the  earth  ceased  to  bring  forth,  and  the  condi- 

'  Frailty. 

^  Ripeness,  or  suitableness. 

3  Little  bags,  or  follicles, 

*  Book  V.  806.     [Uteri  terram  radicibus  apti.] 

^  A  perpetual  temperature  and  an  equable  spring. 


tion  of  time^  was  changed.  Oh,  how  easy  it  is 
to  refute  falsehoods  !  In  the  first  place,  nothing 
can  •  exist  in  this  world  which  does  not  con- 
tinue permanent,  as  it  began.  For  neither  were 
the  sun  and  moon  and  stars  then  uncreated ; 
nor,  having  been  created,  were  they  without 
their  motions  ;  nor  did  that  divine  government, 
which  manages  and  rules  their  courses,  fail  to 
begin  its  exercise  together  with  them.  In  the 
next  place,  if  it  is  as  they  say,  there  must  of  ne- 
cessity be  a  providence,  and  they  fall  into  that 
very  condition  which  they  especially  avoid.  For 
while  the  animals  were  yet  unborn,  it  is  plain 
that  some  one  provided  that  they  should  be 
born,  that  the  world  might  not  appear  gloomy  7 
with  waste  and  desolation.  But,  that  they  might 
be  produced  from  the  earth  without  the  office  of 
parents,  provision  must  have  been  made  with 
great  judgment ;  and  in  the  next  place,  that  the 
moisture  condensed  from  the  earth  might  be 
formed  into  the  various  figures  of  bodies ;  and 
also  that,  having  received  from  the  vessels  with 
which  they  were  covered  the  power  of  life  and 
sensation,  they  might  be  poured  forth,  as  it 
were,  from  the  womb  of  mothers,  is  a  wonder- 
ful and  indescribable  ^  provision.  But  let  us 
suppose  that  this  also  happened  by  chance  ;  the 
circumstances  which  follow  assuredly  cannot  be 
by  chance,  —  that  the  earth  should  at  once  flow 
with  milk,  and  that  the  temperature  of  the  at- 
mosphere should  be  equable.  Aiid  if  these 
things  plainly  happened,  that  the  newly  born 
animals  might  have  nourishment,  or  be  free  from 
danger,  it  must  be  that  some  one  provided  these 
things  by  some  divine  counsel. 

But  who  is  able  to  make  this  provision  except 
God  ?  Let  us,  however,  see  whether  the  circum- 
stance itself  which  they  assert  could  have  taken 
place,  that  men  should  be  born  from  the  earth. 
If  any  one  considers  during  how  long  a  time  and 
in  what  manner  an  infant  is  reared,  he  will  as- 
suredly understand  that  those  earth-born  children 
could  not  possibly  have  been  reared  without  some 
one  to  bring  them  up.  For  they  must  have  lain 
for  many  months  cast  forth,  until  their  sinews 
were  strengthened,  so  that  they  had  power  to 
move  themselves  and  to  change  their  place,  which 
can  scarcely  happen  within  the  space  of  one  year. 
Now  see  whether  an  infant  could  have  lain 
through  many  months  in  the  same  manner  and 
in  the  same  place  where  it  was  cast  forth,  without 
dying,  overwhelmed  and  corrupted  by  that  moist- 
ure of  the  earth  which  it  supplied  for  the  sake  of 
nourishment,  and  by  the  excrements  of  its  own 
body  mixed  together.  Therefore  it  is  impossible 
but  that  it  was  reared  by  some  one  ;  unless,  in- 
deed, all  animals  are  born  not  in  a  tender  con- 


6  The  seasons  were  varied. 

7  Be  rough. 

^  Inextricabilis  that  cannot  be  disentangled. 


Chap.  XIII.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


6i 


dition,  but  grown  up  :  and  it  never  came  into 
their  niind  to  say  this.  Therefore  the  whole  of 
that  method  is  impossible  and  vain ;  if  that  can 
be  called  method  by  which  it  is  attempted  that 
there  shall  be  no  method.  For  he  who  says  that 
all  things  are  produced  of  their  own  accord,  and 
attributes  nothing  to  divine  providence,  he  as- 
suredly does  not  assert,  but  overthrows  method. 
But  if  nothing  can  be  done  or  produced  without 
design,  it  is  plain  that  there  is  a  divine  providence, 
to  which  that  which  is  called  design  peculiarly 
belongs.  Therefore  God,  the  Contriver  of  all 
things,  made  man.  And  even  Cicero,  though  ig- 
norant of  the  sacred  writings,  saw  this,  who  in  his 
treatise  on  the  Laws,  in  the  first  book,'  handed 
down  the  same  thing  as  the  prophets  ;  and  I 
add  his  words  :  "  This  animal,  foreseeing,  saga- 
cious, various,  acute,  gifted  with  memory,  full  of 
method  and  design,  which  we  call  man,  was  pro-  j 
duced  by  the  supreme  Deity  under  remarkable  i 
circumstances  ;  for  this  alone  of  so  many  kinds 
and  natures  of  animals,  partakes  of  judgment  and  \ 
reflection,  when  all  other  animals  are  destitute 
of  them."  Do  you  see  that  the  man,  although 
far  removed  from  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  yet, 
inasmuch  as  he  held  the  image  of  wisdom,  under- 
stood that  man  could  not  be  produced  except  by 
God?  But,  however,  there  is  need  of  divine^ 
testimony,  lest  that  of  man  should  be  insuffi- 
cient. The  Sibvl  testifies  that  man  is  the  work  of 
God:  — 

"  He  who  is  the  only  God  being  the  invincible  Creator, 
He  Himself  fixed'  the  figure  of  the  form  of  men, 
He  Himself  mixed  the  nature  of  all  belonging  to 
the  generation  of  life." 

The  sacred  writings  contain  statements  to  the 
same  effect.  Therefore  God  discharged  the  office 
of  a  true  father.  He  Himself  formed  the  body  ; 
He  Himself  infused  the  soul  with  which  we 
breathe.  Whatever  we  are,  it  is  altogether  His 
work.  In  what  manner  He  effected  this  He 
would  have  taught  us,  if  it  were  right  for  us  to 
know  ;  as  He  taught  us  other  things,  which  have 
conveyed  to  us  the  knowledge  both  of  ancient 
error  and  of  true  light. 

CHAP.  XIII.  —  WHY  MAN  IS  OF  TWO  SEXES  ;  WHAT 
IS  HIS  FIRST  DEATH,  AND  WHAT  THE  SECOND  ; 
AND  OF  THE  FAULT  AND  PUNISHMENT  OF  OUR 
FIRST   PARENTS. 

When,  therefore.  He  had  first  formed  the  male 
after  His  own  likeness,  then  He  also  fashioned 
woman  after  the  image  of  the  man  himself,  that 
the  two  by  their  union  might  be  able  to  perpet- 
uate their  race,  and  to  fill  the  whole  earth  with  a 
multitude.     But  in  the  making  of  man  himself 


He  concluded  and  completed  the  nature  of  those 
two  materials  which  we  have  spoken  of  as  con- 
trary to  each  other,  fire  and  water.  For  having 
made  the  body.  He  breathed  into  it  a  soul  from 
the  vital  source  of  His  own  Spirit,  which  is  ever- 
lasting, that  it  might  bear  the  similitude  of  the 
world  itself,  which  is  composed  of  opposing  ele- 
ments. For  he  ^  consists  of  soul  and  body,  that 
is,  as  it  were,  of  heaven  and  earth  :  since  the 
soul  by  which  we  live,  has  its  origin,  as  it  were, 
out  of  heaven  from  God,  the  body  out  of  the 
earth,  of  the  dust  of  which  we  have  said  that  it 
was  formed.  Empedocles — whom  you  cannot 
tell  whether  to  reckon  among  poets  or  philoso- 
phers, for  he  wrote  in  verse  respecting  the  nature 
of  things,  as  did  Lucretius  and  Varro  among  the 
Romans  —  determined  that  there  were  four  ele- 
ments, that  is,  fire,  air,  water,  and  earth  ;  perhaps 
following  Trismegistus,  who  said  that  our  bodies 
were  composed  of  these  four  elements  by  God, 
for  /le  said  that  they  contained  in  themselves 
something  of  fire,  something  of  air,  something 
of  water,  and  something  of  earth,  and  yet  that 
they  were  neither  fire,  nor  air,  nor  water,  nor 
earth.  And  these  things  indeed  are  not  false  ; 
for  the  nature  of  earth  is  contained  in  the  flesh, 
that  of  moisture  in  the  blood,  that  of  air  in  the 
breath,  that  of  fire  in  the  vital  heat.  But  neither 
can  the  blood  be  separated  from  the  body,  as 
moisture  is  from  the  earth ;  nor  the  vital  heat 
from  the  breath,  as  fire  from  the  air  :  so  that  of 
all  things  only  two  elements  are  found,  the  whole 
nature  of  which  is  included  in  the  formation  of 
our  body.  Man,  therefore,  was  made  from  dif- 
ferent and  opposite  substances,  as  the  world  itself 
was  made  from  light  and  darkness,  from  life  and 
death  ;  and  he  has  admonished  us  that  these  two 
things  contend  against  each  other  in  man  :  so 
that  if  the  soul,  which  has  its  origin  from  God, 
gains  the  mastery,  it  is  immortal,  and  lives  in  per- 
petual light ;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  body  shall 
overpower  the  soul,  and  subject  it  to  its  domin- 
ion, it  is  in  everlasting  darkness  and  death. s  And 
the  force  of  this  is  not  that  it  altogether  annihi- 
lates^ the  souls  of  the  unrighteous,  but  subjects 
th^m  to  everlasting  punishment. ^ 

We  term  that  punishment  the  second  death, 
which  is  itself  also  perpetual,  as  also  is  immor- 
tality. We  thus  define  the  first  death  :  Death 
is  the  dissolution  of  the  nature  of  living  beings  ; 
or  thus  :  Death  is  the  separation  of  body  and 


'  [De  Legibus,  book  i.  cap.  7.] 

2  That  is,  according  to  the  notions  of  the  heathen. 

3  Made  fast,  established. 


••  I.e.,  man. 

5  It  was  necessary  to  remove  ambiguity  from  the  heathen,  to  whom 
the  word  death  conveys  no  such  meaning.  In  the  sacred  writings  the 
departure  of  the  soul  from  the  body  is  often  spoken  of  as  sleep,  or 
rest.  Thus  Lazarus  is  .said  to  sleep,  i  Thcss.  iv.  14,  "Ihem  that 
sleep  in  Jesus  will  God  bring  with  Him,"  — an  expression  of  great 
beauty  and  propriety  as  applied  to  Christians.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  prophets  speak  of  "  the  shadow  of  death." 

<>  Extinguishes.  Compare  the  words  of  Christ  Himself,  John  v. 
29;  Acts  xxiv.  15.  ,     ,     . .    . 

^  [Must  not  be  overlooked.  See  vol.  iv.  p.  495,  and  elucidation 
(after  book,  iv.)  on  p.  542.] 


62 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  II. 


soul.  But  we  thus  define  the  second  death  : 
Death  is  the  suffering  of  eternal  pain  ;  or  thus  : 
Death  is  the  condemnation  of  souls  for  their 
deserts  to  eternal  punishments.  This  does  not 
extend  to  the  dumb  cattle,  whose  spirits,  not 
being  composed  of  God, '  but  of  the  common 
air,  are  dissolved  by  death.  Therefore  in  this 
union  of  heaven  and  earth,  the.  image  of  which 
is  developed  ^  in  man,  those  things  which  belong 
to  God  occupy  the  higher  part,  namely  the  soul, 
which  has  dominion  over  the  body ;  but  those 
which  belong  to  the  devil  occupy  the  lower  ^  part, 
manifestly  the  body :  for  this,  being  earthly, 
ought  to  be  subject  to  the  soul,  as  the  earth  is 
to  heaven.  For  it  is,  as  it  were,  a  vessel  which 
this  heavenly  spirit  may  employ  as  a  temporary 
dwelling.  The  duties  of  both  are  —  for  the  lat- 
ter, which  is  from  heaven  and  from  God,  to 
command  ;  but  for  the  former,  which  is  from 
the  earth  and  the  devil,  to  obey.  And  this,  in- 
deed, did  not  escape  the  notice  of  a  dissolute 
man,  Sallust,  •♦  who  says  :  "  But  all  our  power 
consists  in  the  soul  and  body  ;  we  use  the  soul 
to  command,  the  body  rather  to  obey."  It  had 
been  well  if  he  had  lived  in  accordance  with  his 
words  ;  for  he  was  a  slave  to  the  most  degrading 
pleasures,  and  he  destroyed  the  efficacy  of  his 
sentiment  by  the  depravity  of  his  life.  But  if 
the  soul  is  fire,  as  we  have  shown,  it  ought  to 
mount  up  to  heaven  as  fire,  that  it  may  not  be 
extinguished;  that  is,  it  ought  to  rise  to  the  im- 
mortality which  is  in  heaven.  And  as  fire  can- 
not burn  and  be  kept  alive  unless  it  be  nourished  s 
by  some  rich  fuel  ^  in  which  it  may  have  suste- 
nance, so  the  fuel  and  food  of  the  soul  is  right- 
eousness alone,  by  which  it  is  nourished  unto 
life.  After  these  things,  God,  having  made  man 
in  the  manner  in  which  I  have  pointed  out,  placed 
him  in  paradise,^  that  is,  in  a  most  fruitful  and 
pleasant  garden,  which  He  planted  in  the  regions 
of  the  East  with  every  kind  of  wood  and  tree, 
that  he  might  be  nourished  by  their  various  fruits  ; 
and  being  free  from  all  labours,"^  might  devote 
himself  entirely  to  the  service  of  God  his  Father. 
Then  He  gave  to  him  fixed  commands,  by  the 
observance  of  which  he  might  continue  imnjor- 
tal ;  or  if  he  transgressed  them,  be  punished  with 
death.     It  was  enjoined  that  he  should  not  taste 


'  [Eccles.  iii.  18-21.     Answered,  Eccles.  xii.  7.] 

*  Portrayed  or  expressed. 

3  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  Lactantius,  following  the  error  of 
Marcion,  believed  that  the  body  of  man  had  been  formed  by  the  devil, 
for  he  has  already  described  its  creation  by  God.  He  rather  speaks 
of  the  devil  as  exercising  a  power  permitted  to  him  over  the  earth  and 
the  bodies  of  men.     Compare  2  Cor.  iv.  4. 

<  Preface  to  Catiline. 

S  The  word  tefico  is  used  in  this  sense  by  Cicero  {Dc  Nat.  Dear., 
II.  54) :  "  Tribus  rebus  animantium  vita  tenetur,  cibo,  potione,  spiritu." 

°  Material. 

7  Gen.  ii. 

^  We  are  not  to  understand  this  as  asserting  that  the  man  lived  in 
idleness,  and  without  any  employment  in  paradise;  for  this  would  be 
inconsistent  with  the  Scripture  narrative,  which  tells  us  that  Adam 
was  placed  there  to  keep  the  garden  and  dress  it.  It  is  intended  to 
exclude  painful  and  anxious  labour,  which  is  the  punishment  of  sin. 
See  Gen.  iii.  17. 


of  one  tree  only  which  was  in  the  midst  of  the 
garden,^  in  which  He  had  placed  the  knowledge 
of  good  and  evil.  Then  the  accuser,  envying 
the  works  of  God,  applied  all  his  deceits  and 
artifices  to  beguile  '°  the  man,  that  he  might  de- 
prive him  of  immortality.  And  first  he  enticed 
the  woman  by  fraud  to  take  the  forbidden  fruit, 
and  through  her  instrumentality  he  also  per- 
suaded the  man  himself  to  transgress  the  law  of 
God.  Therefore,  having  obtained  the  knowledge 
of  good  and  evil,  he  began  to  be  ashamed  of  his 
nakedness,  and  hid  himself  from  the  face  of 
God,  which  he  was  not  before  accustomed  to  do. 
Then  God  drove  out  the  man  from  the  garden, 
having  passed  sentence  upon  the  sinner,  that  he 
might  seek  support  for  himself  by  labour.  And 
He  surrounded"  the  garden  itself  with  fire,  to 
prevent  the  approach  of  the  man  until  He  exe- 
cute the  last  judgment  on  earth ;  and  having 
removed  death,  recall  righteous  men,  His  wor- 
shippers, to  the  same  place  ;  as  the  sacred  writers 
teach,  and  the  Erythraean  Sibyl,  when  she  says  : 
"  But  they  who  honour  the  true  God  inherit 
everlasting  life,  themselves  inhabiting  together 
paradise,  the  beautiful  garden,  for  ever."  But 
since  these  are  the  last  things,'-  we  will  treat  of 
them  in  the  last  part  of  this  work.  Now  let  us 
explain  those  which  are  first.  Death  therefore 
followed  man,  according  to  the  sentence  of  God, 
which  even  the  Sibyl  teaches  in  her  verse,  say- 
ing :  "  Man  made  by  the  very  hands  of  God, 
whom  the  serpent  treacherously  beguiled  that  he 
might  come  to  the  fate  of  death,  and  receive  the 
knowledge  of  good  and  evil."  Thus  the  life  of 
man  became  limited  in  duration ;  '^  but  still, 
however,  long,  inasmuch  as  it  was  extended  to  a 
thousand  '■♦  years.  And  when  Varro  was  not  igno- 
rant of  this,  handed  down  as  it  is  in  the  sacred 
writings,  and  spread  abroad  by  the  knowledge 
of  all,  he  endeavoured  to  give  reasons  why  the 
ancients  were  supposed  to  have  lived  a  thousand 
years.  For  he  says  that  among  the  Egyptians 
months  are  accounted  '5  as  years  :  so  that  the 
circuit  of  the  sun  through  the  twelve  signs  of 
the  zodiac  does  not  make  a  year,  but  the  moon, 
which  traverses  that  sign-bearing  circle  in  the 
space  of  thirty  days ;  which  argument  is  mani- 
festly false.  For  no  one  then  exceeded  the 
thousandth  year.  But  now  they  who  attain  to 
the  hundredth  year,  which  frequently  happens, 


9  Paradise. 

'0  Another  reading  is,  ad  dejiciendum  hominem,  "  to  overthrow 
the  man." 

"  Circumvallavit,  "placed  a  barrier  round."  See  Gen.  iii.  24: 
"  He  placed  at  the  east  of  the  garden  of  Eden  cherubims,  and  a  flammg 
sword,  which  turned  every  way,  to  keep  the  way  of  the  tree  of  life." 

'2  [Not  novissima,  but  extrema  here.  He  refers  to  book  vii. 
cap.  II,  etc. J 

'i  Temporary.     The  word  is  opposed  to  everlasting. 

'*  No  one  actually  lived  a  thousand  years.  They  who  approached 
nearest  to  it  were  Methuselah,  who  lived  969  years,  Jared  962,  and 
Noah  950. 

■s  It  appears  that  the  practice  of  the  Egyptians  varied  as  to  the 
computation  of  the  year. 


Chap.  XIV.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


63 


undoubtedly  live  a  thousand  and  two  hundred 
months.  And  competent '  authorities  report  that 
men  are  accustomed  to  reach  one  hundred  and 
twenty  years."  But  because  Varro  did  not  know 
why  or  when  the  life  of  man  was  shortened,  he 
himself  shortened  it,  since  he  knew  that  it  was 
possible  for  man  to  live  a  thousand  and  four 
hundred  months. 

CHAP.    XIV. OF     NOAH    THE    INVENTOR    OF   WINE, 

WHO     FIRST     HAD     KNOWLEDGE    OF    THE     STARS, 
AND    OF   THE    ORIGIN    OF    FALSE    RELIGIONS. 

But  afterwards  God,  when  He  saw  the  earth 
filled  with  wickedness  and  crimes,  determined  to 
destroy  mankind  with  a  deluge ;  but,  however, 
for  renewing  the  multitude.  He  chose  one  man, 
who,3  when  all  were  corrupted,  stood  forth  pre- 
eminent, as  a  remarkable  example  of  righteous- 
ness. He,  when  six  hundred  years  old,  built  an 
ark,  as  God  had  commanded  him,  in  which  he 
himself  was  saved,  together  with  his  wife  and 
three  sons,  and*  as  many  daughters-in-law,  when 
the  water  had  covered  all  the  loftiest  mountains. 
Then  when  the  earth  was  dry,  God,  execrating 
the  wickedness  of  the  former  age,  that  the  length 
of  life  might  not  again  be  a  cause  of  meditating 
evils,  gradually  diminished  the  age  of  man  by 
each  successive  generation,  and  placed  a  limit 
at  a  hundred  and  twenty  years,'*  which  it  might 
not  be  permitted  to  exceed.  But  he,  when  he 
went  forth  from  the  ark,  as  the  sacred  writings 
inform  us,  diligently  cultivated  the  earth,  and 
planted  a  vineyard  with  his  own  hand.  From 
which  circumstance  they  are  refuted  who  regard 
Bacchus  as  the  author  of  wine.  For  he  not  only 
preceded  Bacchus,  but  also  Saturn  and  Uranus, 
by  many  generations.  And  when  he  had  first 
taken  the  fruit  from  the  vineyard,  having  become 
merry,  he  drank  even  to  intoxication,  and  lay 
naked.  And  when  one  of  his  sons,  whose  name 
was  Cham, 5  had  seen  this,  he  did  not  cover  his 
father's  nakedness,  but  went  out  and  told  the  cir- 
cumstance to  his  brothers  also.  But  they,  having 
taken  a  garment,  entered  with  their  faces  turned 
backwards,  and  covered  their  father.*^  And  when 
their  father  became  aware  of  what  had  been  done, 
he  disowned  and  sent  away  his  son.  But  he 
went  into  exile,  and  settled  in  a  part  of  that  land 
which  is  now  called  Arabia ;  and  that  land  was 


'  Philo  and  Josephus. 

2  ["  Old  Parr,"  born  in  Shropshire,  a.d.  1483,  died  in  1635;  i.e., 
born  before  the  discovery  of  America,  he  lived  to  the  beginning  of 
Hampden's  career  in  England.] 

3  The  reading  is  quod,  which  in  construction  refers  not  to  the 
preceding,  but  to  the  following  substantive.  Qui  has  been  suggested 
as  a  preferable  reading. 

*  Lactantius  understands  the  hundred  and  twenty  years  (men- 
tioned Gen.  vi.  3)  as  the  limit  of  human  life,  and  regards  it  as  a  mark 
of  severity  on  God's  part.  But  Chrysostom,  Jerome,  ."Augustine,  and 
most  commentators,  regard  it  rather  as  a  sign  of  God's  patience  and 
long-suffering,  in  giving  them  that  space  for  repentance.  And  this 
appears  to  be  confirmed  by  the  Apostle  Peter,  i  Ep.  iii  20,  "When 
once  the  long-suffering  of  God  waited  in  the  days  of^  Noah,  while  the 
ark  was  a  preparing." 

i  Ham. 

*  Gen.  ix.  23. 


called  from  him  Chanaan,  and  his  posterity 
Chanaanites.  This  was  the  first  nation  which 
was  ignorant  of  God,  since  its  prince  and  founder 
did  not  receive  from  his  father  the  worship  of 
God,  being  cursed  by  him  ;  ^  and  thus  he  left  to 
his  descendants  ignorance  of  the  divine  nature.^ 
From  this  nation  all  the  nearest  people  flowed 
as  the  multitude  increased.  But  the  descendants 
of  his  father  were  called  Hebrews,  among  whom 
the  religion  of  the  true  God  was  established.^ 
But  from  these  also  in  after  times,  when  their 
number  was  multiplied  exceedingly,  since  the 
small  extent  of  their  settlements  could  not  con- 
1:ain  them,  then  young  men,  either  sent  by  their 
parents  or  of  their  own  accord,  by  the  compul- 
sion of  poverty,  leaving  their  own  lands  to  seek 
for  themselves  new  settlements,  were  scattered 
in  all  directions,  and  filled  all  the  islands  and 
the  whole  earth ;  and  thus  being  torn  away  from 
the  stem  of  their  sacred  root,  they  established 
for  themselves  at  their  own  discretion  new  cus- 
toms and  institutions.  But  they  who  occupied 
Egypt  were  the  first  of  all  who  began  to  look  up 
to  and  adore  the  heavenly  bodies.  And  because 
they  did  not  shelter  themselves  in  houses  on  ac- 
count of  the  quality  of  the  atmosphere,  and  the 
heaven  is  not  overspread  with  any  clouds  in  that 
country,  they  observed  the  courses  of  the  stars, 
and  their  obscurations, '°  while  in  their  frequent 
adorations  they  more  carefully  and  freely  beheld 
them.  Then  afterwards,  induced  by  certain 
prodigies,  they  invented  monstrous  figures  of 
animals,  that  they  might  worship  them ;  the 
authors  of  which  we  will  presently  disclose. 
But  the  others,  who  were  scattered  over  the 
earth,  admiring  the  elements  of  the  world,  began 
to  worship  the  heaven,  the  sun,  the  earth,  the 
sea,  without  any  images  and  temples,  and  offered 
sacrifices  to  them  in  the  open  air,  until  in  pro- 
cess of  time  they  erected  temples  and  statues 
to  the  most  powerfiil  kings,  and  originated  the 
practice  of  honouring  them  with  victims  and 
odours ;  and  thus  wandering  from  the  knowledge 
of  God,  they  began  to  be  heathens.  They  err, 
therefore,  who  contend  that  the  worshij)  of  the 
gods  was  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  and 
that  heathenism  was  prior  to  the  religion  of  God  : 
for  they  think  that  this  was  discovered  after- 
wards, because  they  are  ignorant  of  the  source 
and  origin  of  the  truth.  Now  let  us  return  to 
the  beginning  of  the  world. 


7  This  refers  to  that  prophetic  denunciation  of  divine  judgment  on 
the  impiety  of  Ham,  which  Noah,  by  the  suggestion  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  uttered  against  the  posterity  of  the  profane  man.  Gen.  ix.  25: 
"  Cursed  be  Canaan."  The  curse  was  not  uttered  in  a  spirit  of  ven- 
geance or  impatience  on  account  of  the  injiirj'  received,  but  by  the 
proplietic  impulse  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  Ilhe  prophet  fi.ves  on  the 
descendant  of  Ham,  whose  impiety  was  foreseen,  and  to  whom  it 
brought  a  curse  so  signal.] 

»  [Our  author  falls  into  a  hvstcroii-protcron:  the  curse  did  not 
work  the  ignorance,  but  wilful  ignorance  and  idolatry  wrought  the 
curse,  which  was  merely  foretold,  not  fore-ordained.] 

9  Resedit. 

'°  Eclipses. 


64 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  II. 


CHAP.  XV,  —  OF  THE   CORRUPTION   OF  ANGELS,  AND 
THE    TWO    KINDS    OF    DEMONS. 

When,  therefore,  the  number  of  men  had 
begun  to  increase,  God  in  His  forethought,  lest 
the  devil,  to  whom  from  the  beginning  He  had 
given  power  over  the  earth,  should  by  his  sub- 
tilty  either  corrupt  or  destroy  men,  as  he  had 
done  at  first,  sent  angels  for  the  protection  and 
improvement '  of  the  human  race ;  and  inas- 
much as  He  had  given  these  a  free  will.  He 
enjoined  them  above  all  things  not  to  defile 
themselves  with  contamination  from  the  earth, 
and  thus  lose  the  dignity  of  their  heavenl); 
nature.-  He  plainly  prohibited  them  from 
doing  that  which  He  knew  that  they  would  do, 
that  they  might  entertain  no  hope  of  pardon. 
Therefore,  while  they  abode  among  men,  that 
most  deceitful  ruler  ^  of  the  earth,  by  his  very 
association,  gradually  enticed  them  to  vices, 
and  polluted  them  by  intercourse  with  women. 
Then,  not  being  admitted  into  heaven  on  ac- 
count of  the  sins  into  which  they  had  plunged 
themselves,  they  fell  to  the  earth.  Thus  from 
angels  the  devil  makes  them  to  become  his  sat- 
ellites and  attendants.  But  they  who  were  born 
from  these,  because  they  were  neither  angels  nor 
men,  but  bearing  a  kind  of  mixed  •»  nature,  were 
not  admitted  into  hell,  as  their  fathers  were  not 
into  heaven.  Thus  there  came  to  be  two  kinds 
of  demons ;  one  of  heaven,  the  other  of  the 
earth.  The  latter  are  the  wicked  s  spirits,  the 
authors  of  all  the  evils  which  are  done,  and 
the  same  devil  is  their  prince.  Whence  Trisme- 
gistus  calls  him  the  ruler  of  the  demons.  But 
grammarians  say  that  they  are  called  demons,  as 
though  dcemones^  that  is,  skilled  and  acquainted 
with  matters  :  for  they  think  that  these  are  gods. 
They  are  acquainted,  indeed,  with  many  future 
events,  but  not  all,  since  it  is  not  permitted  them 
entirely  to  know  the  counsel  of  God  ;  and  there- 
fore they  are  accustomed  to  accommodate  ?  their 
answers  to  ambiguous  results.  The  poets  both 
know  them  to  be  demons,  and  so  describe  them. 
Hesiod  thus  speaks  :  — 

"These  are  the  demons  according  to  the  will  of  Zeus, 
Good,  living  on  the  earth,  the  guardians  of  mortal 
men." 

And  this  is  said  for  this  purpose,  because  God 
had  sent  them  as  guardians  to  the  human  race  ; 
but  they  themselves  also,  though  they  are  the 
destroyers  of  men,  yet  wish  themselves  to  ap- 

*  Cultum. 

*  Substantiae,  "  essence." 

3  See  2  Cor.  iv.  4,  "  the  god  of  this  world." 
<  Middle. 

5  Unclean. 

6  6o))nove?.  Other  derivations  have  been  proposed;  but  the 
word  probably  comes  from  hai.ui  "  to  distribute  destinies."  Plato  ap- 
proves of  the  etymology  given  by  Lactantius;  for  he  says  that  good 
men,  distinguished  by  great  honours,  after  their  death  became  demons, 
in  accordance  with  this  title  of  prudence  and  wisdom.  [See  the  whole 
subject  in  Lewis'  Plato,  etc.,  p.  347  ] 

'  To  combine,  qualify,  or  temperate. 


pear  as  their  guardians,  that  they  themselves 
may  be  worshipped,  and  God  may  not  be 
worshipped.  The  philosophers  also  discuss  the 
subject  of  these  beings.  For  Plato  attempted 
even  to  explain  their  natures  in  his  "  Banquet ;  " 
and  Socrates  said  that  there  was  a  demon  con- 
tinually about  him,  who  had  become  attached 
to  him  when  a  boy,  by  whose  will  and  direction 
his  life  was  guided.  The  art  also  and  power  of 
the  Magi  altogether  consists  in  the  influences  ^ 
of  these ;  invoked  by  whom  they  deceive  the 
sight  of  men  with  deceptive  illusions,^  so  that 
they  do  not  see  those  things  which  exist,  and 
think  that  they  see  those  things  which  do  not 
exist.  These  contaminated  and  abandoned 
spirits,  as  I  say,  wander  over  the  whole  earth, 
and  contrive  a  solace  for  their  own  perdition  by 
the  destruction  of  men.  Therefore  they  fill 
every  place  with  snares,  deceits,  frauds,  and 
errors ;  for  they  cling  to  individuals,  and  occupy 
whole  houses  from  door  to  door,  and  assume  to 
themselves  the  name  o^  genii ;  for  by  this  word 
they  translate  demons  in  the  Latin  language. 
They  consecrate  these  in  their  houses,  to  these 
they  daily  pour  out '°  libations  of  wine,  and  wor- 
ship the  wise  demons  as  gods  of  the  earth,  and 
as  averters  of  those  evils  which  they  themselves 
cause  and  impose.  And  these,  since  spirits  are 
without  substance  "  and  not  to  be  grasped,  insin- 
uate themselves  into  the  bodies  of  men ;  and 
secretly  working  in  their  inward  parts,  they  cor- 
rupt the  health,  hasten  diseases,  terrify  their  souls 
with  dreams,  harass  their  minds  with  phrenzies, 
that  by  these  evils  they  may  compel  men  to  have 
recourse  to  their  aid. 

CHAP.    XVI. THAT   DEMONS  HAVE  NO  POWER  OVER 

THOSE    WHO    ARE    ESTABLISHED    IN   THE    FAITH. 

And  the  nature  of  all  these  deceits  '^  is  obscure 
to  those  who  are  without  the  truth.  For  they 
think  that  those  demons  profit  them  when  they 
cease  to  injure,  whereas  they  have  no  power  ex- 
cept to  injure. '^  Some  one  may  perchance  say 
that  they  are  therefore  to  be  worshipped,  that 
they  may  not  injure,  since  they  have  the  power 
to  injure.  They  do  indeed  injure,  but  those  only 
by  whom  they  are  feared,  whom  the  powerful  and 
lofty  hand  of  God  does  not  protect,  who  are  un- 


8  Aspirations. 

9  BUnding  trie 
'°  They  lavish. 


9  BUnding  tricksjuggleries 
0  They  lavish.     Tl 
ality. 


he  word  implies  a  profuse  and  excessive  liber- 


'J  Thin,  unsubstantial,  as  opposed  to  corporeal.  The  ancients 
inclined  to  the  opinion  that  angels  had  a  body,  not  like  that  of  man, 
but  of  a  slight  and  more  subtle  nature.  Probably  Lactantius  refers 
to  this  idea  in  using  the  word  tenuis.  How  oppo.sed  this  view  is  to 
Scripture  is  manifest.  [Not  so  jnani/cst  as  our  translator  supposes. 
I  do  not  assert  what  Lactantius  says  to  be  scripturally  correct:  but 
it  certainly  is  not  opposed  to  many  facts  as  Scripture  stales  them; 
whether  figuratively  or  otherwise,  I  do  not  venture  a  suggestion.] 

"  Augustine  gives  an  account  of  these  deceits,  De  Civil.  Dei,  ix. 
18. 

'3  Thus  the  ancient  Romans  worshipped  Fever,  Fear,  etc.,  to  avoid 
injury  from  them. 


Chap.  XVII.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


65 


initiated  in- the  mystery  '  of  truth.  But  they  fear 
the  righteous,^  that  is,  the  worshippers  of  God, 
adjured  by  whose  name  they  depart  ^  from  the 
bodies  of  the  possessed :  for,  being  lashed  by  their 
wor^s  as  though  by  scourges,  they  not  only  con- 
fess themselves  to  be  demons,  but  even  utter 
their  own  names  —  those  which  are  adored  in 
the  temples  —  which  they  generally  do  in  the 
presence  of  their  own  worshippers  ;  not,  it  is 
plain,  to  the  disgrace  of  religion,  but  •♦  to  the  dis- 
grace of  their  own  honour,  because  they  cannot 
speak  falsely  to  God,  by  whom  they  are  adjured, 
nor  to  the  righteous,  by  whose  voice  they  are 
tortured.  Therefore  ofttimes  having  uttered  the 
greatest  bowlings,  they  cry  out  that  they  are 
beaten,  and  are  on  fire,  and  that  they  are  just 
on  the  point  of  coming  forth  :  so  much  power 
has  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  righteousness  ! 
Whom,  therefore,  can  they  injure,  except  those 
whom  they  have  in  their  own  power?  In  short, 
Hermes  affirms  that  those  who  have  known  God 
are  not  only  safe  from  the  attacks  of  demons, 
but  that  they  are  not  even  bound  by  fate.  "  The 
only  protection,"  he  says,  "  is  piety,  for  over  a 
pious  man  neither  evil  demon  nor  fate  has  any 
power :  for  God  rescues  the  pious  man  from  all 
evil ;  for  the  one  and  only  good  thing  among 
men  is  piety."  And  what  piety  is,  he  testifies  in 
another  place,  in  these  words  :  "  For  piety  is  the 
knowledge  of  God."  Asclepius  also,  his  disciple, 
more  fully  expressed  the  same  sentiment  in  that 
finished  discourse  which  he  wrote  to  the  king. 
Each  of  them,  in  truth,  affirms  that  the  demons 
are  the  enemies  and  harassers  of  men,  and  on 
this  account  Trismegistus  calls  them  wicked 
angels  ;  so  far  was  he  from  being  ignorant  that 
from  heavenly  beings  they  were  corrupted,  and 
began  to  be  earthly. 

CHAP.  XVII. THAT   ASTROLOGY,  SOOTHSAYING,  AND 

SIMILAR   ARTS    ARE   THE    INVENTION    OF    DEMONS. 

These  were  the  inventors  of  astrology,  and 
soothsaying,  and  divination,  and  those  produc- 
tions which  are  called  oracles,  and  necromancy, 
and  the  art  of  magic,  and  whatever  evil  practices 
besides  these  men  exercise,  either  openly  or  in 
secret.  Now  all  these  things  are  false  of  them- 
selves, as  the  Erythraean  Sibyl  testifies  :  — 

"  Since  all  these  things  are  erroneous, 

'    Which  foolish  men  search  after  day  by  clay." 


'  Sacramento. 

•  See  Acts  of  Apostles  xvi.  18,  and  xix.  15,  16.  In  the  Gospels 
the  demons  say  to  Jesus,  "Art  Thou  come  to  torment  us  before  the 
time?"     [Suggestive  of  2  Pet.  ii.  4.] 

3  The  practice  of  exorcism  was  used  in  the  early  ages  of  the 
Church,  and  the  faithful  were  supposed  to  possess  power  over  demons. 
See  book  iv.  ch.  27.  Justin,  Tertullian,  and  other  writers  attest  the 
same.  There  were  also  exorcists  in  the  Jewish  synagogues.  Sec  Acts 
xix.  13. 

<  Sed.  Other  editions  read  et ;  but  the  one  adopted  in  the  text 
brings  out  the  meaning  more  distinctly  by  contrast  =  they  did  not  dis- 
grace religion,  but  their  own  honour. 


But  these  same  authorities  by  their  countenance  s 
cause  it  to  be  believed  that  they  are  true.  Thus 
they  delude  the  credulity  of  men  by  lying  divi- 
nation, because  it  is  not  expedient  for  them  to  lay  ' 
open  the  truth.  These  are  they  who  taught  men 
to  make  images  and  statues ;  who,  in  order  that 
they  might  turn  away  the  minds  of  men  from  the 
worship  of  the  true  God,  cause  the  countenances 
of  dead  kings,  fashioned  and  adorned  with  ex- 
quisite beauty,  to  be  erected  and  consecrated, 
and  assumed  to  themselves  their  names,  as 
though  tJiey  were  assuming  some  characters. 
But  the  magicians,  and  those  whom  the  people 
truly  call  enchanters,''  when  they  practise  their 
detestable  arts,  call  upon  them  by  their  true 
names,  those  heavenly  names  which  ar?  read  in 
the  sacred  writings.  Moreover,  these  impure 
and  wandering  spirits,  that  they  may  throw  all 
things  into  confusion,  and  overspread  the  minds 
of  men  with  errors,  interweave  and  mingle  false 
things  with  true.  For  they  themselves  leigned 
that  there  are  many  heavenly  beings,  and  one 
king  of  all,  Jupiter ;  because  there  are  many 
spirits  of  angels  in  heaven,  and  one  Parent  and 
Lord  of  all,  God.  But  they  have  concealed  the 
truth  under  false  names,  and  withdrawn  it  from 
sight. 

For  God,  as  I  have  shown  in  the  beginning,? 
does  not  need  a  name,  since  He  is  alone ;  nor 
do  the  angels,  inasmuch  as  they  are  innnortal, 
either  suffer  or  wish  themselves  to  be  called  gods  : 
for  their  one  and  only  duty  is  to  submit  to  the 
will  of  God,  and  not  to  do  anything  at  all  ex- 
cept at  His  command.  For  we  say  that  the 
world  is  so  governed  by  God,  as  a  province  is 
by  its  ruler ;  and  no  one  would  say  that  his  at- 
tendants'^  are  his  sharers  in  the  administration 
of  the  province,  although  business  is  carried  on 
by  their  service.  And  yet  these  can  effect  some- 
thing contrary  to  the  commands  of  the  ruler, 
through  his  ignorance  ;  which  is  the  result  of 
man's  condition.  But  that  guardian  of  the 
world  and  ruler  of  the  universe,  who  knows  all 
things,  from  whose  divine  eyes  nothing  is  con- 
cealed,'' has  alone  with  His  Son  the  power  over 
all  things ;  nor  is  there  anything  in  the  angels 
except  the  necessity  of  obedience.  Therefore 
they  wish  no  honour  to  be  paid  to  them,  since 
all  their  honour  is  in  God.  But  they  who  have 
revolted  from  the  service  of  God,  because  they 
are  enemies  of  the  truth,  and  betrayers  '°  of  God 
attempt  to  claim  for  themselves  the  name  and 
worship  of  gods ;  not  that  they  desire  any  hon- 


5  Bv  their  presence. 

6  Malefici  — evil-doers.     The  word  is  specially  used  of  enchanters. 
'  Hook  i.  ch.  vi. 

'  Apparitors.  The  word  is  especially  applied  to  public  serv-ints, 
as  Ilctors,  etc. 

9  Surrounded,  shut  in. 

10  Pra;varicatores.  The  word  is  properly  applied  to  an  advocate 
who  is  guilty  of  collusion  with  his  antagonist,  and  thus  betrays  his 
client. 


66 


THE   DIVINE  INSTITUTES. 


[Book  II, 


our  (for  what  honour  is  there  to  the  lost?),  nor 
that  they  may  injure  God,  who  cannot  be  in- 
jured, but  that  they  may  injure  men,  whom  they 
strive  to  turn  away  from  the  worship  and  knowl- 
edge of  the  true  Majesty,  that  they  may  not  be 
able  to  obtain  immortality,  which  they  themselves 
have  lost  through  their  wickedness.  Therefore 
they  draw  on  darkness,  and  overspread  the  truth 
with  obscurity,  that  men  may  not  know  their 
Lord  and  Father.  And  that  they  may  easily  en- 
tice them,  they  conceal  themselves  in  the  tem- 
ples, and  are  close  at  hand  at  all  sacrifices  ;  and 
they  often  give  prodigies,  that  men,  astonished 
by  them,  may  attach  to  images  a  belief  in  their 
di\ine  power  and  influence.  Hence  it  is  that 
the  stonfe  was  cut  by  the  augur  with  a  razor ; 
that  Juno  of  Veil  answered  that  she  wished  to 
remove  to  Rome  ;  that  Fortuna  Muliebris '  an- 
nounced the  threatening  danger ;  that  the  ship 
followed  the  hand  of  Claudia ;  that  Juno  when 
plundered,  and  the  Locrian  Proserpine,  and  the 
Milesian  Ceres,  punished  the  sacrilegious ;  that 
Hercules  exacted  vengeance  from  Appius,  and 
Jupiter  from  -Atinius,  and  Minerva  from  Ciesar. 
Hence  it  was  that  the  serpent  sent  for  from  Epi- 
daurus  freed  the  city  of  Rome  from  pestilence. 
For  the  chief  of  the  demons  was  himself  carried 
thither  in  his  own  form,  without  any  dissembling  ; 
if  indeed  the  ambassadors  who  were  sent  for  that 
purpose  brought  with  them  a  serpent  of  immense 
size. 

But  they  especially  deceive  in  the  case  of 
oracles,  the  juggleries  of  which  the  profane^ 
cannot  distinguish  from  the  truth ;  and  therefore 
they  imagine  that  commands,^  and  victories,  and 
wealth,  and  prosperous  issues  of  affairs,  are  be- 
stowed by  them,  —  in  short,  that  the  state  has 
often  been  freed  from  imminent  dangers  by  their 
interposition ;  ^  which  dangers  they  have  both 
announced,  and  when  appeased  with  sacrifices, 
have  averted.  But  all  these  things  are  deceits. 
For  since  they  have  a  presentiment  5  of  the  ar- 
rangements of  God,  inasmuch  as  they  have  been 
His  ministers,  they  interpose  themselves  in  these 
matters,  that  whatever  things  have  been  accom- 
plished or  are  in  the  course  of  accomplishment 
by  God,  they  themselves  may  especially  appear 
to  be  doing  or  to  have  done  ;  and  as  often  as  any 
advantage  is  hanging  over  any  people  or  city,  ac- 
cording to  the  purpose  of  God,  either  by  prodi- 
gies, or  dreams,  or  oracles,  they  promise  that  they 
will  bring  it  to  pass,  if  temples,  honours,  and 
sacrifices  are  given  to  them.  And  on  the  offer- 
ing of  these,  when  the  necessary^'  result  comes 
to  pass,  they  acquire  for  themselves  the  greatest 


'  Womanly  Fortune. 

^  Unbelievers. 

3  Governments. 

*  At  their  nod,  or  suggestion. 

5  They  presage. 

6  That  which  was  necessary  according  to  the  purpose  and  arrange- 
ment of  God. 


veneration.  Hence  temples  are  vowed,  and  new 
images  consecrated  ;  herds  of  victims  are  slain ; 
and  when  all  these  things  are  done,  yet  the  life 
and  safety  of  those  who  have  performed  them  are 
not  the  less  sacrificed.  But  as  often  as  dangers 
threaten,  they  profess  that  they  are  angry  on  ac- 
count of  some  light  and  trifling  cause  ;  as  Juno 
was  with  Varro,  because  he  had  placed  a  beauti- 
ful boy  on  the  carriage  ?  of  Jupiter  to  guard  the 
dress,  and  on  this  account  the  Roman  name  was 
almost  destroyed  at  Cannae.  But  if  Juno  feared 
a  second  Ganymede,  why  did  the  Roman  youth 
suffer  punishment?  Or  if  the  gods  regard  the 
leaders  only,  and  neglect  the  rest  of  the  multi- 
tude, why  did  Varro  alone  escape  who  acted 
thus,  and  why  was  Paulus,  who  was  innocent,^ 
slain  ?  Assuredly  nothing  then  happened  to  the 
Romans  by  "the  fates  of  the  hostile  Juno,"^ 
when  Hannibal  by  craft  and  valour  despatched 
two  armies  of  the  Roman  people.  For  Juno  did 
not  venture  either  to  defend  Carthage,  where 
were  her  arms  and  chariot,  or  to  injure  the 
Romans ;  for 

"  She  had  heard  that  sons  of  Troy 
Were  born  her  Carthage  to  destroy."  '° 

But  these  are  the  delusions  of  those  who,  con- 
cealing themselves  under  the  names  of  the  dead, 
lay  snares  for  the  living.  Therefore,  whether 
the  impending  danger  can  be  avoided,  they 
wish  it  to  appear  that  they  averted  it,  having 
been  appeased  ;  or  if  it  cannot  be  avoided,  they 
contrive  that  it  may  appear  to  have  happened 
through  disregard  "  of  them.  Thus  they  acquire 
to  themselves  authority  and  fear  from  men,  who 
are  ignorant  of  them.  By  this  subtilty  and  by 
these  arts  they  have  caused  the  knowledge  of 
the  true  and  only  God  to  fail  '^  among  all  nations. 
For,  being  destroyed  by  their  own  vices,  they 
rage  and  use  violence  that  they  may  destroy 
others.  Therefore  these  enemies  of  the  human 
race  even  devised  human  victims,  to  devour  as 
many  lives  as  possible. 

CHAP.    XVIII. OF   THE   PATIENCE    AND   VENGEANCE 

OF    GOD,    THE    WORSHIP   OF    DEMONS,    AND    FALSE 
RELIGIONS. 

Some  one  will  say,  Why  then  does  God  per- 
mit these  things  to  be  done,  and  not  apply  a 
remedy  to  such  disastrous  errors?  That  evils 
may  be  at  variance  with  good  ;  that  vices  may 
be  opposed  to  virtues  ;  that  He  may  have  some 
whom    He  may  punish,  and   others  whom    He 


7  Tensa;  a  carriage  on  which  the  images  of  the  gods  were  carried 
to  the  circus  at  the  Circensi:in  g.imes. 

^  Deserved  nothing,  had  nothing  worthy  of  punishment.     Varro 
and  Paulus  /Emilius  were  the  two  consuls  who  commanded  at  Carmas. 
Varro  escaped,  Paulus  was  slain. 
9  Virg.,  ^n.,  viii.  292. 
10  Ibid.,  i.  19, 
"  Contempt. 
'•^  They  have  made  old. 


Chap.  XIX.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


^1 


may  honour.  For  He  has  determined  at  the 
last  times  to  pass  judgment  on  the  Hving  and 
the  dead,  concerning  which  judgment  I  shall 
speak  in  the  last  book.  He  delays,'  therefore, 
until  the  end  of  the  times  shall  come,  when  He 
may  pour  out  His  wrath  with  heavenly  power 
and  might,  as 

"  Prophecies  of  pious  seers 
Ring  terror  in  the  'wildered  ears."^ 

But  now  He  suffers  men  to  err,  and  to  be  im- 
pious even  towards  Himself,  just,  and  mild,  and 
patient  as  He  is.  For  it  is  impossible  that  He 
in  whom  is  perfect  excellence  should  not  also  be 
of  perfect  patience.  Whence  some  imagine, 
that  God  is  altogether  free  from  anger,  because 
He  is  not  subject  to  affections,  which  are  per- 
turbations of  the  mind  ;  for  every  animal  which 
is  liable  to  affections  and  emotions  is  frail.  But 
this  persuasion  altogether  takes  away  truth  and 
religion.  But  let  this  subject  of  discussing  the 
anger  of  God  be  laid  aside  for  the  present ;  be- 
cause the  matter  is  very  copious,  and  to  be  more 
widely  treated  in  a  work  devoted  to  the  subject. 
Whoever  shall  have  worshipped  and  followed 
these  most  wicked  spirits,  will  neither  enjoy 
heaven  nor  the  light,  which  are  God's  ;  but  will 
fall  into  those  things  which  we  have  spoken  of 
as  being  assigned  in  the  distribution  of  things  to 
the  prince  of  the  evil  ones  himself,  —  namely, 
into  darkness,  and  hell,  and  everlasting  punish- 
ment. 

I  have  shown  that  the  religious  rites  of  the 
gods  are  vain  in  a  threefold  manner  :  In  the  first 
place,  because  those  images  which  are  worshipped 
are  representations  of  men  who  are  dead ;  and 
that  is  a  wrong  and  inconsistent  thing,  that  the 
image  of  a  man  should  be  worshipped  by  the 
image  of  God,  for  that  which  worships  is  lower 
and  weaker //^c?/?  that  which  is  tvorsJiipped :  then 
that  it  is  an  inexpiable  crime  to  desert  the  living 
in  order  that  you  may  serve  memorials  of  the 
dead,  who  can  neither  give  life  nor  light  to  any 
one,  for  they  are  themselves  without  it :  and  that 
there  is  no  other  God  but  one,  to  whose  judg- 
ment and  power  every  soul  is  subject.  In  the 
second  place,  that  the  sacred  images  themselves, 
to  which  most  senseless  men  do  service,  are 
destitute  of  all  perception,  since  they  are  earth. 
But  who  cannot  understand  that  it  is  unlawful 
for  an  upright  animal  to  bend  itself  that  it  may 
adore  the  earth  ?  which  is  placed  beneath  our 
feet  for  this  purpose,  that  it  may  be  trodden 
upon,  and  not  adored   by  us,  who   have    been 


'  Jerome  says:  "Great  is  the  anger  of  God  when  He  does  not 
correct  sins,  but  punishes  blindness  with  bhndness.  On  this  very 
account  God  sends  strong  dchision,  as  St.  Paul  writes  to  the  Thcssa- 
lonians,  that  they  should  believe  a  lie,  that  they  all  may  he  damned 
who  have  not  believed  the  truth.  They  are  unworthy  of  the  living 
fountain  who  dig  for  themselves  cisterns." 

^  Virg.,  ^Eh.,  iv.  464.     Some  KAdJ>rioru>n  instead  ui /wruiit. 


raised  from  it,  and  have  received  an  elevated 
position  beyond  the  other  livijig  creatures,  that 
we  may  not  turn  ourselves  again  downward,  nor 
cast  this  heavenly  countenance  to  the  earth,  but 
may  direct  our  eyes  to  that  quarter  to  which  the 
condition  of  their  nature  has  directed,  and  that 
we  may  adore  and  worship  nothing  except  the 
single  deity  of  our  only  Creator  and  Father, 
who  made  man  of  an  erect  figure,  that  we  may 
know  that  we  are  called  forth  to  high  and 
heavenly  things.  In  the  third  place,  because 
the  spirits  which  preside  over  the  religious  rites 
themselves,  being  condemned  and  cast  off  by 
God,  wallow  3  over  the  earth,  who  not  only  are 
unable  to  afford  any  advantage  to  their  wor- 
shippers, since  the  power  of  all  things  is  in  the 
hands  of  one  alone,  but  even  destroy  them  with 
deadly  attractions  and  errors  ;  since  this  is  their 
daily  business,  to  involve  men  in  darkness,  that 
the  true  God  may  not  be  sought  l)y  them.  There- 
fore they  are  not  to  be  worshipped,  because  they 
lie  under  the  sentence  of  God.  For  it  is  a  very 
great  crime  to  devote-*  one's  self  to  the  power  of 
those  whom,  if  you  follow  righteousness,  you  are 
able  to  excel  in  power,  and  to  drive  out  and  put 
to  flight  by  adjuration  of  the  divine  name.  I3ut 
if  it  appears  that  these  religious  rites  are  vain  in 
so  many  ways  as  I  have  shown,  it  is  manifest  that 
those  who  either  make  prayers  to  the  dead,5  or 
venerate  the  earth,  or  make  over'^  their  souls  to 
unclean  spirits,  do  not  act  as  becomes  men,  and 
that  they  will  suffer  punishment  for  their  impiety 
and  guilt,  who,  rebelling  against  God,  the  Father 
of  the  human  race,  have  undertaken  inexpiable 
rites,  and  violated  every  sacred  law. 


CHAP.    XIX. 


OF    THE    WORSHIP     OF    IM.A.GES    AND 
EARTHLY    OliJECl'S. 


Whoever,  therefore,  is  anxious  to  observe  the 
obligations  to  which  man  is  liable,  and  to  main- 
tain a  regard  for  his  nature,  let  him  raise  himself 
from  the  ground,  and,  with  mind  lifted  up,  let 
him  direct  his  eyes  to  heaven  :  let  him  not  seek 
God  under  his  feet,  nor  dig  up  from  his  footprints 
an  object  of  veneration,  for  whatever  lies  beneath 
man  must  necessarily  be  inferior  to  man  ;  but 
let  him  seek  it  aloft,  let  him  seek  it  in  the 
highest  place  :  for  nothing  can  be  greater  than 
man,  except  that  which  is  above  man.  But  God 
is  greater  than  man  :  therefore  He  is  abo\'e,  and 


3  Roll  themselves. 

■♦  Addico,  "  to  adjudge,"  is  the  legal  term,  expressing  the  sentence 
by  which  the  praetor  gave  eflect  to  the  right  which  he  had  declared  to 
e.\ist. 

5  fi.et  this  be  noted.]  , 

f"  Mancipo.  The  word  implies  the  making  over  or  transferring  by 
a  formal  act  of  sale.  I  'eblors,  who  were  unable  to  satisfy  ihe  demands 
of  their  creditors,  were  made  over  to  them,  and  regarded  .as  their 
slaves.  They  were  termed  addicti.  Our  Lord  said  (John  viii.  34), 
"  Whosoever  commiiteth  sin,  is  the  servant  of  sin."  ihus  also  Su 
Paul,  Rom.  vi.  16,  17. 


68 


THE    DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


not  below  ;  nor  is  He  to  be  sought  in  the  lowest, 
but  rather  in  the  highest  region.     Wherefore  it 
is  undoubted  that  there  is  no  rehgion  wherever 
there  is  an  image.'     For  if  rehgion  consists  of 
divine  things,  and  there  is  nothing  divine  except 
in  heavenly  things;    it   follows  that  images  are 
without  religion,  because  there  can  be  nothing 
heavenly  in  that  which  is  made  from  the  earth. 
And  this,  indeed,  may  be  plain  to  a  wise  man 
from  the  very  name.^     For  whatever  is  an  imi- 
tation, that  must  of  necessity  be  false  ;  nor  can 
anything  receive  the  name  of  a  true  object  which 
counterfeits  the  truth  by  deception  and  imitation. 
But  if  all  imitation  is  not  particularly  a  serious 
matter,  but  as  it  were  a  sport  and  jest,  then  there 
is  no  religion  in  images,  but  a  mimicry  of  reli- 
gion.    That  which    is   true    is    therefore  to   be 
preferred  to  all  things  which  are  false  ;  earthly 
things  are  to  be  trampled  upon,  that  we    may 
obtain  heavenly  things.     For  this  is  the  state  of  j 
the  case,  that  whosoever  shall  prostrate  his  soul, 
which  has  its  origin  from  heaven,  to  the  shades  ^ 
beneath,  and  the  lowest  things,  must  fall  to  that 
place  to  which  he  has  cast  himself.     Therefore 
he  ought  to  be  mindful  of  his  nature  and  condi- 
tion, and  always   to   strive   and    aim    at    things 
above.     And  whoever  shall  do  this,  he  will  be 
judged  altogether  wise,  he  just,  he  a  man  :  he, 
in  short,  will  be  judged  worthy  of  heaven  whom 
his  Parent  will  recognise  not  as  abject,  nor  cast 
down   to    the    earth   after   the   manner   of  the 


[Quare  non  est  dubium  quin  religio  nulla  sit  ubicunque  simula- 
crum est.     Such  is  the  uniform  Ante-Nicene  testimony.] 

2  Simulacrum,  "  an  image,"  from  simulo,  "  to  imitate." 

3  The  infernal  regions. 


beasts,'*  but  rather  standing  and  upright  as  He 
made  him. 

CH.4P.    XX. OF    PHILOSOPHY    AND    THE    TRUTH. 

A  great  and  difficult  portion  of  the  work  which 
I  have  undertaken,  unless  I  am  deceived,  has 
been  completed  ;  and  the  majesty  of  heaven  sup- 
plying the  power  of  speaking,  we  have  driven 
away  inveterate  errors.  But  now  a  greater  and 
more  difficult  contest  with  philosophers  is  pro- 
posed to  us,  the  height  of  whose  learning  and 
eloquence,  as  some  massive  structure,  is  opposed 
to  me.  For  as  in  the  former  s  case  we  were  op- 
pressed by  a  multitude,  and  almost  by  the  uni- 
versal agreement  of  all  nations,  so  in  this  subject 
we  are  oppressed  by  the  authority  of  men  excel- 
hng  in  every  kind  of  praise.  But  who  can  be 
ignorant  that  there  is  more  weight  in  a  smaller 
number  of  learned  men  than  in  a  greater  number 
of  ignorant  persons  ?  ^  But  we  must  not  despair 
that,  under  the  guidance  of  God  and  the  truth, 
these  also  may  be  turned  aside  from  their  opin- 
ion ;  nor  do  I  think  that  they  will  be  so  obstinate 
as  to  deny  that  they  behold  with  sound  and  open 
eyes  the  sun  as  he  shines  in  his  brilliancy.  Only 
let  that  be  true  which  they  themselves  are  ac- 
customed to  profess,  that  they  are  possessed  with 
the  desire  of  investigation,  and  I  shall  assuredly 
succeed  in  causing  them  to  believe  that  the  truth 
which  they  have  long  sought  for  has  been  at 
length  found,  and  to  confess  that  it  could  not 
have  been  found  by  the  abilities  of  man. 


*  Quadrupeds. 

5  In  this  second  book. 

*  [Quis  autem  nesciat  plus  esse  momenti  in  paucioribus  doctis 
quam  ni  plunbus  impentis?] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 
BOOK    III. 


OF  THE   FALSE   WISDOM   OF   PHILOSOPHERS. 


CHAP.    I.  A    COMPARISON    OF     THE     TRUTH     WITH 

ELOQUENCE  :  WHY  THE  PHILOSOPHERS  DID  NOT 
ATTAIN  TO  IT.  OF  THE  SIMPLE  STYLE  OF  THE 
SCRIPrURES. 

_  Since  it  is  .supposed  that  the  truth  still  lies 
hidden  in  obscurity  —  either  through  the  error 
and  ignorance  of  the  common  people,  who  are 
the  slaves  of  various  and  foolish  superstitions,  or 
through  the  philosophers,  who  by  the  perverse- 
ness  of  their  minds  confuse  rather  than  throw 
light  upon  it  —  I  could  wish  that  the  power  of 
eloquence  had  fallen  to  my  lot,  though  not  such 
as  it  was  in  Marcus  Tullius,  for  that  was  extraor- 
dinary and  admirable,  but  in  some  degree  ap- 
proaching it ; '  that,  being  supported  as  much  by 
the  strength  of  talent  as  it  has  weight  by  its  own 
force,  the  truth  might  at  length  come  forth,  and 
having  dispelled  and  refuted  public  errors,  and 
the  errors  of  those  who  are  considered  wise, 
might  introduce  among  the  human  race  a  brilliant 
light.  And  I  could  wish  that  this  were  so,  for 
two  reasons  :  either  that  men  might  more  readily 
believe  the  truth  when  adorned  with  embellish- 
ments, since  they  even  believe  falsehood,  being 
captivated  by  the  adornment  of  speech  and  the 
enticement  of  words  ;  or,  at  all  events,  that  the 
philosophers  themselves  might  be  overpowered 
by  us,  most  of  all  by  their  own  arms,  in  which 
they  are  accustomed  to  pride  themselves  and  to 
place  confidence. 

But  since  God  has  willed  this  to  be  the  nature 
of  the  case,  that  simple  and  undisguised  truth 
should  be  more  clear,  because  it  has  sufficient 
ornament  of  itself,  and  on  this  account  it  is  cor- 
rupted when  embellishetl  ^  with  adornings  from 
without,  but  that  falsehood  should  please  by 
means  of  a  splendour  not  its  own,  because  being 
corrupt  of  itself  it  vanishes  and  melts  away,  unless 
it  is  set  off  3  and  polished  with  decoration  sought 


'  [A  modest  confession  of  his  desire  to  "  find  out   acceptable 
words."    Eccles.  xii.  lo.     His  success  is  proverbiaL] 
^  Stained,  counterfeit. 
^  Embellished. 


from  another  source ;  I  bear  it  with  equanimity 
that  a  moderate  degree  of  talent  has  been  granted 
to  me.  But  it  is  not  in  reliance  upon  eloquence, 
but  upon  the  truth,  that  I  have  undertaken  this 
work,  —  a  work,  perhaps,  too  great  to  be  sus- 
tained by  my  strength  ;  which,  however,  even  if 
I  should  fail,  the  truth  itself  will  complete,  with 
the  assistance  of  God,  whose  office  this  is.  For 
when  I  know  that  the  greatest  orators  have  often 
been  overcome  by  pleaders  of  moderate  ability, 
because  the  power  of  truth  is  so  great  that  it 
defends  itself  even  in  small  things  by  its  own 
clearness  :  why  should  I  imagine  that  it  will  be 
overwhelmed  in  a  cause  of  the  greatest  impor- 
tance by  men  who  are  ingenious  and  eloquent, 
as  I  admit,  but  who  speak  false  things ;  and  not 
that  it  should  appear  bright  and  illustrious,  if  not 
by  our  speech,  which  is  very  feeble,  and  flows 
from  a  slight  fountain,  but  by  its  own  light  ?  Nor, 
if  there  have  been  philosophers  worthy  of  admira- 
tion on  account  of  their  literary  erudition,  should 
I  also  yield  to  them  the  knowledge  and  learning 
of  the  truth,  which  no  one  can  attain  to  by  re- 
flection or  disputation.  Nor  do  I  now  disparage 
the  pursuit  of  those  who  wished  to  know  the 
truth,  because  God  has  made  the  nature  of  man 
most  desirous  of  arriving  at  the  truth ;  but  I  as- 
sert and  maintain  this  against  them,  that  the 
effect  did  not  follow  their  honest  and  well-directed 
will,  because  they  neither  knew  what  was  true  in 
itself,  nor  how,  nor  where,  nor  with  what  mind  it 
is  to  be  sought.  And  thus,  while  they  desire  to 
remedy  the  errors  of  men,  they  have  become  en- 
tangled in  snares  and  the  greatest  errors.  I  have 
therefore  been  led  to  this  task  of  refuting  philos- 
ophy by  the  very  order  of  the  subject  which  I 
have  undertaken. 

For  since  all  error  arises  either  from  false  re- 
ligion or  from  wisdom,-*  in  refuting  error  it  is 
necessary  to  overthrow  both.     For  inasmuch  as 


Si.] 


■•  [i.e.,  false  sophia  —  "  philosophy  falsely  so  called."     Vol.  v.  p. 


69 


•o 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  III. 


it  has  been  handed  down  to  us  in  the  sacred 
writings  that  the  thoughts  of  philosophers  are 
foohsh,  this  very  thing  is  to  be  proved  by  fact 
and  by  arguments,  that  no  one,  induced  by  the 
honourable  name  of  wisdom,  or  deceived  by 
the  splendour  of  empty  eloquence,  may  prefer  to 
give  credence  to  human  rather  than  to  divine 
things.  Which  things,  indeed,  are  related  in  a 
concise  and  simple  manner.  For  it  was  not 
befitting  that,  when  God  was  speaking  to  man. 
He  should  confirm  His  words  by  arguments,  as 
though  He  would  not  otherwise  '  be  regarded 
with  confidence  :  but,  as  it  was  right.  He  spoke 
as  the  mighty  Judge  of  all  things,  to  whom  it 
belongs  not  to  argue,  but  to  pronounce  sentence. 
He  Himself,  as  God,  is  truth.  But  we,  since 
we  have  divine  testimony  for  everything,  will 
assuredly  show  by  how  much  surer  arguments 
truth  may  be  defended,  when  even  false  things 
are  so  defended  that  they  are  accustomed  to 
appear  true.  Wherefore  there  is  no  reason  why 
we  should  give  so  much  honour  to  philosophers 
as  to  fear  their  eloquence.  For  they  might  speak 
well  as  men  of  learning  ;  but  they  could  not  speak 
truly,  because  they  had  not  learned  the  truth  from 
Him  in  whose  power  it  was.  Nor,  indeed,  shall 
we  effect  anything  great  in  convicting  them  of 
ignorance,  which  they  themselves  very  often  con- 
fess. Since  they  are  not  believed  in  that  one 
point  alone  in  which  alone  they  ought  to  have 
been  believed,  I  will  endeavour  to  show  that 
they  never  spoke  so  truly  as  when  they  uttered 
their  opinion  respecting  their  own  ignorance. 

CHAP.  II. OF  PHILOSOPHY,  AND  HOW  VAIN  WAS  ITS 

OCCUPATION  IN  SEITING  FORTH  THE  TRUTH. 

Now,  since  the  falsehood  of  superstitions^  has 
been  shown  in  the  two  former  books,  and  the 
origin  itself  of  the  whole  error  has  been  set 
forth,  it  is  the  business  of  this  book  to  show  the 
emptiness  and  falsehood  of  philosophy  also,  that, 
all  error  being  removed,  the  truth  may  be  brought 
to  light  and  become  manifest.  Let  us  begin, 
therefore,  from  the  common  name  of  philosophy, 
that  when  the  head  itself  is  destroyed,  an  easier 
approach  may  be  open  to  us  for  demolishing  the 
whole  body  ;  if  indeed  that  can  be  called  a  body, 
the  parts  and  members  of  which  are  at  variance 
with  one  another,  and  are  not  united  together  by 
any  connecting  link,^  but,  as  it  were,  dispersed 
and  scattered,  appear  to  palpitate  rather  than  to 
live.  Philosophy  is  (as  the  name  indicates,  and 
they  themselves  define  it)  the  love  of  wisdom. 


'  Aliter.  This  word  is  usually  read  in  the  former  clause,  but  it 
gives  a  better  meaning  in  this  position. 

^  [Reh'gioiiti))!  iahilas.  He  does  not  here  employ  j/^/crj^/V/V)  By 
the  way,  Lactantius  derives  this  word  from  those  '"  qui  superstitetn 
memoriam  hominum,  tanqiiam  deorum,  colerent."  Cicero,  however, 
derives  it  from  those  who  bother  the  gods  with  petitions,  —  "pro 
superstite  prole."  See  note  of  the  annotator  of  the  Delphin  Cicero, 
on  the  jVatura  Dear.,  i.  17.] 

^  A  joint  or  fastening. 


By  what  argument,  then,  can  I  prove  that  phi- 
losophy is  not  wisdom,  rather  than  by  that  de- 
rived from  the  meaning  of  the  name  itself?  For 
he  who  devotes  himself  to  wisdom  is  manifestly 
not  yet  wise,  but  devotes  himself  to  the  subject 
that  he  may  be  wise.  In  the  other  arts  it  ap- 
pears what  this  devotedness  effects,  and  to  what 
it  tends  :  for  when  any  one  by  learning  has  at- 
tained to  these,  he  is  now  called,  not  a  devoted 
follower  of  the  profession,  but  an  artificer.  But 
it  is  said  it  was  on  account  of  modesty  that  they 
called  themselves  devoted  to  wisdom,  and  not 
wise.  Nay,  in  truth,  Pythagoras,  who  first  in- 
vented this  name,  since  he  had  a  little  more 
wisdom  than  those  of  early  times,  who  regarded 
themselves  as  wise,  understood  that  it  was  im- 
possible by  any  human  study  to  attain  to  wisdom, 
and  therefore  that  a  perfect  name  ought  not  to 
be  applied  to  an  incomprehensible  and  imperfect 
subject.  And,  therefore,  when  he  was  asked  what 
was  his  profession,"*  he  answered  that  he  was  a 
philosopher,  that  is,  a  searcher  after  wisdom.  If, 
therefore,  philosophy  searches  after  wisdom,  it  is 
not  wisdom  itself,  because  it  must  of  necessity 
be  one  thing  which  searches,  and  another  which 
is  searched  for ;  nor  is  the  searching  itself  cor- 
rect, because  it  can  find  nothing. 

But  I  am  not  prepared  to  concede  even  that 
philosophers  are  devoted  to  the  pursuit  of  wisdom, 
because  by  that  pursuit  there  is  no  attaining  to 
wisdom.  For  if  the  power  of  finding  the  truth 
were  connected  5  with  this  pursuit,  and  if  this 
pursuit  were  a  kind  of  road  to  wisdom,  it  would 
at  length  be  found.  But  since  so  much  time 
and  talent  have  been  wasted  in  the  search  for  it, 
and  it  has  not  yet  been  gained,  it  is  plain  that 
there  is  no  wisdom  there.  Therefore  they  who 
apply  themselves  to  philosophy  do  not  devote 
themselves  to  the  pursuit  of  wisdom  ;  but  they 
themselves  imagine  that  they  do  so,  because  they 
know  not  where  that  is  which  they  are  searching 
for,  or  of  what  character  it  is.  Whether,  there- 
fore, they  devote  themselves  to  the  pursuit  of 
wisdom  or  not,  they  are  not  wise,  because  that 
can  never  be  discovered  which  is  either  sought 
in  an  improper  manner,  or  not  souglit  at  all. 
Let  us  look  to  this  very  thing,  whether  it  is  pos- 
sible for  anything  to  be  discovered  by  this  kind 
of  pursuit,  or  nothing. 

CHAP.  III. OF  WHAT  SUPJECTS  PHILOSOPHY  CON- 
SISTS, AND  WHO  WAS  THE  CHIEF  FOUNDER  OF 
THE    ACADEMIC    SECT. 

Philosophy  appears  to  consist  of  two  subjects, 
knowledge  and  conjecture,  and  of  nothing  more. 
Knowledge  cannot  come  from  the  understand- 
ing, nor  be  apprehended  by  thought ;  because 

••  What  he  professed  —  gave  himself  out  tp  be. 
5  Subjaceret. 


Chap.  IV.] 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


71 


to  have  knowledge  in  oneself  as  a  peculiar 
property  does  not  belong  to  man,  but  to  God. 
But  the  nature  of  mortals  does  not  receive 
knowledge,  except  that  which  comes  from  with- 
out. For  on  this  account  the  divine  intelligence 
has  opened  the  eyes  and  ears  and  other  senses 
in  the  body,  that  by  these  entrances  knowledge 
might  flow  through  to  the  mind.  For  to  investi- 
gate or  wish  to  know  the  causes  of  natural  things, 
—  whether  the  sun  is  as  great  as  it  appears  to 
be,  or  is  many  times  greater  than  the  whole  of 
this  earth ;  also  whether  the  moon  be  spherical 
or  concave  ;  and  whether  the  stars  are  fi.xed  to 
the  heaven,  or  are  borne  with  free  course  through 
the  air ;  of  what  magnitude  the  heaven  itself  is, 
of  what  material  it  is  composed  ;  whether  it  is 
at  rest  and  immoveable,  or  is  turned  round  with 
incredible  swiftness ;  how  great  is  the  thickness 
of  the  earth,  or  on  what  foundations  it  is  poised 
and  suspended,  —  to  wish  to  comprehend  these 
things,  I  say,  by  disputation  and  conjectures,  is 
as  though  we  should  wish  to  discuss  what  we 
may  suppose  to  be  the  character  of  a  city  in 
some  very  remote  country,  which  we  have  never 
seen,  and  of  which  we  have  heard  nothing  more 
than  the  name.  If  we  should  claim  to  ourselves 
knowledge  in  a  matter  of  this  kind,  which  cannot 
be  known,  should  we  not  appear  to  be  mad,  in 
venturing  to  affirm  that  in  which  we  may  be 
refuted  ?  How  much  more  are  they  to  be  judged 
mad  and  senseless,  who  imagine  that  they  know- 
natural  things,  which  cannot  be  known  by  man  ! 
Righdy  therefore  did  Socrates,  and  the  Aca- 
demics '  who  followed  him,  take  away  knowl- 
edge, which  is  not  the  part  of  a  disputant,  but 
of  a  diviner.  It  remains  that  there  is  in  philoso- 
phy conjecture  only  ;  for  that  from  which  knowl- 
edge is  absent,  is  entirely  occupied  by  conjecture. 
For  every  one  conjectures  that  of  which  he  is 
ignorant.  But  they  who  discuss  natural  subjects, 
conjecture  that  they  are  as  they  discuss  them.  1 
Therefore  they  do  not  know  the  truth,  because 
knowledge  is  concerned  with  that  which  is  cer-  ! 
tain,  conjecture  with  the  uncertain. 

Let  us  return  to  the  example  before  men-  j 
tioned.  Come,  let  us  conjecture  about  the  state 
and  character  of  that  city  which  is  unknown  to 
us  in  all  respects  except  in  name.  It  is  proba- 
ble that  it  is  situated  on  a  plain,  with  walls  of 
stone,  lofty  buildings,  many  streets,  magnificent 
and  highly  adorned  temples.  Let  us  describe, 
if  you  please,  the  customs  and  deportment  of  , 
the  citizens.  But  when  we  shall  have  described 
these,  another  will  make  opposite  statements ; 


'  It  is  evident  that  the  Academy  took  its  rise  from  the  doctrine  of 
Socrates.  Plato,  the  disciple  of  Socrates,  founfled  the  Academy. 
However  excellent  their  system  may  appear  to  many,  the  opinion  of 
Carncadcs  the  Stoic  seems  just,  who  said  that  "  the  wise  man  who  is 
about  to  conjecture  is  about  to  err,  for  he  who  conjectures  knows 
nothing."  Thus  knowledge  is  taken  from  them  by  themselves.  — 
Betul. 


and  when  he  also  shall  have  concluded,  a  third 
will  arise,  and  others  after  him  ;  and  they  will 
make  very  different  conjectures  to  those  of  ours. 
Which  therefore  of  all  is  more  true?  Perhaps 
none  of  them.  But  all  things  have  been  men- 
tioned which  the  nature  of  the  circumstances 
admits,  so  that  some  one  of  them  must  necessa- 
rily be  true.  But  it  will  not  be  known  who  has 
spoken  the  truth.  It  may  possibly  be  that  all 
have  in  some  degree  erred  in  their  description, 
and  that  all  have  in  some  degree  attained  to  the 
truth.  Therefore  we  are  foolish  if  we  seek  this 
by  disputation  ;  for  some  one  may  present  him- 
self who  may  deride  our  conjectures,  and  esteem 
us  as  mad,  since  we  wish  to  conjecture  the  char- 
acter of  that  which  we  do  not  know.  But  it 
is  unnecessary  to  go  in  quest  of  remote  cases, 
from  which  perhaps  no  one  may  come  to  refute 
us.  Come,  let  us  conjecture  what  is  now  going 
on  in  the  forum,  what  in  the  senate-house.  That 
also  is  too  distant.  Let  us  say  what  is  taking 
place  with  the  interposition  of  a  single  wall ;  ^ 
no  one  can  know  this  but  he  who  has  heard  or 
seen  it.  No  one  therefore  ventures  to  say  this, 
because  he  will  immediately  be  refuted  not  by 
words,  but  by  the  presence  of  the  fact  itself. 
But  this  is  the  very  thing  which  philosophers  do, 
who  discuss  what  is  taking  place  in  heaven,  but 
think  that  they  do  that  with  impunity,  because 
there  is  no  one  to  refute  their  errors.  But  if  they 
were  to  think  that  some  one  was  about  to  de- 
scend wiio  would  prove  them  to  be  mad  and 
false,  they  would  never  discuss  those  subjects  at 
all  which  they  cannot  possibly  know.  Nor,  how- 
ever, is  their  shamelessness  and  audacity  to  be 
regarded  as  more  successful  because  they  are  not 
refuted  ;  for  God  refutes  them  to  whom  alone 
the  truth  is  known,  although  He  may  seem  to 
connive  at  their  conduct,  and  He  reckons  such 
wisdom  of  men  as  the  greatest  folly. 

CHAP.  IV. TH.\T    KNOWLEDGE    IS   TAKEN   AWAY  BY 

SOCR.-\TES,    AND    CONJECTURE    BY    ZENO. 

Zeno  and  the  Stoics,  then,  were  right  in  repu- 
diating conjecture.  For  to  conjecture  that  you 
know  that  which  you  do  not  know,  is  not  the 
l)art  of  a  wise,  but  rather  of  a  rash  and  foolish 
man.  Therefore  if  nothing  can  be  known,  as 
Socrates  taught,  or  ought  to  be  conjectured,  as 
Zeno  taught,  philosophy  is  entirely  removed. 
Why  should  I  say  that  it  is  not  only  overthrown 
by  these  two,  who  were  the  chiefs  of  philosophy, 
but  by  all,  so  that  it  now  ap])ears  to  have  been 
long  ago  destroyed  by  its  own  arms?  Philoso- 
phy has  been  divided  into  many  sects ;  and  they 
all  entertain  various  sentiments.  In  which  do 
we  place  the  truth?     It  certainly  cannot  be  in 


2  With  nothing  but  an  inner  wall  between. 


/ 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  III. 


all.  Let  us  point  out  some  one  ;  it  follows  that 
all  the  others  will  be  without  wisdom.  Let  us 
pass  through  them  separately ;  in  the  same  man- 
ner, whate\er  we  shall  give  to  one  we  shall  take 
away  from  the  others.  For  each  particular  sect 
overturns  all  others,  to  confirm  itself  and  its  own 
doctrines :  nor  does  it  allow  wisdom  to  any 
other,  lest  it  should  confess  that  it  is  itself  fool- 
ish ;  but  as  it  takes  away  others,  so  is  it  taken 
away  itself  by  all  others.  For  they  are  nev- 
ertheless philosophers  who  accuse  it  of  folly. 
Whatever  sect  you  shall  praise  and  pronounce 
true,  that  is  censured  by  philosophers  as  false. 
Shall  we  therefore  believe  one  which  praises 
itself  and  its  doctrine,  or  the  many  which 
blame  the  ignorance  of  each  other?  That  must 
of  necessity  be  better  which  is  held  by  great 
numbers,  than  that  which  is  held  by  one  only. 
For  no  one  can  rightly  judge  concerning  him- 
self, as  the  renowned  poet  testifies ; '  for  the 
nature  of  men  is  so  arranged,  that  they  see  and 
distinguish  the  affairs  of  others  better  than  their 
own.  Since,  therefore,  all  things  are  uncertain, 
we  must  either  believe  all  or  none  :  if  we  are  to 
believe  no  one,  then  the  wise  have  no  existence, 
because  while  they  separately  affirm  different 
things  they  think  themselves  wise  ;  if  all,  it  is 
equally  true  that  there  are  no  wise  men,  because 
all  deny  the  wisdom  of  each  individually.  There- 
fore all  are  in  tliis  manner  destroyed  ;  and  as 
those  fabled  sparti^  of  the  poets,  so  these  men 
mutually  slay  one  another,  so  that  no  one  remains 
of  all ;  which  happens  on  this  account,  because 
they  have  a  sword,  but  have  no  shield.  If,  there- 
fore, the  sects  individually  are  convicted  of  folly 
by  the  judgment  of  many  sects,  it  follows  that  all 
are  found  to  be  vain  and  empty ;  and  thus  phi- 
losophy consumes  and  destroys  itself.  And  since 
Arcesilas  the  founder  of  the  Academy  understood 
this,  he  collected  together  the  mutual  censures 
of  all,  and  the  confession  of  ignorance  made  by 
distinguished  philosophers,  and  armed  himself 
against  all.  Thus  he  established  a  new  philoso- 
phy of  not  philosophizing.  From  this  founder, 
therefore,  there  began  to  be  two  kinds  of  philos- 
ophy :  one  the  old  one,  which  claims  to  itself 
knowledge  ;  the  other  a  new  one,  opposed  to 
the  former,  and  which  detracts  from  it.  Be- 
tween these  two  kinds  of  philosophy  I  see  that 
there  is  disagreement,  and  as  it  were  civil  war. 
On  which  side  shall  we  place  wisdom,  which  can- 
not be  torn  asunder  P^  If  the  nature  of  things 
can  be  known,  this  troop  of  recruits  will  perish  ; 
if  it  cannot,  the  veterans  will  be  destroyed  :  if 
they  shall  be  equal,  nevertheless  philosophy,  the 
guide  of  all,  will  still  perish,  because  it  is  divided  ; 


*  Terent.,  Heautont.^  iii.  sec.  97. 
2  mtnp-roi.,  those  who  sprung  from  the  dragon's  teeth. 
5  Distrahi,  which  is  the  readina  of  some  editions,  is  here  followed 
in  preference  to  the  common  reading,  detrahi. 


for  nothing  can  be  opposed  to  itself  without 
its  own  destruction.  But  if,  as  I  have  shown, 
there  can  be  no  inner  and  peculiar  knowledge  in 
man  on  account  of  the  frailty  of  the  human  con- 
dition, the  party  of  Arcesilas  prevails.  But  not 
even  will  this  stand  firm,  because  it  cannot  be 
the  case  that  nothing  at  all  is  known. 


CHAP.  V. THAT  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  MAX\'  THINGS 

IS    NECESSARY. 

For  there  are  many  things  which  nature  itself, 
and  frequent  use,  and  the  necessity  of  life,  com- 
pel us  to  know.  Accordingly  you  must  perish, 
unless  you  know  what  things  are  useful  for  life, 
in  order  that  you  may  seek  them  ;  and  what  are 
dangerous,  that  you  may  shun  and  avoid  them. 
Moreover,  there  are  many  things  which  experi- 
ence finds  out.  For  the  various  courses  of  the 
sun  and  moon,  and  the  motions  of  the  stars,  and 
the  computation  of  times,  have  been  discovered, 
and  the  nature  of  bodies,  and  the  strength  of 
herbs  by  students  of  medicine,  and  by  the  culti- 
vators of  the  land  the  nature  of  soils,  and  signs 
of  future  rains  and  tempests  have  been  collected. 
In  short,  there  is  no  art  which  is  not  dependent 
on  knowle'dge.  Therefore  Arcesilas  ought,  if  he 
had  any  wisdom,  to  have  distinguished  the  things 
which  were  capable  of  being  known,  and  those 
which  were  incapable.  But  if  he  had  done  this, 
he  wouki  have  reduced  himself  to  the  common 
herd.  For  the  common  people  have  sometimes 
more  wisdom,  because  they  are  only  so  far  wise 
as  is  necessary.  And  if  you  inquire  of  them 
whether  they  know  anything  or  nothing,  they  will 
say  that  they  know  the  things  which  they  know, 
and  will  confess  that  they  are  ignorant  of  what 
they  are  ignorant.  He  was  right,  therefore,  in 
taking  away  the  systems  of  others,  but  he  was 
not  right  in  laying  the  foundations  of  his  own. 
For  ignorance  of  all  things  cannot  be  wisdom, 
the  peculiar  property  of  which  is  knowledge. 
And  thus,  when  he  overcame  the  philosophers, 
and  taught  that  they  knew  nothing,  he  himself 
also  lost  the  name  of  philosopher,  because  his 
system  is  to  know  nothing.  For  he  who  blames 
others  because  they  are  ignorant,  ought  himself 
to  have  knowledge  ;  but  when  he  knows  nothing, 
what  perverseness  or  what  insolence  it  is,  to  con- 
stitute himself  a  philosopher  on  account  of  that 
very  thing  for  which  he  takes  away  the  others  ! 
For  it  is  in  their  power  to  answer  thus  :  If  you 
convict  us  of  knowing  nothing,  and  therefore  of 
being  unwise  because  we  know  nothing,  does  it 
follow  that  you  are  not  wise,  because  you  confess 
that  you  know  nothing?  What  progress,  there- 
fore, did  Arcesilas  make,  except  that,  having 
despatched  all  the  philosophers,  he  pierced  him- 
self also  with  the  same  sword? 


Chap.  VI.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


73 


CHAP.  VI. OF   WISDOM,  AND    THE    ACADEMICS,  AND 

NATURAL   PHILOSOPHY. 

Does  wisdom  therefore  nowhere  exist?  Yes, 
indeed,  it  was  amongst  them,  but  no  one  saw  it. 
Some  thought  that  all  things  could  be  known  : 
these  were  manifestly  not  wise.  Others  thought 
that  nothing  could  be  known ;  nor  indeed  were 
these  wise  :  the  former,  because  they  attributed 
too  much  to  man ;  the  latter,  because  they 
attributed  too  little.  A  limit  was  wanting  to 
each  on  either  side.  Where,  then,  is  wisdom  ? 
It  consists  in  thinking  neither  that  you  know  all 
things,  which  is  the  property  of  God  ;  nor  that 
you  are  ignorant  of  all  things,  which  is  the  ])art 
of  a  beast.  For  it  is  something  of  a  middle 
character  which  belongs  to  man,  that  is,  knowl- 
edge united  and  combined  with  ignorance. 
Knowledge  in  us  is  from  the  soul,  which  has  its 
origin  from  heaven  ;  ignorance  from  the  body, 
which  is  from  the  earth  :  whence  we  have  some- 
thing in  common  with  God,  and  with  the  animal 
creation.  Thus,  since  we  are  composed  of  these 
two  elements,  the  one  of  which  is  endowed  with 
light,  the  other  with  darkness,  a  part  of  knowl- 
edge is  given  to  us,  and  a  part  of  ignorance. 
Over  this  bridge,  so  to  speak,  we  may  pass  with- 
out any  danger  of  falling  ;  for  all  those  who  have 
inclined  to  either  side,  either  towards  the  left 
hand  or  the  right,  have  fallen.  But  I  will  say 
how  each  part  has  erred.  The  Academics  argued 
from  obscure  subjects,  against  the  natural  philos- 
ophers, that  there  was  no  knowledge  ;  and  satis- 
fied with  the  examples  of  a  few  incomprehensible 
subjects,  they  embraced  ignorance  as  though 
they  had  taken  away  the  whole  of  knowledge, 
because  they  had  taken  it  away  in  part.  But 
natural  philosoi)hers,  on  the  other  hand,  derived 
their  argument  from  those  things  which  are  open, 
a7ui  inferred  that  all  things  could  be  known,  and, 
satisfied  with  things  which  were  manifest,  re- 
tained knowledge  ;  as  if  they  had  defended  it 
altogether,  because  they  had  defended  it  in  parf. 
And  thus  neither  the  one  saw  what  was  clear, 
nor  the  others  what  was  obscure ;  but  each 
party,  while  they  contended  with  the  greatest 
ardour  either  to  retain  or  to  take  away  knowledge 
only,  did  not  see  that  there  would  be  placed  in 
the  middle  that  which  might  guide  them  to 
wisdom. 

But  Arcesilas,  who  teaches  that  there  is  no 
knowledge,'  when  he  was  detracting  from  Zeno, 
the  chief  of  the  Stoics,  that  he  might  altogether 
overthrow  philosophy  on  the  authority  of  Soc- 
rates, undertook  this  opinion  to  affirm  that  noth- 
ing could  be  known.  And  thus  he  disproved 
the  judgment  of  the  philosophers,  who  had 
thought   that   the   truth  was  drawn   forth,^   and 


'  The  master  of  ignorance. 
*  Erutam. 


found  out  by  their  talents,  —  namely,  because 
that  wisdom  was  mortal,  and,  having  been  insti- 
tuted a  few  ages  before,  had  now  attained  to  its 
greatest  increase,  so  that  it  was  now  necessarily 
growing  old  and  perishing,  the  Academy  3  sud- 
denly arose,  the  old  age,  as  it  were,  of  philos- 
ophy, which  might  despatch  it  now  withering. 
And  Arcesilas  rightly  saw  that  they  are  arrogant, 
or  rather  foolish,  who  imagine  that  the  knowl- 
edge of  the  truth  can  be  arrived  at  by  conjec- 
ture. But  no  one  can  refute  one  speaking  falsely, 
unless  he  who  shall  have  previously  known  what 
is  true  ;  but  Arcesilas,  endeavouring  to  do  this 
without  a  knowledge  of  the  truth,  introduced  a 
kind  of  philosophy  which  we  may  call  unstable 
or  inconstant. 4  For,  that  nothing  may  be  known, 
it  is  necessary  that  something  be  known.  For  if 
you  know  nothing  at  all,  the  very  knowledge  that 
nothing  can  be  known  will  be  taken  away. 
Therefore  he  who  pronounces  as  a  sentiment 
that  nothing  is  known,  professes,  as  it  were,  some 
conclusion  already  arrived  at  and  known  :  there- 
fore it  is  possible  for  something  to  be  known. 

Of  a  similar  character  to  this  is  that  which 
is  accustomed  to  be  proposed  in  the  schools 
as  an  example  of  the  kind  of  fallacy  called 
asystaton ;  that  some  one  had  dreamt  that  he 
should  not  believe  dreams.  For  if  he  did  be- 
lieve them,  then  it  follows  that  he  ought  not  to 
beUeve  them.  But  if  he  did  not  believe  them, 
then  it  follows  that  he  ought  to  believe  them. 
Thus,  if  nothing  can  be  known,  it  is  necessary  that 
this  fact  must  be  known,  that  nothing  is  known. 
But  if  it  is  known  that  nothing  can  be  known,  the 
statement  that  nothing  can  be  known  must  as  a 
consequence  be  false.  Thus  there  is  introduced 
a  tenet  opposed  to  itself,  and  destructive  of  it- 
self. But  the  evasive  5  man  wished  to  take  away 
learning  from  the  other  philosophers,  that  he 
might  conceal  it  at  his  home.  For  truly  he  is 
not  for  taking  it  from  himself  who  affirms  any- 
thing that  he  may  take  it  from  others  :  but  he 
does  not  succeed  ;  for  it  shows  itself,  and  be- 
trays its  plunderer.  How  much  more  wisely  and 
truly  he  would  act,  if  he  should  make  an  excep- 
tion, and  say  that  the  causes  and  systems  of 
heavenly  things  only,  or  natural  things,  because 
they  are  hidden,  cannot  be  known,  for  there  is 
no  one  to  teach  them  ;  and  ought  not  to  be  in- 
quired into,  for  they  cannot  be  found  out  by 
inquiry  !  For  if  he  had  brought  forward  this  ex- 
ception, he  would  both  have  admonished  the 
natural  philosophers  not  to  search  into  those 
things  which  exceeded  the  limit  of  human  reflec- 
tion ;  and  would  have  freed  himself  from  the  ill- 
will  arising   from  calumny,  and  would  certainly 


3  The  New  Academy. 

<  In   Greek,  ao-iio-Taroi',  "without  consistency,   not  holding  to- 
gether; "  in  Latin,  "  instabile  "  or  "  inconstans." 
s  Versutus,  one  who  turns  and  shifts. 


74 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  III. 


have  left  us  something  to  follow.  But  now,  since 
he  has  drawn  us  back  from  following  others,  that 
we  may  not  wish  to  know  more  than  we  are  capa- 
ble of  knowing,  he  has  no  less  drawn  us  back 
from  himself  also.  For  who  would  wish  to 
labour  lest  he  should  know  anything?  or  to 
undertake  learning  of  this  kind  that  he  may  even 
lose  ordinary  knowledge  ?  For  if  this  learning 
exists,  it  must  necessarily  consist  of  knowledge  ; 
if  it  does  not  exist,  who  is  so  foolish  as  to  think 
that  that  is  worthy  of  being  learned,  in  which 
either  nothing  is  learned,  or  something  is  even 
unlearned?  Wherefore,  if  all  things  cannot  be 
known,  as  the  natural  philosophers  thought,  nor 
nothing,  as  the  Academics  taught,  philosophy  is 
altogether  extinguished. 

CHAP.     VII.  OF     iMOR.\L     PHILOSOPHY,     AND     THE 

CHIEF     GOOD. 

Let  us  now  pass  to  the  other  part  of  philoso- 
phy, which  they  themselves  call  moral,  in  which 
is  contained  the  method  of  the  whole  of  philoso- 
phy, since  in  natural  philosophy  there  is  only 
delight,  in  this  there  is  utility  also.  And  since 
it  is  more  dangerous  to  commit  a  fault  in  arran- 
ging the  condition  of  life  and  in  forming  the  char- 
acter, greater  diligence  must  be  used,  that  we 
may  know  how  we  ought  to  live.  For  in  the  for- 
mer subject  ■  some  indulgence  may  be  granted  : 
for  whether  they  say  anything,  they  bestow  no 
advantage ;  or  if  they  foolishly  rave,  they  do  no 
injury.  But  in  this  subject  there  is  no  room  for 
difference  of  opinion,  none  for  error.  All  must 
entertain  the  same  sentiments,  and  philosophy 
itself  must  give  instructions  as  it  were  with  one 
mouth;  because  if  any  error  shall  be  committed, 
life  is  altogether  overthrown.  In  that  former 
part,  as  there  is  less  danger,  so  there  is  more 
difficulty ;  because  the  obscurity  of  the  subject 
compels  us  to  entertain  different  and  various 
opinions.  But  in  this,  as  there  is  more  danger, 
so  there  is  less  difficulty ;  because  the  very  use 
of  the  subjects  and  daily  experiments  are  able 
to  teach  what  is  truer  and  better.  Let  us  see, 
therefore,  wliether  they  agree,  or  what  assistance 
they  give  us  for  the  better  guidance  of  life.  It 
is  not  necessary  to  enlarge  on  every  point ;  let 
us  select  one,  and  especially  that  which  is  the 
chief  and  principal  thing,  in  which  the  whole  of 
wisdom  centres  and  depends.^  Epicurus  deems 
that  the  chief  good  consists  in  pleasure  of  mind, 
Aristippus  in  pleasure  of  the  body.  Callipho 
and  Dinomachus  united  virtue  with  pleasure, 
Diodorus  with  the  privation  of  pain.  Hierony- 
mus  placed  the  chief  good  in  the  absence  of 
pain ;  the  Peripatetics,  again,  in  the  goods  of 
the    mind,  the   body,  and    fortune.     The   chief 


'  Natural  philosophy. 

*  The  hinge  of  wisdom  altogether  turns. 


good  of  Herillus  is  knowledge  ;  that  of  Zeno,  to 
live  agreeably  to  nature  ;  that  of  certain  Stoics, 
to  follow  virtue.  Aristotle  placed  the  chief  good 
in  integrity  and  virtue.  These  are  the  senti- 
ments of  nearly  all.  In  such  a  difference  of 
opinions,  whom  do  we  follow?  whom  do  we  be- 
lieve ?  All  are  of  equal  authority.  If  we  are  able 
to  select  that  which  is  better,  it  follows  that  phi- 
losophy is  not  necessary  for  us  ;  because  we  are 
already  wise,  inasmuch  as  we  judge  respecting 
the  opinions  of  the  wise.  But  since  we  come 
for  the  sake  of  learning  wisdom,  how  can  we 
judge,  w4io  have  not  yet  begun  to  be  wise?  es- 
pecially when  the  Academic  is  close  at  hand,  to 
draw  us  back  by  the  cloak,  and  forbid  us  to  be- 
lieve any  one,  without  bringing  forward  that 
which  we  may  follow. 

CHAP.  VIII. OF  THE  CHIEF  GOOD,  AND  THE  PLEAS- 
URES OF   THE    SOUL  AND  BODY,  AND  OF    VIRTUE. 

What  then  remains,  but  that  we  leave  raving 
and  obstinate  wranglers,  and  come  to  the  judge, 
who  is  in  truth  the  giver  of  simple  and  calm 
wisdom?  which  is  able  not  only  to  mould  us, 
and  lead  us  into  the  way,  but  also  to  pass  an 
opinion  on  the  controversies  of  those  men.  This 
teaches  us  what  is  the  true  and  highest  good  of 
man  ;  but  before  I  begin  to  speak  on  this  sub- 
ject, all  those  opinions  must  be  refuted,  that  it 
may  appear  that  no  one  of  those  philosophers  viz.% 
wise.  Since  the  inquiry  is  respecting  the  duty 
of  man,  the  chief  good  of  the  chief  animal  ought 
to  be  placed  in  that  which  it  cannot  have  in 
common  with  the  other  animals.  But  as  teeth 
are  the  peculiar  property  of  wild  beasts,  horns 
of  cattle,  and  wings  of  birds,  so  something  pecul- 
iar to  himself  ought  to  be  attributed  to  man, 
without  which  he  would  lose  the  fixed  ^  order  of 
his  condition.  For  that  which  is  given  to  all  for 
the  purpose  of  life  or  generation,  is  indeed  a 
natural  good  ;  but  still  it  is  not  the  greatest,  un- 
less it  be  peculiar  to  each  class.  Therefore  he 
was  not  a  wise  man  who  believed  that  pleasure 
of  the  mind  is  the  chief  good,  since  that,  whether 
it  be  freedom  from  anxiety  or  joy,  is  common 
to  all.  I  do  not  consider  Aristippus  even  worthy 
of  an  answer  ;  for  since  he  is  always  rushing  into 
pleasures  of  the  body,  and  is  only  the  slave  of 
sensual  indulgences,  no  one  can  regard  him  as  a 
man :  for  he  lived  in  such  a  manner  that  there 
was  no  difference  between  him  and  a  brute,  ex- 
cept this  only,  that  he  had  the  faculty  of  speech. 
But  if  the  power  of  speaking  were  given  to  the 
ass,  or  the  dog,  or  swine,  and  you  were  to  in- 
quire from  these  why  they  so  furiously  pursue 
the  females,  that  they  can  scarcely  be  separated 
from  them,  and  even  neglect  their  food  and 
drink  ;  why  they  either  drive  away  other  males, 

3  Rationem,  "  the  plan  or  method  of  his  condition." 


Chap.  VIIT.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


75 


or  do  not  abstain  from  the  pursuit  even  when 
vanquished,  but  often,  when  bruised  by  stronger 
animals,  they  are  more  determined  in  their  pur- 
suit ;  why  they  dread  neither  rain  nor  cold  ;  why 
they  undertake  labour,  and  do  not  shrink  from 
danger  ;  —  what  other  answer  will  they  give,  but 
that  the  chief  good  is  bodily  pleasure  ?  —  that 
they  eagerly  seek  it,  in  order  that  they  may  be 
affected  with  the  most  agreeable  sensations  ;  and 
that  these  are  of  so  much  importance,  that,  for 
the  sake  of  attaining  them,  they  imagine  that  no 
labour,  nor  wounds,  nor  death  itself,  ought  to  be 
refused  by  them?  Shall  we  then  seek  precepts 
of  living  from  these  men,  who  have  no  other 
feelings  than  those  of  the  irrational  creatures? 

The  Cyrenaics  say  that  virtue  itself  is  to  be 
praised  on  this  account,  because  it  is  productive 
of  pleasure.  True,  says  the  filthy  dog,  or  the 
swine  wallowing  in  the  mire.'  For  it  is  on  this 
account  that  I  contend  with  my  adversary  with 
the  utmost  exertion  of  strength,  that  my  valour 
may  procure  for  me  pleasure  ;  of  which  I  must 
necessarily  be  deprived  if  I  shall  come  off  van- 
quished. Shall  we  therefore  learn  wisdom  from 
these  men,  who  differ  from  cattle  and  the  brutes, 
not  in  feeling,  but  in  language  ?  To  regard  the 
absence  of  pain  as  the  chief  good,  is  not  indeed 
the  part  of  Peripatetic  and  Stoic,  but  of  clinical 
philosophers.  For  who  would  not  imagine  that 
the  discussion  was  carried  on  by  those  who  were 
ill,  and  under  the  influence  of  some  pain  ?  What 
is  so  ridiculous,  as  to  esteem  that  the  chief  good 
which  the  physician  is  able  to  give  ?  W' e  must 
therefore  feel  pain  in  order  that  we  may  enjoy 
good ;  and  that,  too,  severely  and  frecjuently, 
that  afterwards  the  absence  of  pain  may  be 
attended  with  greater  pleasure.  He  is  therefore 
most  wretched  who  has  never  felt  pain,  because 
he  is  without  that  which  is  good  ;  whereas  we 
used  to  regard  him  as  most  happy,  because  he 
was  without  evil.  He  was  not  far  distant  from 
this  folly,  who  said  that  the  entire  absence  of 
pain  was  the  chief  good.  For,  besides  the  fact 
that  every  animal  avoids  pain,  who  can  bestow 
upon  himself  that  good,  towards  the  obtaining 
of  which  we  can  do  no  more  than  wish  ?  But 
the  chief  good  cannot  make  any  one  happy, 
unless  it  shall  be  always  in  his  power ;  and  it  is 
not  virtue,  nor  learning,  norlaljour,  which  affords 
this  to  man,  but  nature  herself  bestows  it  upon 
all  living  creatures.  They  who  joined  pleasure 
with  virtuous  principle,  wished  to  avoid  this 
common  blending  together  of  all,  b\it  they  made 
a  contradictory  kind  of  good  ;  since  he  who  is 
abandoned  to  pleasure  must  of  necessity  be 
destitute  of  virtuous  principle,  and  he  who  aims 
at  principle  must  be  destitute  of  pleasure. 

The  chief  good  of  the   Peripatetics  may  pos- 


'  [Sus  ille  lutulentus.     2  Pet.  ii.  22.] 


sibly  appear  excessive,  various,  and  —  excepting 
those  goods  which  belong  to  the  mind,  and  what 
they  are  is  a  great  subject  of  dispute  —  common 
to  man  with  the  beasts.  For  goods  belonging 
to  the  body  —  that  is,  safety,  freedom  from  pain, 
health  —  are  no  less  necessary  for  dumb  creatures 
than  for  man ;  and  I  know  not  if  they  are  not 
more  necessary  for  them,  because  man  can  be 
relieved  by  remedies  and  services,  the  dumb 
animals  cannot.  The  same  is  true  of  those  which 
they  call  the  goods  of  fortune ;  for  as  man  has 
need  of  resources  for  the  support  of  life,  so 
have  they^  need  of  prey  and  pasture.  Thus, 
by  introducing  a  good  which  is  not  within  the 
power  of  man,  they  made  man  altogether  subject 
to  the  power  of  another.  Let  us  also  hear  Zeno, 
for  he  at  times  dreams  of  virtue.  The  chief 
good,  he  says,  is  to  live  in  accordance  with  na- 
ture. Therefore  we  must  live  after  the  manner 
of  the  brutes.  For  in  these  are  found  all  the 
things  which  ought  to  be  absent  from  man  :  they 
are  eager  for  pleasures,  they  fear,  they  deceive, 
they  lie  in  wait,  they  kill ;  and  that  which  is 
especially  to  the  point,  they  have  no  knowledge 
of  God.  Why,  therefore,  does  he  teach  me  to 
live  according  to  nature,  which  is  of  itself  prone 
to  a  worse  course,  and  under  the  influence  of 
some  more  soothing  blandishments  plunges  head- 
long into  vices  ?  Or  if  he  says  that  the  nature 
of  brutes  is  different  from  the  nature  of  man, 
because  man  is  born  to  virtue,  he  says  something 
to  the  purpose ;  but,  however,  it  will  not  be  a 
definition  of  the  chief  good,  because  there  is  no 
animal  which  does  not  live  in  accordance  with 
its  nature. 

He  who  made  knowledge  the  chief  good,  gave 
something  peculiar  to  man ;  but  men  desire 
knowledge  for  the  sake  of  something  else,  and 
not  for  its  own  sake.  For  who  is  contented  with 
knowing,  without  seeking  some  advantage  from 
his  knowledge?  The  arts  are  learned  for  the 
purpose  of  being  put  into  exercise  ;  but  they  are 
exercised  either  for  the  support  of  life,  or  pleas- 
ure, or  for  glory.  That,  therefore,  is  not  the 
chief  good  which  is  not  sought  for  on  its  own 
account.  What  difference,  therefore,  does  it 
make,  whether  we  consider  knowledge  to  be  the 
chief  good,  or  those  very  things  which  knowledge 
produces  from  itself,  that  is,  means  of  subsist- 
ence, glory,  pleasure?  And  these  things  are 
not  peculiar  to  man,  and  therefore  they  are  not 
the  chief  goods  ;  for  the  desire  of  pleasure  and 
of  food  does  not  exist  in  man  alone,  but  also  in 
the  brutes.  How  is  it  with  regard  to  the  desire 
of  glory?  Is  it  not  discovered  in  horses,  since 
they  exult  in  victory,  and  are  grieved  wlien  van- 
quished ?  "  So  great  is  their  love  of  i)raises,  so 
great  is  their  eagerness  for  victory."  ^    Nor  with- 


*  They,  i.e.,  the  beasts  of  prey  and  the  tame  animals 
3  Virg.,  Georg.,  iii.  112,  102. 


76 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  III. 


out  reason  does  that  most  excellent  poet  say  that 
we  must  try  "  what  grief  they  feel  when  over- 
come, and  how  they  rejoice  in  victory."  But  if 
those  things  which  knowledge  produces  are  com- 
mon to  man  with  other  animals,  it  follows  that 
knowledge  is  not  the  chief  good.  Moreover, 
it  is  no  slight  fault  of  this  definition  that  bare 
knowledge  is  set  forth.  For  all  will  begin  to 
appear  happy  who  shall  have  the  knowledge  of 
any  art,  even  those  who  shall  know  mischievous 
subjects  ;  so  that  he  who  shall  have  learned  to 
mix  poisons,  is  as  happy  as  he  who  has  learned 
to  apply  remedies.  I  ask,  therefore,  to  what 
subject  knowledge  is  to  be  referred.  If  to  the 
causes  of  natural  things,  what  happiness  will  be 
proposed  to  me,  if  I  shall  know  the  sources  of 
the  Nile,  or  the  vain  dreams  of  the  natural  phi- 
losophers respecting  the  heaven?  Why  should 
I  mention  that  on  these  subjects  there  is  no 
knowledge,  but  mere  conjecture,  which  varies 
according  to  the  abilities  of  men?  It  only  re- 
mains that  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  things 
is  the  chief  good.  Why,  then,  did  he  call  knowl- 
edge the  chief  good  more  than  wisdom,  when 
both  words  have  the  same  signification  and 
meaning?  But  no  one  has  yet  said  that  the 
chief  good  is  wisdom,  though  this  might  more 
properly  have  been  said.  For  knowledge  is  in- 
sufficient for  the  undertaking  of  that  which  is 
good  and  avoiding  that  which  is  evil,  unless  vir- 
tue also  is  added.  For  many  of  the  philoso- 
phers, though  they  discussed  the  nature  of  good 
and  evil  things,  yet  from  the  compulsion  of 
nature  lived  in  a  manner  different  from  their 
discourse,  because  they  were  without  virtue. 
But  virtue  united  with  knowledge  is  wisdom. 

It  remains  that  we  refute  those  also  who 
judged  virtue  itself  to  be  the  chief  good,  and 
Marcus  Tullius  was  also  of  this  opinion  ;  and  in 
this  they  "were  very  inconsiderate.'  For  virtue 
itself  is  not  the  chief  good,  but  it  is  the  contriver 
and  mother  of  the  chief  good  ;  for  this  cannot 
be  attained  without  virtue.  Each  point  is  easily 
understood.  For  I  ask  whether  they  imagine 
that  it  is  easy  to  arrive  at  that  distinguished 
good,  or  that  it  is  reached  only  with  difficulty 
and  labour?  Let  them  apply  their  ingenuity, 
and  defend  error.  If  it  is  easily  attained  to,  and 
without  labour,  it  cannot  be  the  chief  good. 
For  why  should  we  torment  ourselves,  why  wear 
ourselves  out  with  striving  day  and  night,  seeing 
that  the  object  of  our  pursuit  is  so  close  at  hand, 
that  any  one  who  wishes  may  grasp  it  without 
any  effort  of  the  mind?  But  if  we  do  not  attain 
even  to  a  common  and  moderate  good  except 
by  labour,  since  good  things  are  by  their  nature 
arduous  and  difficult.^  whereas  evil  things  have  a 

'  [De  Finibits,  book  v.  cap.  28.] 

^  Literally,  "  since  the  nature  of  good  things  is  placed  on  a  steep 
ascent,  that  of  evil  things  on  a  precipitous  descent." 


downward  tendency,  it  follows  that  the  greatest 
labour  is  necessary  for  the  attainment  of  the 
greatest  good.  And  if  this  is  most  true,  then 
there  is  need  of  another  virtue,  that  we  may 
arrive  at  that  virtue  which  is  called  the  chief 
good ;  but  this  is  incongruous  and  absurd,  that 
virtue  should  arrive  at  itself  by  means  of  itself. 
If  no  good  can  be  reached  unless  by  labour,  it 
is  evident  that  it  is  virtue  by  which  it  is  reached, 
since  the  force  and  office  of  virtue  consist  in  the 
undertaking  and  carrying  through  of  labours. 
Therefore  the  chief  good  cannot  be  that  by 
which  it  is  necessary  to  arrive  at  another.  But 
they,  since  they  were  ignorant  of  the  effects  and 
tendency  of  virtue,  and  could  discover  nothing 
more  honourable,  stopped  at  the  very  name  of 
virtue,  and  said  that  it  ought  to  be  sought, 
though  no  advantage  was  proposed  from  it ;  and 
thus  they  fixed  for  themselves  a  good  which  it- 
self stood  in  need  of  a  good.  From  these  Aris- 
totle was  not  far  removed,  who  thought  that 
virtue  together  with  honour  was  the  chief  good ; 
as  though  it  were  possible  for  any  virtue  to  exist 
unless  it  were  honourable,  and  as  though  it 
would  not  cease  to  be  virtue  if  it  had  any 
measure  of  disgrace.  But  he  saw  that  it  might 
happen  that  a  bad  opinion  is  entertained  respect- 
ing virtue  by  a  depraved  judgment,  and  there- 
fore he  thought  that  deference  should  be  paid 
to  what  in  the  estimation  of  men  constitutes  a 
departure  from  what  is  right  and  good,  because 
it  is  not  in  our  power  that  virtue  should  be  hon- 
oured simply  for  its  own  deserts.  For  what  is 
honourable  ^  character,  except  perpetual  honour, 
conferred  on  any  one  by  the  favourable  report 
of  the  people?  What,  then,  will  happen,  if 
through  the  error  and  perverseness  of  men  a 
bad  reputation  should  ensue  ?  Shall  Ave  cast 
aside  virtue  because  it  is  judged  to  be  base  and 
disgraceful  by  the  foolish?  And  since  it  is  capa- 
ble of  being  oppressed  and  harassed,  in  order 
that  it  may  be  of  itself  a  peculiar  and  lasting 
good,  it  ought  to  stand  in  need  of  no  outward 
assistance,  so  as  not  to  depend  by  itself  upon  its 
own  strength,  and  to  remain  stedfast.  And  thus 
no  good  is  to  be  hoped  by  it  from  man,  nor  is 
any  evil  to  be  refused. 

CHAP.  IX. OF  THE  CHIEF  GOOD,  AND  THE  WOR- 
SHIP OF  THE  TRUE  GOD,  AND  A  REFUTATION 
OF   ANAXAGORAS. 

I  now  come  to  the  chief  good  of  tme  wisdom, 
the  nature  of  which  is  to  be  determined  in  this 
manner :  first,  it  must  be  the  property  of  man 
alone,  and  not  belong  to  any  other  animal ; 
secondly,  it  must  belong  to  the  soul  only,  and 


3  Honestas  is  used  with  some  latitude  of  meaning,  to  express  re- 
spectability of  character,  or  honourable  feeling,  or  the  principle  of 
honour,  or  virtue  itself.     [See  Philipp.  iv.  8.j 


Chap.  X.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


11 


not  be  shared  with  the  body  ;  lastly,  it  cannot 
fall  to  the  lot  of  any  one  without  knowledge  and 
virtue.  Now  this  limitation  excludes  and  does 
away  with  all  the  opinions  of  those  tiiJiom  I  have 
mentioned ;  for  their  sayings  contain  nothing  of 
this  kind.  I  will  now  say  what  this  is,  that  I 
may  show,  as  I  designed,  that  all  philosophers 
were  blind  and  foolish,  who  could  neither  see, 
nor  understand,  nor  surmise  at  any  time  what 
was  fixed  as  the  chief  good  for  man.  Anaxago- 
ras,  when  asked  for  what  purpose  he  was  born, 
replied  that  he  might  look  upon  the  heaven  and 
the  sun.  This  expression  is  admired  by  all,  and 
judged  worthy  of  a  philosopher.  But  I  think 
that  he,  being  unprepared  with  an  answer,  uttered 
this  at  random,  that  he  might '  not  be  silent. 
But  if  he  had  been  wise,  he  ought  to  have  con- 
sidered and  reflected  with  himself;  for  if  any 
one  is  ignorant  of  his  own  condition,  he  cannot 
even  be  a  man.  But  let  us  imagine  that  the  say- 
ing was  not  uttered  on  the  spur  of  the  moment. 
Let  us  see  how  many  and  what  great  errors  he 
committed  in  three  words.  First,  he  erred  in 
placing  the  whole  duty  of  man  in  the  eyes  alone, 
referring  nothing  to  the  mind,  but  everything  to 
the  body.  But  if  he  had  been  blind,  would  he 
lose  the  duty  of  a  man,  which  cannot  happen 
without  the  ruin^  of  the  soul?  What  of  the 
other  parts  of  the  body?  Will  they  be  destitute, 
each  of  its  own  duty?  Why  should  I  say  that 
more  depends  upon  the  ears  than  upon  the  eye, 
since  learning  and  wisdom  can  be  gained  by  the 
ears  only,  but  not  by  the  eyes  only?  Were  you 
born  for  the  sake  of  seeing  the  heaven  and  the 
sun  ?  Who  introduced  you  to  this  ^  sight  ?  or 
what  does  your  vision  contribute  to  the  heaven 
and  the  nature  of  things?  Doubtless  that  you 
may  praise  this  immense  and  wonderful  work. 
Therefore  confess  that  God  is  the  Creator  of  all 
things,  who  introduced  you  into  this  world,  as  a 
witness  and  praiser  of  His  great  work.  You  be- 
lieve that  it  is  a  great  thing  to  behold  the  heaven 
and  the  sun  :  why,  therefore,  do  you  not  give 
thanks  to  Him  who  is  the  author  of  this  benefit  ? 
why  do  you  not  measure  with  your  mind  the  ex- 
cellence, the  providence,  and  the  power  of  Him 
whose  works  you  admire?  For  it  must  be,  that 
He  who  created  objects  worthy  of  admiration,  is 
Himself  much  more  to  be  admired.  If  any  one 
had  invited  you  to  dinner,  and  you  had  been  well 
entertained,  should  you  appear  in  your  senses,  if 
you  esteemed  the  mere  pleasure  more  highly 
than  the  author  of  the  pleasure?  So  entirely 
do  philosophers  refer  all  things  to  the  body,  and 
nothing  at  all  to  the  mind,  nor  do  they  see  be- 
yond that  which  falls  under  their  eyes.     But  all 


■  That  he  might  be  able  to  make  some  answer. 
^  The  fall  or  overthrow. 

3  This  sight  orsfiectaclc,  that  is,  into  this  world.     This  expression 
is  used  for  the  place  from  wliich  the  sight  is  beheld. 


the  offices  of  the  body  being  put  aside,  the  busi- 
ness of  man  is  to  be  placed  in  the  mind  alone. 
Therefore  we  are  not  born  for  this  purpose,  that 
we  may  see  those  things  which  are  created,  but 
that  we  may  contemplate,  that  is,  behold  with 
our  mind,  the  Creator  of  all  things  Himself. 
Wherefore,  if  any  one  should  ask  a  man  who  is 
truly  wise  for  what  purpose  he  was  born,  he  will 
answer  without  fear  or  hesitation,  that  he  was 
born  for  the  purpose  of  worshipping  God,  who 
brought  us  into  being  for  his  cause,  that  we  may 
serve  Him.  But  to  serve  God  is  nothing  else 
than  to  maintain  and  preserve  justice  by  good 
works.  But  he,  as  a  man  ignorant  of  divine 
things,  reduced  a  matter  of  the  greatest  magni- 
tude to  the  least,  by  selecting  two  things  only, 
which  he  said  were  to  be  beheld  by  him.  But 
if  he  had  said  that  he  was  born  to  behold  the 
world,  although  he  would  comprise  all  things  in 
this,  and  would  use  an  expression  of  greater  •♦ 
sound,  yet  he  would  not  have  completed  the 
duty  of  man ;  for  as  much  as  the  soul  excels 
the  body,  so  much  does  God  excel  the  world,  for 
God  made  and  governs  the  world.  Therefore  it 
is  not  the  world  which  is  to  be  contemplated  by 
the  eye,  for  each  is  a  body  ;  5  but  it  is  God  who 
is  to  be  contemplated  by  the  soul :  for  God,  be- 
ing Himself  immortal,  willed  that  the  soul  also 
should  be  everlasting.  But  the  contemplation 
of  God  is  the  reverence  and  worship  of  the 
common  Parent  of  mankind.  And  if  the  phi- 
losophers were  destitute  of  this,  and  in  their 
ignorance  of  divine  things  prostrated  themselves 
to  the  earth,  we  must  suppose  that  Anaxagoras 
neither  beheld  the  heaven  nor  the  sun,  though 
he  said  that  he  was  born  that  he  might  behold 
them.  The  object  proposed  to  man  is  therefore 
plain  ^  and  easy,  if  he  is  wise  ;  and  to  it  espe- 
cially belongs  humanity. 7  For  what  is  humanity 
itself,  but  justice?  what  is  justice,  but  piety? 
And  piety  ^  is  nothing  else  than  the  recognition 
of  God  as  a  parent. 

CHAP.     X. IT     IS     THE     PECULI.A.R     PROPERTY     OF 

MAN    TO    KNOW   AND    WORSHIP   GOD. 

Therefore  the  chief  good  of  man  is  in  religion 
only ;  for  the  other  things,  even  those  which  are 
supposed  to  be  peculiar  to  man,  are  found  in  the 
other  animals  also.  For  when  they  discern  and 
distinguish  their  own  voices  9  by  peculiar  marks 
among  themselves,  they  seem  to  converse  :  they 
also  appear  to  have  a  kind  of  smile,  when  with 
soothed  ears,  and  contracted  mouth,  and  with 


*  Would  use  a  greater  sound. 

S  Each,  viz.,  the  world  and  the  eye. 

*  Expedita,  "  free  from  obst.icles,"  "  unembarrassed." 

'  Humanity,  properly  that  which  is  characteristic  of  man,  then 
kindness  and  hnmaneness. 

^  I'ietas.  The  word  denotes  not  only  piety  towards  God,  but  also 
the  affection  due  to  a  parent. 

9  The  sounds  uttered  by  the  beasts,  by  which  they  are  able  to 
distinguish  one  another.      [Rousseau's  theory  goes  further.] 


78 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  III. 


eyes  relaxed  to  sportiveness,  they  fawn  upon 
man,  or  upon  their  own  mates  and  young.  Do 
they  not  give  a  greeting  which  bears  some  re- 
semblance to  mutual  love  and  indulgence? 
Again,  those  creatures  which  look  forward  to 
the  future  and  lay  up  for  themselves  food,  plainly 
have  foresight.  Indications  of  reason  are  also 
found  in  many  of  them.  For  since  they  desire 
things  useful  to  themselves,  guard  against  evils, 
avoid  dangers,  prepare  for  themselves  lurking- 
places  standing  open  in  different  places  with 
various  outlets,  assuredly  they  have  some  under- 
standing. Can  any  one  deny  that  they  are  pos- 
sessed of  reason,  since  they  often  deceive  man 
himself?  For  those  which  have  the  office  of 
producing  honey,  when  they  inhabit  the  place 
assigned  to  them,  fortify  a  camp,  construct  dwell- 
ings with  unspeakable  skill,  and  obey  their  king ; 
I  know  not  if  there  is  not  in  them  perfect  pru- 
dence. It  is  therefore  uncertain  whether  those 
things  which  are  given  to  man  are  common  to 
him  with  other  living  creatures  :  they  are  certainly 
without  religion.  I  indeed  thus  judge,  that  reason 
is  given  to  all  animals,  but  to  the  dumb  creatures 
only  for  the  protection  of  life,  to  man  also  for 
its  prolongation.  And  because  reason  itself  is 
perfect  in  man,  it  is  named  wisdom,  which  ren- 
ders man  distinguished  in  this  respect,  that  to 
him  alone  it  is  given  to  comprehend  divine  things. 
And  concerning  this  the  opinion  of  Cicero  is 
true  :  "  Of  so  many  kinds  of  animals,"  he  says, 
"  there  is  none  except  man  which  has  any  knowl- 
edge of  God  ;  and  among  men  themselves,  there 
is  no  nation  either  so  uncivilized  or  so  savage, 
which,  even  if  it  is  ignorant  of  due  conceptions  of 
the  Deity,  does  not  know  that  some  conception 
of  Him  ought  to  be  entertained."  From  which 
it  is  effected,  that  he  acknowledges  God,  who, 
as  It  were,  calls  to  mind  the  source  from  which 
he  is  sprung.  Those  philosophers,  therefore, 
who  wish  to  free  the  mind  from  all  fear,  take 
away  even  religion,  and  thus  deprive  man  of  his 
peculiar  and  surpassing  good,  which  is  distinct 
from  living  uprightly,  and  from  everything  con- 
nected with  man,  because  God,  who  made  all 
living  creatures  subject  to  man,  also  made  man 
subject  to  Himself.  What  reason  is  there  why 
they  should  also  maintain  that  the  mind  is  to  be 
turned  in  the  same  direction  to  which  the  counte- 
nance is  raised?  For  if  we  must  look  to  the 
heaven,  it  is  undoubtedly  for  no  other  reason  than 
on  account  of  religion  ;  if  religion  is  taken  away, 
we  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  heaven.  There- 
fore we  must  either  look  in  that  direction  or  bend 
down  to  the  earth.  We  are  not  aljle  to  bend 
down  to  the  earth,  even  if  we  should  wish,  since 
our  posture  is  upright.  We  must  therefore  look 
up  to  the  heaven,  to  which  the  nature  of  the 
body  calls  us.  And  if  it  is  admitted  that  this 
must  be  done,  it  must  either  be  done  with  this 


view,  that  we  may  devote  ourselves  to  religion, 
or  that  we  may  know  the  nature  of  the  heavenly 
objects.  But  we  cannot  by  any  means  know  the 
nature  of  the  heavenly  objects,  because  nothing 
of  that  kind  can  be  found  out  by  reflection,  as  I 
have  before  shown.  We  must  therefore  devote 
ourselves  to  religion,  and  he  who  does  not  under- 
take this  prostrates  himself  to  the  ground,  and, 
imitating  the  life  of  the  brutes,  abdicates  the 
office  of  man.  Therefore  the  ignorant  are  more 
wise  ;  for  although  they  err  in  choosing  religion, 
yet  they  remember  their  own  nature  and  condition. 

CHAP.  XI. OF  RELIGION,  WISDOM,  .4ND  THE  CHIEF 

GOOD. 

It  is  agreed  upon,  therefore,  by  the  general 
consent  of  all  mankind,  that  religion  ought  to  be 
undertaken  ;  but  we  have  to  explain  what  errors 
are  committed  on  this  subject.  God  willed  this 
to  be  the  nature  of  man,  that  he  should  be 
desirous  and  eager  for  two  things,  religion  and 
wisdom.  But  men  are  mistaken  in  this,  that 
they  either  undertake  religion  and  pay  no  atten- 
tion to  wisdom,  or  they  devote  themselves  to 
wisdom  alone,  and  pay  no  attention  to  religion, 
though  the  one  cannot  be  true  without  the  other. 
The  consequence  is,  that  they  fall  into  a  multi- 
plicity of  religions,  but  false  ones,  because  they 
have  left  wisdom,  which  could  have  taught  them 
that  there  cannot  be  many  gods  ;  or  they  devote 
themselves  to  wisdom,  but  a  false  wisdom,  be- 
cause they  have  paid  no  attention  to  the  religion 
of  the  Supreme  (jod,  who  might  have  instructed 
them  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  Thus  men 
who  undertake  either  of  these  courses  follow  a 
devious  path,  and  one  full  of  the  greatest  errors, 
inasmuch  as  the  duty  of  man,  and  all  truth,  are 
included  in  these  two  things  which  are  insepa- 
rably connected.  I  wonder,  therefore,  that  there 
was  none  at  all  of  the  philosophers  who  discov- 
ered the  abode  and  dwelling-place  of  the  chief 
good.  For  they  might  have  sought  it  in  this 
manner.  Whatever  the  greatest  good  is,  it  must 
be  an  object  proposed  to  all  men.  There  is 
pleasure,  which  is  desired  by  all ;  but  this  is 
common  also  to  man  with  the  beasts,  and  has 
not  the  force  of  the  honourable,  and  brings  a 
feeling  of  satiety,  and  when  it  is  in  excess  is  in- 
jurious, and  it  is  lessened  by  advance  of  age,  and 
does  not  fall  to  the  lot  of  many  :  for  they  who 
are  without  resources,  who  constitute  the  greater 
part  of  men,  must  also  be  without  pleasure. 
Therefore  pleasure  is  not  the  chief  good  ;  but  it 
is  not  even  a  good.  What  shall  we  say  of  riches  ? 
This  is  much  more  '  true  of  them.  For  they  fall 
to  the  lot  of  fewer  men,  and  that  generally  by 
chance  ;  and  they  often  fall  to  the  indolent,  and 

'  Multo  magis  is  the  reading  of  the  MSS.;  but  multo  minus  — 
"  much  leis  "  —  seems  preferable. 


Chap.  XIL] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


79 


sometimes  by  guilt,  and  they  are  desired  by 
tliose  wlio  already  possess  them.  What  shall  we 
say  of  sovereignty  itself?  That  does  not  consti- 
tute the  chief  good  :  for  all  cannot  reign,  but  it 
is  necessary  that  all  should  be  capable  of  attain- 
ing the  chief  good. 

Let  US  therefore  seek  something  which  is  held 
forth  to  all.  Is  it  virtue?  It  cannot  be  denied 
that  virtue  is  a  good,  and  undoubtedly  a  good 
for  all  men.  But  if  it  cannot  be  happy  because 
its  power  and  nature  consist  in  the  endurance  of 
evil,  it  assuredly  is  not  the  chief  good.  Let  us 
seek  something  else.  But  nothing  can  be  found 
more  beautiful  than  virtue,  nothing  more  worthy 
of  a  wise  man.  For  if  vices  are  to  be  avoided 
on  account  of  their  deformity,  virtue  is  therefore 
to  be  desired  on  account  of  its  beauty.  What 
then  ?  Can  it  be  that  that  which  is  admitted  to 
be  good  and  honourable  should  be  requited 
with  no  reward,  and  be  so  unproductive  as  to 
procure  no  advantage  from  itself?  That  great 
labour  and  difficulty  and  struggling  against  evils 
with  which  this  life  is  filled,  must  of  necessity 
produce  some  great  good.  But  what  shall  we 
say  that  it  is  ?  Pleasure  ?  But  nothing  that  is 
base  can  arise  from  that  which  is  honourable. 
Shall  we  say  that  it  is  riches?  or  commands? 
But  these  things  are  frail  and  uncertain.'  Is  it 
glory?  or  honour?  or  a  lasting  name?  But  all 
these  things  are  not  contained  in  virtue  itself, 
but  depend  upon  the  opinion  and  judgment  of 
others.  For  virtue  is  often  hated  and  visited 
with  evil.  But  the  good  which  arises  from  it 
ought  to  be  so  closely  united  with  it  as  to  be  in- 
capable of  being  separated  or  disunited  from  it ; 
and  it  cannot  apjiear  to  be  the  chief  good  in  any 
other  way  than  if  it  belongs  peculiarly  to  virtue, 
and  is  such  that  notJiing  can  be  added  to  it  or 
taken  from  it.  WHiy  should  I  say  that  the  duties 
of  virtue  consist  in  the  despising  of  all  these 
things  ?  For  not  to  long  for,  or  desire,  or  love 
pleasures,  riches,  dominions,  and  honours,  and 
all  those  things  which  are  esteemed  as  goods,  as 
others  do  overpowered  by  desire,  that  assuredly 
is  virtue.  Therefore  it  effects  something  else 
more  sublime  and  excellent ;  nor  does  anything 
struggle  against  these  present  goods  but  that 
which  longs  for  greater  and  truer  things.  Let 
us  not  despair  of  l)eing  able  to  find  it,  if  we  turn 
our  thoughts  in  all  directions ;  for  no  slight  or 
trifling  rewards  are  sought. 

CHAP.  XII. OF   THE   TWOFOLD    CONFLICT  OF  P.ODV 

AND  SOUL  ;  AND  OF  DESIRING  VIRTUE  ON  ACCOUNT 
OF  ETERNAL  LIFE. 

But  our  inquiry  is  as  to  tlie  object  for  which 
we  are  born  :  and  thus  we  are  able  to  trace  out 


'  Liable  to  fall,  perishable. 


what  is  the  effect  of  virtue.  There  are  two* 
parts  of  which  man  is  made  up,  soul  and  body. 
There  are  many  things  peculiar  to  the  soul,  many 
peculiar  to  the  body,  many  common  to  both,  as 
is  virtue  itself;  and  as  often  as  this  is  referred  to 
the  body,  it  is  called  fortitude  for  the  sake  of 
distinction.  Since,  therefore,  fortitude  is  con- 
nected with  each,  a  contest  is  proposed  to  each, 
and  victory  held  forth  to  each  from  the  contest  : 
the  body,  because  it  is  solid,  and  capable  of 
being  grasped,  must  contend  with  objects  which 
are  solid  and  can  be  grasped ;  but  the  soul,  on 
the  other  hand,  because  it  is  slight ^  and  subtle, 
and  invisible,  contends  with  those  enemies  who 
cannot  be  seen  and  touched.  But  what  are  the 
enemies  of  the  soul,  but  lusts,  vices,  and  sins? 
And  if  virtue  shall  have  overcome  and  put  to 
flight  these,  the  soul  will  be  pure  and  free  from 
stain.  Whence,  then,  are  we  able  to  collect  what 
are  the  effects  of  fortitude  of  soul?  Doubtless 
from  that  which  is  closely  connected  with  it,  and 
resembles  it,  that  is,  from  fortitude  of  the  body ; 
for  when  this  has  come  to  any  encounter  and 
contest,  what  else  does  it  seek  from  victory  but 
life  ?  For  whether  you  contend  with  a  man  or 
beast,  the  contest  is  for  safety.  Therefore,  as 
the  body  obtains  by  victory  its  preservation  from 
destruction,  so  the  soul  obtains  a  continuation 
of  its  existence  ;  and  as  the  body,  when  over- 
come by  its  enemies,  suffers  death,  so  the  soul, 
when  overpowered  by  vices,  must  die.  What 
difference,  therefore,  will  there  be  between  the 
contest  carried  on  by  the  soul  and  that  carried 
on  by  the  body,  except  that  the  body  seeks  for 
temporal,  but  the  soul  eternal  life?  If,  there- 
fore, virtue  is  not  happy  by  itself,  since  its  whole 
force  consists,  as  I  have  said,  in  the  enduring  of 
evils ;  if  it  neglects  all  things  which  are  desired 
as  goods  ;  if  in  its  highest  condition  it  is  exposed 
to  death,  inasmuch  as  it  often  refuses  life,  which  is 
desired  by  others,  and  bravely  undergoes  death, 
which  others  fear  ;  if  it  must  necessarily  i)roduce 
some  great  good  from  itself,  because  labours,  en- 
dured and  overcome  even  until  death,  cannot 
fail  of  obtaining  a  reward  ;  if  no  reward,  such  as 
it  deserves,  is  found  on  earth,  inasmuch  as  it 
despises  all  things  which  are  frail  and  transitory, 
what  else  remains  but  that  it  may  effect  some 
heavenly  reward,  since  it  treats  with  contempt 
all  earthly  things,  and  may  aim  at  higher  things, 
since  it  despises  things  that  are  humble?  And 
this  retvan/  can  be  nothing  else  but  immortality. 
With  good  reason,  therefore,  did  Euclid,  no 
obscure  philosopher,  who  was  the  fountler  of 
the  system  of  the  Megareans,  differing  from  the 
others,  say  that  that  was  the  chief  good  which 


2  According  to  St.  Paul,  man  consists  of  three  parts  — body,  soul, 
and  spirit.  Lactantius  appears  to  use  the  word  -ivy;/  in  the  same 
sense  in  which  the  Scriptures  sjicak  of  spirit.      [Vol.  i.  p.  532  J 

^  Tenuis,  as  applied  to  the  soul,  opposed  to  soMus,  applied  to  the 
body. 


So 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  III. 


was  unvarying  and  always  the  same.  He  cer- 
tainly understood  what  is  the  nature  of  the  chief 
good,  although  he  did  not  explain  in  what  it  con- 
sisted ;  but  it  consists  of  immortality,  nor  anything 
else  at  all,  inasmuch  as  it  alone  is  incapable  of 
diminution,  or  increase,  or  change.  Seneca  also 
unconsciously  happened  to  confess  that  there  is 
no  other  reward  of  virtue  than  immortality.  For 
in  praising  virtue  in  the  treatise  which  he  wrote 
on  the  subject  of  premature  death,  he  says  : 
"Virtue  is  the  only  thing  which  can  confer  upon 
us  immortality,  and  make  us  equal  to  the  gods." 
But  the  Stoics  also,  \vhom  he  followed,  say  that  no 
one  can  be  made  happy  without  virtue.  There- 
fore, the  reward  of  virtue  is  a  happy  life,  if  virtue, 
as  it  is  rightly  said,  makes  a  happy  life.  Virtue, 
therefore,  is  not,  as  they  say,  to  be  sought  on  its 
own  account,  but  on  account  of  a  happy  life, 
which  necessarily  follows  virtue.  And  this  argu- 
ment might  have  taught  them  in  what  the  chief 
good  consisted.  But  this  present  and  corporeal 
life  cannot  be  happy,  because  it  is  subjected  to 
evils  through  the  body.  Epicurus  calls  God 
happy  and  incorruptible,  because  He  is  everlast- 
ing. For  a  state  of  happiness  ought  to  be  per- 
fect, so  that  there  may  be  nothing  which  can 
harass,  or  lessen,  or  change  it.  Nor  can  any- 
thing be  judged  happy  in  other  respects,  unless 
it  be  incorruptible.  But  nothing  is  incorruptible 
but  that  which  is  immortal.  Immortality  there- 
fore is  alone  happy,  because  it  can  neither  be 
corrupted  nor  destroyed.  But  if  virtue  falls 
within  tiie  power  of  man,  which  no  one  can 
deny,  happiness  also  belongs  to  him.  For  it  is 
impossible  for  a  man  to  be  wretched  who  is  en- 
dued with  virtue.  If  happiness  falls  within  his 
power,  then  immortality,  which  is  possessed  of 
the  attribute  of  happiness,  also  belongs  to  him. 

The  chief  good,  therefore,  is  found  to  be  im- 
mortality alone,  which  pertains  to  no  other  ani- 
mal or  body ;  nor  can  it  happen  to  any  one 
without  the  virtue  of  knowledge,  that  is,  without 
the  knowledge  of  God  and  justice.  And  how 
true  and  right  is  the  seeking  for  this,  the  very 
desire  of  this  life  shows  :  for  although  it  be  but 
temporary,  and  most  full  of  labour,  yet  it  is 
sought  and  desired  by  all ;  for  both  old  men  and 
boys,  kings  and  those  of  the  lowest  station,  in 
fine,  wise  as  well  as  foolish,  desire  this.  Of  such 
value,  as  it  seemed  to  Anaxagoras,  is  the  contem- 
plation of  the  heaven  and  the  light  itself,  that 
men  willingly  undergo  any  miseries  on  this  ac- 
count. Since,  therefore,  this  short  and  laborious 
life,  by  the  general  consent  not  only  of  men, 
but  also  of  other  animals,  is  considered  a  great 
good,  it  is  manifest  that  it  becomes  also  a  very 
great  and  perfect  good  if  it  is  without  an  end 
and  free  from  all  evil.  In  short,  there  never 
would  have  been  any  one  who  would  despise 
this  life,  however  short  it  is,  or  undergo  death, 


unless  through  the  hope  of  a  longer  life.  For 
those  who  voluntarily  offered  themselves  to  death 
for  the  safety  of  their  countrymen,  as  Menoeceus 
did  at  Thebes,  Codrus  at  Athens,  Curtius  and 
the  two  Mures  at  Rome,  would  never  have  pre- 
ferred death  to  the  advantages  of  life,  unless 
they  had  thought  that  they  should  attain  to  im- 
mortality through  the  estimation  of  their  coun- 
trymen ;  and  although  they  were  ignorant  of  the 
life  of  immortality,  yet  the  reality  itself  did  not 
escape  their  notice.  For  if  virtue  despises  opu- 
lence and  riches  because  they  are  frail,  and 
pleasures  because  they  are  of  brief  continuance, 
it  therefore  despises  a  life  which  is  frail  and 
brief,  that  it  may  obtain  one  which  is  substantial 
and  lasting.  Therefore  reflection  itself,  advan- 
cing by  regular  order,  and  weighing  everything, 
leads  us  to  that  excellent  and  surpassing  good, 
on  account  of  which  we  are  born.  And  if  phi- 
losophers had  thus  acted,  if  they  had  not  pre- 
ferred obstinately  to  maintain  that  which  they 
had  once  apprehended,  they  would  undoubtedly 
have  arrived  at  this  truth,  as  I  have  lately  shown. 
And  if  this  was  not  the  part  of  those  who  extin- 
guish the  heavenly  souls  together  with  the  body, 
yet  those  who  discuss  the  immortality  of  the 
soul  ought  to  have  understood  that  virtue  is  set 
before  us  on  this  account,  that,  lusts  having  been 
subdued,  and  the  desire  of  earthly  things  over- 
come, our  souls,  pure  and  victorious,  may  return 
to  God,  that  is,  to  their  original  source.  For  it 
is  on  this  account  that  we  alone  of  living  crea- 
tures are  raised  to  the  sight  of  the  heaven,  that 
we  may  believe  that  our  chief  good  is  in  the 
highest  place.  Therefore  we  alone  receive  re- 
ligion, that  we  may  know  from  this  source  that 
the  spirit  of  man  is  not  mortal,  since  it  longs 
for  and  acknowledges  God,  who  is  immortal. 

Therefore,  of  all  the  philosophers,  those  who 
have  embraced  either  knowledge  or  virtue  as  the 
chief  good,  have  kept  the  way  of  truth,  but  have 
not  arrived  at  perfection.  For  these  are  the 
two  things  which  together  make  up  that  which 
is  sought  for.  Knowledge  causes  us  to  know  by 
what  means  and  to  what  end  we  must  attain ; 
virtue  causes  us  to  attain  to  it.  The  one  with- 
out the  other  is  of  no  avail ;  for  from  knowledge 
arises  virtue,  and  from  virtue  the  chief  good  is 
produced.  Therefore  a  happy  life,  w'lich  phi- 
losophers have  always  sought,  and  still  do  seek, 
has  no  existence  either  in  the  worship  of  the 
gods  or  in  philosophy ;  and  on  this  account  they 
were  unable  to  find  it,  because  they  did  not  seek 
the  highest  good  in  the  highest  place,  but  in  the 
lowest.  For  what  is  the  highest  but  heaven,  and 
God,  from  whom  the  soul  has  its  origin?  And 
what  is  the  lowest  but  the  earth,  from  which  the 
body  is  made?  Therefore,  although  some  phi- 
losophers have  assigned  the  chief  good,  not  to 
the  body,  but  to  the  soul,  yet,  inasmuch  as  they 


Chap.  XIII.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


8i 


have  referred  it  to  this  Hfe,  which  has  its  ending 
with  the  body,  they  have  gone  back  to  the  body, 
to  which  the  whole  of  this  time  which  is  passed 
on  earth  has  reference.  Therefore  it  was  not 
without  reason  that  they  did  not  attain  to  the 
highest  good  ;  for  whatever  looks  to  the  body 
only,  and  is  without  immortality,  must  necessarily 
be  the  lowest.  Therefore  happiness  does  not 
fall  to  the  condition  of  man  in  that  manner  in 
which  philosophers  thought ;  but  it  so  foils  to 
him,  not  that  he  should  then  be  happy,  when  he 
lives  m  the  body,  which  must  undoubtedly  be 
corrupted  in  order  to  its  dissolution ;  but  then, 
when,  the 'soul  being  freed  from  intercourse  with 
the  body,  he  lives  in  the  spirit  only.  In  this 
one  thing  alone  can  we  be  happy  in  this  life,  if 
we  appear  to  be  unhappy ;  if,  avoiding  the  en- 
ticements of  pleasures,  and  giving  ourselves  to 
the  service  of  virtue  only,  we  live  in  all  labours 
and  miseries,  which  are  the  means  of  exercising 
and  strengthening  virtue ;  if,  in  short,  we  keep 
to  that  rugged  and  difficult  path  which  has  been 
opened  for  us  to  happiness.  The  chief  good 
therefore  which  makes  men  happy  cannot  exist, 
unless  it  be  in  that  religion  and  doctrine  to 
which  is  annexed  the  hope  of  immortality. 

CHAP.  XIII. OF   THE    IMMORTALITY   OF   THE    SOUL, 

AND  OF  WISDOM,  PHILOSOPHY,  AND  ELOQUENCE. 

The  subject  seems  to  require  in  this  place, 
that  since  we  have  taught  that  immortality  is 
the  chief  good,  we  should  prove  this  also,  that  the 
soul  IS  immortal.  On  which  subject  there  is 
great  disputation  among  philosophers  ;  nor  have 
they  who  held  true  opinions  respecting  the  soul 
been  able  to  explain  or  prove  anything :  for, 
being  destitute  of  divine  knowledge,  they  neither 
brought  forward  true  arguments  by  which  they 
might  overcome,  nor  evidence  by  which  they 
might  convince.  But  we  shall  treat  of  this 
question  more  conveniently  in  the  last  book, 
when  we  shall  have  to  discuss  the  subject  of  a 
happy  life.  There  remains  that  third  part  of 
philosophy,  which  they  call  Logic,  in  which  the 
whole  subject  of  dialectics  and  the  whole  meth- 
od of  speaking  are  contained.  Divine  learning 
does  not  stand  in  need  of  this,  because  the  seat 
of  wisdom  is  not  the  tongue,  but  the  heart ;  and 
it  makes  no  difference  what  kind  of  language 
you  employ,  for  the  cjucstion  is  not  about  words,' 
but  facts.  And  we  are  not  disjKiting  about  the 
grammarian  or  the  orator,  whose  knowledge  is 
concerned  with  the  proper  manner  of  speaking, 
but  about  the  wise  man,  whose  learning  is  con- 

■  There  is  a  memorable  story  related  by  ecclesiastical  historians, 
about  a  very  clever  disputant,  whose  sophistries  could  not  be  an- 
swered by  his  fellow-disputants,  but  who  was  completely  silenced  by 
the  simple  answers  of  a  Christian  otherwise  unknown.  When  ques- 
tioned about  his  sudden  silence,  the  sophist  replied  that  others  ex- 
changed words  for  words,  but  that  this  simple  Christian  fought  with 
virtue. 


cerned  with  the  right  manner  of  living.  But  if 
that  system  of  natural  philosophy  before  men- 
tioned- is  not  necessary,  nor  this  of  logic,  because 
they  are  not  able  to  render  a  man  happy,  it  re- 
mains that  the  whole  force  of  philosophy  is 
contained  in  the  ethical  part  alone,  to  which 
Socrates  is  said  to  have  applied  himself,  laying 
aside  the  others.  And  since  I  have  shown  that 
philosophers  erred  in  this  part  also,  who  did  not 
grasp  the  chief  good,  for  the  sake  of  gaining 
which  we  are  born  ;  it  appears  that  philosophy 
is  altogether  false  and  empty,  since  it  does  not 
prepare  us  for  the  duties  of  justice,  nor  strength- 
en the  obligations  and  settled  course  of  man's 
life.  Let  them  know,  therefore,  that  they  are  in 
error  who  imagine  that  philosophy  is  wisdom ; 
let  them  not  be  drawn  away  by  the  authority 
of  any  one  ;  but  rather  let  them  incline  to  the 
truth,  and  approach  it.  There  is  no  room  for 
rashness  here  ;  we  must  endure  the  punishment 
of  our  folly  to  all  eternity,  if  we  shall  be  deceived 
either  by  an  empty  character  or  a  false  opinion. 
But  man,2  such  as  he  is,  if  he  trusts  in  himself, 
that  is,  if  he  trusts  in  man,  is  (not  to  say  foolish, 
in  that  he  does  not  see  his  own  error)  undoubt- 
edly arrogant,  in  venturing  to  claim  for  himself 
that  which  the  condition  of  man  does  not  admit  of. 
And  how  much  that  greatest  author  of  the 
Roman  language  is  deceived,  we  may  see  from 
that  sentiment  of  his  ;  for  when,  in  his  "  Books 
on  Offices,"  3  he  had  said  that  philosophy  is 
nothing  else  than  the  desire  of  wisdom,  and  that 
wisdom  itself  is  the  knowledge  of  things  divine 
and  human,  added:  "And  if  any  one  censures 
the  desire  of  this,  I  do  not  indeed  understand 
what  there  is  which  he  imagines  praiseworthy. 
For  if  enjoyment  of  the  mind  and  rest  from 
cares  is  sought,  what  enjoyment  can  be  com- 
pared with  the  pursuits  of  those  who  are  al\va}'S 
inquiring  into  something  which  has  reference  to 
and  tends  to  promote  a  good  and  happy  life? 
Or  if  any  account  is  taken  of  consistency  and 
virtue,  either  this  is  the  study '»'by  which  we  may 
attain  them,  or  there  is  none  at  all.  To  say  that 
there  is  no  system  in  connection  with  the  great- 
est subjects,  when  none  of  the  least  is  without  a 
system,  is  the  part  of  men  speaking  inconsider- 
ately, and  erring  in  the  greatest  subjects.  But 
if  there  is  any  discipline  of  virtue,  where  shall  it 
be  sought  wiien  you  have  departed  from  that 
kind  of  learning?"  For  my  own  part,  although 
I  endeavoured  to  attain  in  some  degree  to  the 
means  of  ac'iuiring  learning,  on  account  of  my 
desire  to  teach  others,  yet  I  have  never  been 
elocjuent,  inasmuch  as  I  never  even  engaged  in 


^  There  seems  to  be  a  reference  to  a  passage  of  Terence,  in  which 
the  poet  represents  it  as  the  property  of  man  to  err.  |Or  to  Cicero, 
rather:  Cujusvis  hominis  est  errare,  etc.     Philipp.  xii.  2. J 

^  Cicero,  De  Offtciis,  ii.  2. 

•<  Ars  denotes  study,  method,  or  system.  The  word  is  applied 
both  to  theoretical  knowledge  and  practical  skill. 


82 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  III. 


public  speaking ;  but  the  goodness  of  the  cause 
cannot  fail  of  itself  to  make  me  eloquent,  and 
for  its  clear  and  copious  defence  the  knowledge 
of  divinity  and  the  truth  itself  are  sufficient.  I 
could  wish,  therefore,  that  Cicero  might  for  a 
short  time  rise  from  the  dead,  that  a  man  of 
such  consummate  eloquence  might  be  taught 
by  an  insignificant  person  who  is  devoid  of  elo- 
quence, first,  what  that  is  which  is  deemed 
worthy  of  praise  by  him  who  blames  that  study 
which  is  called  philosophy ;  and  in  the  next 
place,  that  it  is  not  that  study  by  which  virtue 
and  justice  are  learned,  nor  any  other,  as  he 
thought ;  and  lastly,  that  since  there  is  a  disci- 
pline of  virtue,  he  might  be  taught  where  it  is  to 
be  sought,  when  you  have  laid  aside  that  kind 
of  learning,  which  he  did  not  seek  for  the  sake 
of  hearing  and  learning.  For  from  whom  could 
he  hear  when  no  one  knew  it?  But,  as  his 
usual  practice  was  in  pleading  causes,  he  wished 
to  press  his  opponent  by  questioning,  and  thus 
to  lead  him  to  confession,  as  though  he  were 
confident  that  no  answer  could  be  given  to 
show  that  philosophy  was  not  the  instructress  of 
virtue.  And  in  the  Tusculan  disputations  he 
openly  professed  this,  turning  his  speech  to  phi- 
losophy, as  though  he  was  showing  himself  off 
by  a  declamatory  style  of  speaking.  "  O  phi- 
losophy, thou  guide  of  life,"  he  says  ;  "  O  thou 
investigator  of  virtue,  and  expeller  of  vices ; 
what  could  not  only  we,  but  the  life  of  men, 
have  effected  at  all  without  thee?  Thou  hast 
been  the  inventor  of  laws,  thou  the  teacher  of 
morals  and  discipline;"  —  as  though,  indeed, 
she  could  perceive  anything  by  herself,  and  he 
were  not  rather  to  be  praised  who  gave  her.  In 
the  same  manner  he  might  have  given  thanks  to 
food  and  drink,  because  without  these  life  could 
not  exist ;  yet  these,  while  they  minister  to  sense, 
confer  no  benefit.  But  as  these  things  are  the  nour- 
ishment of  the  body,  so  wisdom  is  of  the  soul. 

CHAP.  XIV. — THAT  LUCRETIUS  AND  OTHERS  HAVE 
ERRED,  AND  CICERO  HIMSELF,  IN  FIXING  THE 
ORIGIN    OF   WISDOM. 

Lucretius,  accordingly,  acts  more  correctly  in 
praising  him  who  was  the  first  discoverer  of  wis- 
dom ;  but  he  acts  foolishly  in  this,  that  he  sup- 
posed it  to  be  discovered  by  a  man,  —  as  though 
that  man  whom  he  praises  had  found  it  lying 
somewhere  as  flutes  at  the  fountain,'  according 
to  the  legends  of  the  poets.  But  if  he  praised 
the  inventor  of  wisdom  as  a  god,  —  for  thus  he 
speaks : ^  — 

"  No  one,  I  think,  who  is  formed  of  mortal  body.  For 
if  we  must  speak,  as  the  acknowledged  majesty  of 
the  subject  itself  demands,  he  was  a  god,  he  was 
a  god,  most  noble  Memmius,"  — 

*  A  proverbial  expression,  denoting  an  accidental  occurrence. 

*  Book  V.  6. 


yet  God  ought  not  to  have  been  praised  on  this 
account,  because  He  discovered  wisdom,  but 
because  He  created  man,  who  might  be  capable 
of  receiving  wisdom.  For  he  diminishes  the 
praise  who  praises  a  part  only  of  the  whole.  But 
he  praised  Him  as  a  man ;  whereas  He  ought  to 
have  been  esteemed  as  a  God  on  this  very  ac- 
count, because  He  found  out  wisdom.  For  thus 
he  speaks : ^  — 

"Will  it  not  be  right  that  this  man  should  be  enrolled 
among  the  gods .'' " 

From  this  it  appears,  either  that  he  wished  to 
praise  Pythagoras,  who  was  the  first,  as  I  have 
said,*  to  call  himself  a  philosopher ;  or  Thales 
of  Miletus,  who  is  reported  to  have  been  the 
first  who  discussed  the  nature  of  things.  Thus, 
while  he  seeks  to  exalt,  he  has  depressed  the 
thing  itself.  For  it  is  not  great  if  it  could  have 
been  discovered  by  man.  But  he  may  be  par- 
doned as  a  poet.  But  that  same  accomplished 
orator,  that  same  consummate  philosopher,  also 
censures  the  Greeks,  whose  levity  he  always  ac- 
cuses, and  yet  imitates.  Wisdom  itself,  which 
at  one  time  he  calls  the  gift,  at  another  time 
the  invention,  of  the  gods,  he  fashions  after  the 
manner  of  the  poets,  and  praises  on  account  of 
its  beauty.  He  also  grievously  complains  that 
there  have  been  some  who  disparaged  it.  "  Can 
any  one,"  he  says,  "  dare  to  censure  the  parent 
of  life,  and  to  defile  himself  with  this  guilt  of 
parricide,  and  to  be  so  impiously  ungrateiul  ?  " 

Are  we  then  parricides,  Marcus  Tullius,  and 
in  your  judgment  worthy  to  be  sewed  5  up  in  a 
bag,  who  deny  that  pliilosophy  is  the  parent  of 
life  ?  Or  you,  who  are  so  impiously  ungrateful 
towards  God  (not  this  god  whose  image  you 
worship  as  he  sits  in  the  Capitol,  but  Him  who 
made  the  world  and  created  man,  who  bestowed 
wisdom  also  among  His  heavenly  benefits),  do 
you  call  her  the  teacher  of  virtue  or  the  parent 
of  life,  having  learned  ^  from  whom,  one  must 
be  in  much  greater  uncertainty  than  he  was  be- 
fore? For  of  what  virtue  is  she  the  teacher? 
For  philosophers  to  the  j)resent  time  do  not  ex- 
plain where  she  is  situated.  Of  what  life  is  she 
the  parent?  since  the  teachers  themselves  have 
been  worn  out  by  old  age  and  death  before  they 
have  determined  upon  the  befitting  course  of 
life.  Of  what  truth  can  you  hokl  her  forth  as 
an  explorer?  since  you  often  testify  that,  in  so 
great  a  multitude  of  philosophers,  not  a  single 
wise  man  has  yet  existed.  What,  then,  did  that 
mistress  of  life  teach  you  ?  Was  it  to  assail  with 
reproaches  the  most  powerful  consul, ^  and  by 


Book  ■ 
Ch. 


51- 


5  The  allusion  is  to  the  punishment  of  parricides,  who  were  sewed 
into  a  bag  with  an  ape,  a  serpent,  and  a  cock,  and  thus  thrown  into 
the  sea. 

''  If  any  one  has  approached  her  as  a  learner. 

^  Marcus  Antonins,  who  was  consul  with  C.  Caesar  in  the  year 
when  Ca:sar  wag  assassinated.     It  wa&  against  Antonius  that  Cicero 


Chap.  XV.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


83 


your  envenomed  speeches  to  render  him  the 
enemy  of  his  country?  But  let  us  pass  by  those 
things,  which  may  be  excused  under  the  name 
of  fortune.  You  appHed  yourself,  in  truth,  to 
the  study  of  philosophy,  and  so,  indeed,  that  no 
one  ever  applied  himself  more  diligently ;  since 
you  were  acquainted  with  all  the  systems  of  phi- 
losophy, as  you  yourself  are  accustomed  to  boast, 
and  elucidated  the  subject  itself  in  Latin  writ- 
ings, and  displayed  yourself  as  an  imitator  of 
Plato.  Tell  us,  therefore,  what  you  have  learned, 
or  in  what  sect  you  have  discovered  the  truth. 
Doubtless  it  was  in  the  Academy  which  you  fol- 
lowed and  approved.  But  this  teaches  nothing, 
excepting  that  you  know  your  own  ignorance.' 
Therefore  your  own  books  refute  you,  and  show 
the  nothingness*  of  the  learning  which  may  be 
gained  from  philosophy  for  life.  These  are  your 
words  :  "  But  to  me  we  appear  not  only  blind 
to  wisdom,  but  dull  and  obtuse  to  those  very 
things  which  may  appear  in  some  degree  to 
be  discerned."  If,  therefore,  philosophy  is  the 
teacher  of  life,  why  did  you  appear  to  yourself 
blind,  and  dull,  and  obtuse  ?  whereas  you  ought, 
under  her  teaching,  both  to  perceive  and  to  be 
wise,  and  to  be  engaged  m  the  clearest  light. 
But  how  you  confessed  the  truth  of  philosophy 
we  learn  from  the  letters  addressed  to  your  son, 
in  which  you  advise  him  that  the  precepts  of 
philosophy  ought  to  be  known,  but  that  we 
must  live  as  members  of  a  community.^ 

What  can  be  spoken  so  contradictory?  If 
the  precepts  of  philosophy  ought  to  be  known, 
it  is  on  this  account  that  they  ought  to  be  known, 
in  order  to  our  living  well  and  wisely.  Or  if 
we  must  live  as  members  of  a  community,  then 
philosophy  is  not  wisdom,  if  it  is  better  to  live 
in  accordance  with  society  than  with  philosophy. 
For  if  that  which  is  called  philosophy  be  wis- 
dom, he  assuredly  lives  foolishly  who  does  not 
live  according  to  philosophy.  But  if  he  does 
not  live  foolishly  who  lives  in  accordance  with 
society,  it  follows  that  he  who  lives  according  to 
philosophy  lives  foolishly.  By  your  own  judg- 
ment, therefore,  philosophy  is  condemned  of 
folly  and  emi)tiness.  And  you  also,  in  your  Ct^n- 
solation,  that  is,  not  in  a  work  of  le\  ity  and  mirth, 
introduced  this  sentiment  respecting  philosophy  : 
"  But  I  know  not  what  error  possesses  us,  or  de- 
plorable ignorance  of  the  truth."  Where,  then, 
is  the  guidance  of  philosophy?  or  what  has  that 
parent  of  life  taught  you,  if  you  are  deplorably 
ignorant  of  the  truth?  But  if  this  confession 
of  error  and  ignorance  has  been  extorted  almost 
against  your  will  from  your  innermost  breast, 
why  do  you  not  at  length  acknowledge  to  your- 


wrote  those  speeches  full  of  invectives,  which,  in  imit.ition  of  Demos- 
thenes, he  named  Philippics. 

'  This  point  is  discussed  hy  Cicero  in  his  Academic  questions. 

*  [Advice  which  he  took  to  heart  as  a  swinish  debauchee.] 


self  the  truth,  that  philosophy  which,  though  it 
teaches  nothing,  you  extolled  with  praises  to  the 
heavens,  cannot  be  the  teacher  of  virtue  ? 

CHAP.  XV. THE  ERROR  OF  SENECA  IN  PHILOSOPHY, 

AND    HOW   THE    SPEECH    OF    PHILOSOPHERS    IS   AT 
VARIANCE    WITH   THEIR    LIFE. 

Under  the  influence  of  the  same  error  (for 
who  could  keep  the  right  course  when  Cicero  is 
in  error?),  Seneca  said  :  "  Philosophy  is  nothing 
else  than  the  right  method  of  living,  or  the 
science  of  living  honourably,  or  the  art  of  passing 
a  good  life.  We  shall  not  err  in  saying  that 
philosophy  is  the  law  of  living  well  and  honour- 
ably. And  he  who  spoke  of  it  as  a  rule  of  life, 
gave  to  it  that  which  was  its  due."  He  evidently 
did  not  refer  to  the  common  name  of  philosophy  ; 
for,  since  this  is  diffused  into  many  sects  and 
systems,  and  has  nothing  certain  —  nothing,  in 
short,  respecting  which  all  agree  with  one  mind 
and  one  voice,  —  what  can  be  so  false  as  that 
philosophy  should  be  called  the  rule  of  life,  since 
the  diversity  of  its  precepts  hinders  the  right 
way  and  causes  confusion  ?  or  the  law  of  livmg 
well,  when  its  subjects  are  widely  discordant?  or 
the  science  of  passing  life,  in  which  nothing  else 
is  effected  by  its  repeated  contradictions  than 
general  J  uncertainty?  For  I  ask  whether  he 
thinks  that  the  Academy  is  philosophy  or  not? 
I  do  not  think  that  he  will  deny  it.  And  if  this 
is  so,  none  of  these  things,  therefore,  is  in  agree- 
ment with  philosophy  ;  which  renders  all  things 
uncertain,  abrogates  law,  esteems  art  as  nothing, 
subverts  method,  distorts  rule,  entirely  takes 
away  knowledge.  Therefore  all  those  things  are 
false,  because  they  are  inconsistent  with  a  sys- 
tem which  is  always  uncertain,  and  up  to  this 
time  explaining  nothing.  Therefore  no  system, 
or  science,  or  law  of  living  well,  has  been  estab- 
lished, except  in  this  the  only  true  and  heavenly 
wisdom,  which  had  been  unknown  to  philoso- 
phers. For  that  earthly  wisdom,  since  it  is  false, 
becomes  varied  and  manifold,  and  altogether 
opposed  to  itself.  And  as  there  is  but  one 
founder  and  ruler  of  the  world,  God,  and  as 
truth  is  one  ;  so  wisdom  must  be  one  and  simple, 
because,  if  anything  is  true  and  good,  it  cannot 
be  perfect  unless  it  is  the  only  one  of  its  kind. 
But  if  i)hilosoi)hy  were  able  to  form  the  life,  no 
others  but  philosophers  would  be  good,  and  all 
those  who  had  not  learned  it  would  be  always 
bad.  But  since  there  are,  and  always  have  been, 
innumerable  persons  who  are  or  have  been  good 
without  any  learning,  but  of  philosophers  there 
has  seldom  been  one  who  has  done  anything 
l)raiseworthy  in  his  life  ;  who  is  there,  I  i)ray, 
who  does  not  see  that  those  men  are  not  teachers 


3  Than —  that  no  one  knows  anything. 


84 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  III. 


of  virtue,  of  which  they  themselves  are  destitute  ? 
For  if  any  one  should  diligently  inquire  into 
their  character,  he  will  find  that  they  are  passion- 
ate, covetous,  lustful,  arrogant,  wanton,  and, 
concealing  their  vices  under  a  show  of  wisdom, 
doing  those  things  at  home  which  they  had 
censured  in  the  schools.' 

Perhaps  I  speak  falsely  for  the  sake  of  bring- 
ing an  accusation.  Does  not  Tullius  both  ac- 
knowledge and  complain  of  the  same  thing? 
"  How  few,"  he  says,  "  of  philosophers  are  found 
of  such  a  character,  so  constituted  in  soul  and 
life,  as  reason  demands  !  how  few  who  think 
true  instruction  not  a  display  of  knowledge,  but 
a  law  of  life  !  how  few  who  are  obedient  to 
themselves,  and  submit  to  their  own  decrees  ! 
We  may  see  some  of  such  levity  and  ostentation, 
that  it  would  be  better  for  them  not  to  have 
learned  at  all ;  others  eagerly  desirous  of  money, 
others  of  glory ;  many  the  slaves  of  lusts,  so 
that  their  speech  wonderfully  disagrees  with  their 
life."  Cornelius  Nepos  also  writes  to  the  same 
Cicero  :  "  So  far  am  I  from  thinking  that  phi- 
losophy is  the  teacher  of  life  and  the  completer 
of  happiness,  that  I  consider  that  none  have 
greater  need  of  teachers  of  living  than  many 
who  are  engaged  in  the  discussion  of  this  subject. 
For  I  see  that  a  great  part  of  those  who  give 
most  elaborate  precepts  in  their  school  respect- 
modesty  and  self-restraint,  live  at  the  same  time 
in  the  unrestrained  desires  of  all  lusts."  Seneca 
also,  m  his  Exhortations,  says  :  "  Many  of  the 
philosophers  are  of  this  description,  eloquent  to 
their  own  condemnation  :  for  if  you  should  hear 
them  arguing  against  avarice,  against  lust  and 
ambition,  you  would  think  that  they  were  making 
a  public  disclosure  ^  of  their  own  character,  so 
entirely  do  the  censures  which  they  utter  in 
public  flow  back  upon  themselves  ;  so  that  it  is 
right  to  regard  them  in  no  other  light  than  as 
physicians,  whose  advertisements  ^  contain  medi- 
cines, but  their  medicine  chests  poison.  Some 
are  not  ashamed  of  their  vices ;  but  they  invent 
defences  for  their  baseness,  so  that  they  may 
appear  even  to  sin  with  honour."  Seneca  also 
says  :  "  The  wise  man  will  even  do  things  which 
he  will  not  approve  of,  that  he  may  find  means 
of  passing  to  the  accomplishment  of  greater 
things  ;  nor  will  he  abandon  good  morals,  but 
will  adapt  them  to  the  occasion ;  and  those 
things  which  others  employ  for  glory  or  pleasure, 
he  will  employ  for  the  sake  of  action."  Then 
he  says  shortly  afterwards  :  "  All  things  which 
the  luxurious  and  the  ignorant  do,  the  wise  man 
also  will  do,  but  not  in  the  same  manner,  and 
with  the  same  purpose.     But  it  makes  no  differ- 

'  [Sallust  as  a  writer  abounds  in  denunciations  of  vice.  But  see 
book  11.  cap.  13,  note  4,  p.  62,  S7ipra.\ 

^  Indicium  sui  professes  pules;  others  rcod  judicium,  "you 
■would  think  that  they  were  passing  sentence  on  themselves." 

3  Tituli,  "  titles.'^ 


ence  with  what  intention  you  act,  when  the 
action  itself  is  vicious  ;  because  acts  are  seen, 
the  intention  is  not  seen." 

Aristippus,  the  master  of  the  Cyrenaics,  had  a 
criminal  intimacy  with  Lais,  the  celebrated  cour- 
tesan ;  and  that  grave  teacher  of  philosophy  de- 
fended this  fault  by  saying,  that  there  was  a  great 
difference  between  him  and  the  other  lovers  of 
Lais,  because  he  himself  possessed  Lais,  whereas 
others  were  possessed  by  Lais.  O  illustrious 
wisdom,  to  be  imitated  by  good  men  !  Would 
you,  in  truth,  entrust  your  children  to  this  man 
for  education,  that  they  might  learn  to  possess  a 
harlot  ?  Lie  said  that  there  was  some  difference 
between  himself  and  the  dissolute,  that  they 
wasted  their  property,  whereas  he  lived  in  indul- 
gence without  any  cost.  And  in  this  the  harlot 
was  plainly  the  wiser,  who  had  the  philosopher  as 
her  creature,  that  all  the  youth,  corrupted  by  the 
example  and  authority  of  the  teacher,  might 
flock  together  to  her  without  any  shame.  What 
difference  therefore  did  it  make,  with  what  in- 
tention the  philosopher  betook  himself  to  that 
most  notorious  harlot,  when  the  people  and  his 
rivals  saw  him  more  depraved  than  all  the  aban- 
doned ?  Nor  was  it  enough  to  live  in  this  man- 
ner, but  he  began  also  to  teach  lusts  ;  and  he 
transferred  his  habits  from  the  brothel  to  the 
school,  contending  that  bodily  pleasure  was  the 
chief  good.  Which  pernicious  and  shameful 
doctrine  has  its  origin  not  in  the  heart  of  the 
philosopher,  but  in  the  bosom  of  the  harlot. 

For  why  should  I  speak  of  the  Cynics,  who 
practised  licentiousness  in  public  ?  What  won- 
der if  they  derived  their  name  and  title  from 
dogs,"*  since  they  also  imitated  their  life  ?  There- 
fore there  is  no  instruction  of  virtue  in  this  sect, 
since  even  those  who  enjoin  more  honourable 
things  either  themselves  do  not  practise  what 
they  advise  ;  or  if  they  do  (which  rarely  hap- 
pens), it  is  not  tlie  system  which  leads  them  to 
that  which  is  right,  but  nature  which  often  im- 
pels even  the  unlearned  to  praise. 

CHAP.    XVI. THAT   THE    PHILOSOPHERS   WHO    GIVE 

GOOD  INSTRUCTIONS  LIVE  BADLY,  BY  THE  TES- 
TIMONY OF  CICERO  ;  THEREFORE  WE  SHOULD 
NOT  SO  MUCH  DEVOTE  OURSELVES  TO  THE 
STUDY    OF    PHILOSOPHY    AS   TO    WISDOM. 

But  when  they  give  themselves  ,up  to  perpet- 
ual sloth,  and  undertake  no  exercise  of  virtue, 
and  pass  their  whole  life  in  the  practice  of 
speaking,  in  what  light  ought  they  to  be  regarded 
rather  than  as  triflers?  For  wisdom,  unless  it  is 
engaged  on  some  action  on  which  it  may  exert 
its  force,  is  empty  and  false  ;  and  Tullius  rightly 


*  Augustine  in  many  places  expresses  his  opinion  that  the  Cynics 
were  so  called  from  their  immodesty.  Others  suppose  that  the  name 
was  given  to  them  on  account  of  their  snarling  propensity. 


Chap.  XVI.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


85 


gives  the  preference,  above  teachers  of  philoso- 
phy, to  those  men  employed  in  civil  affairs,  who 
govern  the  state,  who  found  new  cities  or  main- 
tain with  equity  those  already  founded,  who  pre- 
serve the  safety  and  liberty  of  the  citizens  either 
by  good  laws  or  wholesome  counsels,  or  by 
weighty  judgments,  f'or  it  is  right  to  make 
men  good  rather  than  to  give  precepts  about 
duty  to  those  shut  up  in  corners,  which  precepts 
are  not  observed  even  by  those  who  speak  them  ; 
and  inasmuch  as  they  have  withdrawn  themselves 
from  true  actions,  it  is  manifest  that  they  in- 
vented the  system  of  philosophy  itself,  for  the 
purpose  of  exercising  the  tongue,  or  for  the  sake 
of  pleading.  But  they  who  merely  teach  with- 
out acting,  of  themselves  detract  from  the  weight 
of  their  own  precepts ;  for  who  would  obey, 
when  they  who  give  the  precepts  themselves 
teach  disobedience?  Moreover,  it  is  a  good 
thing  to  give  right  and  honourable  precepts  ;  but 
unless  you  also  practise  them  it  is  a  deceit,  and 
it  is  inconsistent  and  trifling  to  have  goodness 
not  in  the  heart,  but  on  the  lips. 

It  is  not  therefore  utility,  but  enjoyment,  which 
they  seek  from  philosophy.  And  this  Cicero 
indeed  testified.  "Truly,"  he  says,  "all  their 
disputation,  although  it  contains  most  abundant 
fountains  of  virtue  and  knowledge,  yet,  when 
compared  with  their  actions  and  accomplish- 
ments, I  fear  lest  it  should  seem  not  to  have 
brought  so  much  advantage  to  the  business  of 
men  as  enjoyment  to  their  times  of  relaxation." 
He  ought  not  to  have  feared,  since  he  spoke  the 
truth  ;  but  as  if  he  were  afraid  lest  he  should  be 
arraigned  by  the  philosophers  on  a  charge  of  be- 
traying a  mystery,  he  did  not  venture  confidently 
to  pronounce  that  which  was  true,  that  they  do 
not  dispute  for  the  purpose  of  teaching,  but  for 
their  own  enjoyment  in  their  leisure  ;  and  since 
they  are  the  advisers  of  actions,  and  do  not 
themselves  act  at  all,  they  are  to  be  regarded  as 
mere  talkers.'  But  assuredly,  because  they  con- 
tributed no  advantage  to  life,  they  neither  obeyed 
their  own  decrees,  nor  has  any  one  been  found, 
through  so  many  ages,  who  lived  in  accordance 
with  their  laws.  Therefore  philosophy^  must 
altogether  be  laid  aside,  because  we  are  not  to 
devote  ourselves  to  the  pursuit  of  wisdom,  for 
this  has  no  limit  or  moderation ;  but  we  must 
be  wise,  and  that  indeed  quickly.  For  a  second 
life  is  not  granted  to  us,  so  that  when  vve  seek 
wisdom  in  this  life  we  may  be  wise  in  that ;  each 
result  must  be  brought  about  in  this  life.  It 
ought  to  be  quickly  found,  in  order  that  it  may 
be  quickly  taken  up,  lest  any  part  of  life  should 
pass  away,  the  end  of  which  is  uncertain.     Hor- 


'  [See  p.  83,  note  2,  and  p.  84,  note  t.] 

2  Lactantiua  must  be  understood  as  speakinR  of  that  kind  of  phi- 
losophy which  teaches  errors  and  deceits,  as  St.  Paul  speaks,  ('ol.  ii. 
8:  "  Beware  lest  any  man  spoil  you  through  philosophy  and  vain 
deceit." 


tensius  in  Cicero,  contending  against  philosophy, 
is  pressed  by  a  clever  argument ;  inasmuch  as, 
when  he  said  that  men  ought  not  to  philosophize, 
he  seemed  nevertheless  to  philosophize,  since  it 
is  the  part  of  the  philosophers  to  discuss  what 
ought  and  what  ought  not  to  be  done  in  life. 
We  are  free  and  exempt  from  this  calumny,  who 
take  away  philosophy,  because  it  is  the  invention 
of  human  thought ;  we  defend  wisdom,  because 
it  is  a  divine  tradition,  and  we  testify  that  it 
ought  to  be  taken  up  by  all.  He,  when  he  took 
away  philosophy  without  introducing  anything 
better,  was  supposed  to  take  away  wisdom  ;  and 
on  that  account  was  more  easily  driven  from  his 
opinion,  because  it  is  agreed  upon  that  man  is 
not  born  to  folly,  but  to  wisdom. 

Moreover,  the  argument  which  the  same  Hor- 
tensius  employed  has  great  weight  also  against 
philosophy,  —  namely,  that  it  may  be  understood 
from  this,  that  philosophy  is  not  wisdom,  since 
its  beginning  and  origin  are  apparent.  When, 
he  says,  did  philosophers  begin  to  exist?  Thales, 
as  I  imagine,  was  the  first,  and  his  age  was  recent. 
Where,  then,  among  the  more  ancient  men  did 
that  love  of  investigating  the  truth  lie  hid  ?  Lu- 
cretius also  says  :  ^  — 

"Then,  too,  this  nature  and  system  of  things  has  been 
discovered  lately,  and  I  the  very  first  of  all  have 
only  now  been  found  able  to  transfer  it  into  native 
words." 

And  Seneca  says  :  "  There  are  not  yet  a  thousand 
years  since  the  beginnings  of  wisdom  were  under- 
taken." Therefore  mankind  for  many  genera- 
tions lived  without  system.  In  ridicule  of  which, 
Persius  says  :  •*  — 

"  When  wisdom  came  to  the  city, 
Together  with  pepper  and  palms ;  " 

as  though  wisdom  had  been  introduced  into  the 
city  together  with  savoury  merchandise. 5  For  if 
it  is  in  agreement  with  the  nature  of  man,  it  must 
have  had  its  commencement  together  with  man  ; 
but  if  it  is  not  in  agreement  with  it,  human  nature 
would  be  incapable  of  receiving  it.  But,  inas- 
much as  it  has  received  it,  it  follows  that  wisdom 
has  existed  from  the  beginning  :  therefore  phi- 
losophy, inasmuch  as  it  has  not  existed  from 
the  beginning,  is  not  the  same  true  wisdom.  But, 
in  truth,  the  Greeks,  because  they  had  not  at- 
tained to  the  sacred  letters  of  truth,  did  not  know 
how  wisdom  was  corrupted.  And,  therefore, 
since  they  thought  that  human  life  was  destitute 
of  wisdom,  they  invented  philosophy  ;  that  is, 
they  wished  by  discussion  to  tear  up  the  truth 
which  was  lying  hid  and  unknown  to  them  :  and 
this  employment,  through  ignorance  of  the  truth, 
they  thought  to  be  wisdom. 


3  Lucretius,  v.  -^36. 

4  Persius,  Sat.',\i.  38. 

5  [The  force  of  the  poet's  satire  is  in  \.\ns  petty  merchandise.] 


86 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  III. 


CHAP.     XVII. HE     PASSES     FROM     PHILOSOPHY     TO 

THE  PHILOSOPHERS,  BEGIXNING  WITH  EPICURUS  ; 
AND  HOW  HE  REGARDED  LEUCIPPUS  AND  DEMOC- 
RITUS   AS   AUTHORS   OF   ERROR. 

I  have  spoken  on  the  subject  of  philosophy 
itself  as  briefly  as  I  could ;  now  let  us  come  to 
the  philosophers,  not  that  we  may  contend  with 
these,  who  cannot  maintain  their  ground,  but 
that  we  may  pursue  those  who  are  in  flight  and 
driven  from  our  battle-field.  The  system  of  Epi- 
curus was  much  more  generally  followed  than 
those  of  the  others  ;  not  because  it  brings  for- 
ward any  truth,  but  because  the  attractive  name 
of  pleasure  invites  many.'  For  every  one  is  nat- 
urally inclined  to  vices.  Moreover,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  drawing  the  multitude  to  himself,  he 
speaks  that  which  is  specially  adapted  to  each 
character  separately.  He  forbids  the  idle  to  ap- 
ply himself  to  learning ;  he  releases  the  covet- 
ous man  from  giving  largesses  to  the  peoi)le  ;  he 
prohibits  the  inactive  man  from  undertaking  the 
business  of  the  state,  the  sluggish  from  bodily 
exercise,  the  timid  from  military  service.  The 
irreligious  is  told  that  the  gods  pay  no  attention 
to  the  conduct  of  men  ;  the  man  who  is  unfeeling 
and  selfish  is  ordered  to  give  nothing  to  any  one, 
for  that  the  wise  man  does  everything  on  his 
own  account.  To  a  man  who  avoids  the  crowd, 
solitude  is  praised.  One  who  is  too  sparing, 
learns  that  life  can  be  sustained  on  water  and 
meal.  If  a  man  hates  his  wife,  the  blessings  of 
celibacy  are  enumerated  to  him  ;  to  one  who 
has  bad  children,  the  happiness  of  those  who 
are  without  children  is  proclaimed ;  against  un- 
natural ^  parents  it  is  said  that  there  is  no  bond 
of  nature.  To  the  man  who  is  delicate  and  in- 
capable of  endurance,  it  is  said  that  pain  is  the 
greatest  of  all  evils  ;  to  the  man  of  fortitude,  it 
is  said  that  the  wise  man  is  happy  even  under 
tortures.  The  man  who  devotes  himself  to  the 
pursuit  of  influence  and  distinction  is  enjoined 
to  pay  court  to  kings  ;  he  who  cannot  endure 
annoyance  is  enjoined  to  shun  the  abode  of  kings. 
Thus  the  crafty  man  collects  an  assembly  from 
various  and  differing  characters ;  and  while  he 
lays  himself  out  to  please  all,  he  is  more  at  vari- 
ance with  himself  than  they  all  are  with  one  an- 
other. But  we  must  explain  from  what  source 
the  whole  of  this  system  is  derived,  and  what 
origin  it  has. 

Epicurus  saw  that  the  good  are  always  subject 
to  adversities,  poverty,  labours,  exile,  loss  of 
dear  friends.  On  the  contrary,  he  saw  that  the 
wicked  were  happy  ;  that  they  were  exalted  with 
influence,  and  loaded  with  honours  ;  he  saw  that 


'  [See  Plato's  remark  upon  what  he  calls  this  disease,  De  Leg., 
X.,  finely  expounded  in  Plato  cent.  Atkeos  (note  ix.  p.  114)  by 
Tayler  Lewis.] 

^  There  is  another  reading,  "  adversus  parentes  iinpio,"  "  to  the 
son  whose  conduct  to  his  parents  is  unnatural." 


innocence  was  unprotected,  that  crimes  were 
committed  with  impunity :  he  saw  that  death 
raged  without  any  regard  to  character,  without 
any  arrangement  or  discrimination  of  age  ;  but 
that  some  arrived  at  old  age,  while  others  were 
carried  off  in  their  infancy  ;  that  some  died  when 
they  were  now  robust  and  vigorous,  that  others 
were  cut  off  by  an  untimely  death  in  the  first 
flower  of  youth ;  that  in  wars  the  better  men 
were  especially  overcome  and  slain.  But  that 
which  especially  moved  him,  was  the  fact  that 
religious  men  were  especially  visited  with  weight- 
ier evils,  whereas  he  saw  that  less  evils  or  none 
at  all  fell  upon  those  who  altogether  neglected 
the  gods,  or  worshipped  them  in  an  impious 
manner ;  and  that  even  the  very  temples  them- 
selves were  often  set  on  fire  by  lightning.  And 
of  this  Lucretius  complains,^  when  he  says  re- 
specting the  god  :  — 

"  Then  he  may  hurl  lightnings,  and  often  throw  down 
his  temples,  and  withdrawing  into  the  deserts, 
there  spend  his  rage  in  practising  his  bolt,  which 
often  passes  the  guilty  by,  and  strikes  dead  the 
innocent  and  unoftending." 

But  if  he  had  been  able  to  collect  even  a  small 
particle  of  truth,  he  would  never  say  that  the 
god  throws  down  his  own  temples,  when  he 
throws  them  down  on  this  account,  because  they 
are  not  his.  The  Capitol,  which  is  the  chief 
seat  of  the  Roman  city  and  religion,  was  struck 
with  lightning  and  set  on  fire  not  once  only,  but 
frequently.  But  what  was  the  opinion  of  clever 
men  respecting  this  is  evident  from  the  saying 
of  Cicero,  who  says  that  the  flame  came  from 
heaven,  not  to  destroy  that  earthly  dwelling-place 
of  Jupiter,  but  to  demand  a  loftier  and  more 
magnificent  abode.  Concerning  which  transac- 
tion, in  the  books  respecting  his  consulship,  he 
speaks  to  the  same  purport  as  Lucretius  :  — 

"  For  the  father  thundering  on  high,  throned  in  the 
lofty  01ym])us,  himself  assailed  his  own  citadels 
and  famed  temples,  and  cast  fires  upon  his  abode 
in  the  Capitol. 

In  the  obstinacy  of  their  folly,  therefore,  they 
not  only  did  not  understand  the  power  and 
majesty  of  the  true  God,  but  they  even  increased 
the  impiety  of  their  error,  in  endeavouring  against 
all  divine  law  to  restore  a  temple  so  often  con- 
demned by  the  judgment  of  Heaven. 

Therefore,  when  Epicurus  reflected  on  these 
things,  induced  as  it  were  by  the  injustice  of 
these  matters  (for  thus  it  appeared  to  him  in  his 
ignorance  of  the  cause  and  subject),  he  thought 
that  there  was  no  providence."*  And  having  per- 
suaded himself  of  this,  he  undertook  also  to 
defend  it,  and  thus  he  entangled  himself  in  in- 
extricable errors.     For  if  there  is  no  providence, 


3  Lucretius,  De  Rerjini  Natura,  ii.  iioi,  Munro. 
"•   [This  age  is  favoured  with   a  reproduction  of  these   absurdities; 
and  what  has  happened  in  consequence  before,  will  be  repeated  now.j 


Chap.  XVII.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


87 


how  is  it  that  the  world  was  made  with  such 
order  and  arrangement?  He  says:  There  is 
no  arrangement,  for  many  things  are  made  in 
a  different  manner  from  that  in  which  they  ought 
to  have  been  made.  And  the  divine  man  found 
subjects  of  censure.  Now,  if  I  had  leisure  to 
refute  these  things  separately,  I  could  easily  show 
that  this  man  was  neither  wise  nor  of  sound 
mind.  Also,  if  there  is  no  providence,  how  is 
it  that  the  bodies  of  animals  are  arranged  with 
such  foresight,  that  the  various  members,  being 
disposed  in  a  wonderful  manner,  discharge  their 
own  offices  individually?  The  system  of  provi- 
dence, he  says,  contrived  nothing  in  the  produc- 
tion of  animals  ;  for  neither  were  the  eyes  made 
for  seeing,  nor  the  ears  for  hearing,  nor  the 
tongue  for  speaking,  nor  the  feet  for  walking ; 
inasmuch  as  these  were  produced  before  it  was 
possible  to  speak,  to  hear,  to  see,  and  to  walk. 
Therefore  these  were  not  produced  for  use  ;  but 
use  was  produced  from  them.  If  there  is  no 
providence,  why  do  rains  fall,  fruits  spring  up. 
and  trees  put  forth  leaves?  These  things,  he 
says,  are  not  always  done  for  the  sake  of  living 
creatures,  inasmuch  as  they  are  of  no  benefit  to 
providence ;  but  all  tilings  must  be  produced 
of  their  own  accord.  From  what  source,  there- 
fore, do  they  arise,"  or  how  are  all  things  which 
are  carried  on  brought  about  ?  There  is  no  need, 
he  says,  of  supposing  a  providence  ;  for  there 
are  seeds  floating  through  the  empty  void,  and 
from  these,  collected  together  without  order,  all 
things  are  produced  and  take  their  form.  Why, 
then,  do  we  not  perceive  or  distinguish  them? 
Because,  he  says,  they  have  neither  any  colour, 
nor  warmth,  nor  smell ;  they  are  also  without 
flavour  and  moisture  ;  and  they  are  so  minute, 
that  they  cannot  be  cut  and  divided. 

Thus,  because  he  had  taken  up  a  false  princi- 
ple at  the  commencement,  the  necessity  of  the 
subjects  which  followed  led  him  to  absurdities. 
For  where  or  from  whence  are  these  atoms? 
Why  did  no  one  dream  of  them  besides  Leu- 
cippus  only?  from  whom  Democritus,-  having 
received  instructions,  left  to  Epicurus  the  inherit- 
ance of  his  folly.  And  if  these  are  minute  bod- 
ies, and  indeed  solid,  as  they  say,  they  certainly 
are  able  to  fall  under  the  notice  of  the  eyes.  If 
the  nature  of  all  things  is  the  same,  how  is  it 
that  they  compose  various  objects?  They  meet 
together,  he  says,  in  varied  order  and  position  ; 
as  the  letters  which,  though  few  in  number,  by 
variety  of  arrangement  make  up  innumerable 
words.  But  it  is  urged  the  letters  have  a  variety 
of  forms.  And  so,  he  says,  have  these  first  prin- 
ciples ;  for  they  are  rough,  they  are  furnished 
with  hooks,  they  are  smooth.  Therefore  they 
can  be  cut  and  divided,  if  there  is  in  them  any 

■  See  Lucretius,  book  ii. 

*  [See  vol.  ii.  p.  465,  the  whole  of  14th  ch.ipter.] 


part  which  projects.  But  if  they  are  smooth  and 
without  hooks,  they  cannot  cohere.  They  ought 
therefore  to  be  hooked,  that  they  may  be  linked 
together  one  with  another.  But  since  they  are 
said  to  be  so  minute  that  they  cannot  be  cut 
asunder  by  the  edge  of  any  weapon,  how  is  it 
that  they  have  hooks  or  angles  ?  For  it  must  be 
possible  for  these  to  be  torn  asunder,  since  they 
project.  In  the  next  place,  by  what  mutual 
compact,  by  what  discernment,  do  they  meet 
together,  so  that  anything  may  be  constructed 
out  of  them?  If  they  are  without  intelligence, 
they  cannot  come  together  in  such  order  and 
arrangement ;  for  nothing  but  reason  can  bring 
to  accomplishment  anything  in  accordance  with 
reason.  With  how  many  arguments  can  this 
trifling  be  refuted  !  But  I  must  proceed  with  my 
subject.     This  is  he 

"  Who  surpassed  in  intellect  the  race  of  man,  and 
quenched  the  light  of  all,  as  the  ethereal  sun 
arisen  quenches  the  stars."  ^ 

Which  verses  I  am  never  able  to  read  without 
laughter.  For  this  was  not  said  respecting  Soc- 
rates or  Plato,  who  are  esteemed  as  kings  of 
philosophers,  but  concerning  a  man  who,  though 
of  sound  mind  and  vigorous  health,  raved  more 
senselessly  than  any  one  diseased.  And  thus 
the  most  vain  poet,  I  do  not  say  adorned,  but 
overwhelmed  and  crushed,  the  mouse  with  the 
praises  of  the  lion.  But  the  same  man  also  re- 
leases us  from  the  fear  of  death,  respecting  which 
these  are  his  own  exact  words  :  — 

"  When  we  are  in  existence,  death  does  not  exist ;  when 
death  exists,  we  have  no  existence  :  therefore  death 
is  nothing  to  us." 

How  cleverly  he  has  deceived  us  !  As  though 
it  were  death  now  completed  which  is  an  object 
of  fear,  by  which  sensation  has  been  already 
taken  away,  and  not  the  very  act  of  dying,  by 
which  sensation  is  being  taken  from  us.  For 
there  is  a  time  in  which  we  ourselves  even  yet* 
exist,  and  death  does  not  yet  exist ;  and  that 
very  time  appears  to  be  miserable,  because 
death  is  beginning  to  exist,  and  we  are  ceasing 
to  exist. 

Nor  is  it  said  without  reason  that  death  is  not 
miserable.  The  approach  of  death  is  miserable  ; 
that  is,  to  waste  away  by  disease,  to  endure  the 
thrust,  to  receive  the  weapon  in  the  body,  to  be 
burnt  with  fire,  to  be  torn  by  the  teeth  of  beasts. 
These  are  the  things  which  are  feared,  not  be- 
cause they  bring  death,  but  because  they  bring 
great  pain.  But  rather  make  out  that  pain  is  not 
an  evil.     He  says  it  is  the  greatest  of  all  evils. 


I        3  Lucretius,  iii.  1056. 

*  The  reading  of  the  text,  which  appears  to  be  the  true  one,  is, 
l"(luo  nos  etiamnuni  sunuis."  There  is  another  rcailuig,  "quo  et 
I  nos  jam  non  sumus  "  This  latter  reading  would  be  m  accordance 
I  with  the  sentiment  of  Epicurus,  which  is  totally  opposed  to  the  view 
I  taken  by  Lactantius. 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  III. 


How  therefore  can  I  fail  to  fear,  if  that  which 
precedes  or  brings  about  death  is  an  evil  ?  Why- 
should  I  say  that  the  argument  is  false,  inasmuch 
as  souls  do  not  perish  ?  But,  he  says,  souls  do 
perish ;  for  that  which  is  born  with  the  body 
must  perish  with  the  body.  I  have  already 
stated  that  I  prefer  to  put  off  the  discussion  of 
this  subject,  and  to  reserve  it  for  the  last  part 
of  my  work,  that  I  may  refute  this  persuasion 
of  Epicurus,  whether  it  was  that  of  Democritus 
or  Diccxarchus,  both  by  arguments  and  divine 
testimonies.  But  perhaps  he  promised  himself 
impunity  in  the  indulgence  of  his  vices  ;  for  he 
was  an  advocate  of  most  disgraceful  pleasure, 
and  said  that  man  was  born  for  its  enjoyment.' 
Who,  when  he  hears  this  affirmed,  would  abstain 
from  the  practice  of  vice  and  wickedness?  For 
if  the  soul  is  doomed  to  perish,  let  us  eagerly 
pursue  riches,  that  we  may  be  able  to  enjoy  all 
kinds  of  indulgence ;  and  if  these  are  wanting 
to  us,  let  us  take  them  away  from  those  who 
have  them  by  stealth,  by  stratagem,  or  by  force, 
especially  if  there  is  no  God  who  regards  the 
actions  of  men  :  as  long  as  the  hope  of  impunity 
shall  favour  us,  let  us  plunder  and  put  to  death. - 
For  it  is  the  part  of  the  wise  man  to  do  evil, 
if  it  is  advantageous  to  him,  and  safe  ;  since,  if 
there  is  a  God  in  heaven.  He  is  not  angry  with 
any  one.  It  is  also  equally  the  part  of  the  fool- 
ish man  to  do  good ;  because,  as  he  is  not  ex- 
cited with  anger,  so  he  is  not  influenced  by 
favour.  Therefore  let  us  live  in  the  indulgence 
of  pleasures  in  every  possible  way  ;  for  in  a  short 
time  we  shall  not  exist  at  all.  Therefore  let  us 
suffer  no  day,  in  short,  no  moment  of  time,  to 
pass  away  from  us  without  pleasure  ;  lest,  since 
we  ourselves  are  doomed  to  perish,  the  life 
which  we  have  already  spent  should  itself  also 
perish. 

Although  he  does  not  say  this  in  word,  yet  he 
teaches  it  in  fact.  For  when  he  maintains  that 
the  wise  man  does  everything  for  his  own  sake, 
he  refers  all  things  which  he  does  to  his  own  ad- 
vantage. And  thus  he  who  hears  these  disgrace- 
ful things,  will  neither  think  that  any  good  thing 
ought  to  be  done,  since  the  conferring  of  bene- 
fits has  reference  to  the  advantage  of  another ; 
nor  that  he  ought  to  abstain  from  guilt,  because 
the  doing  of  evil  is  attended  with  gain.  If  any 
chieftain  of  pirates  or  leader  of  robbers  were 
exhorting  his  men  to  acts  of  violence,  what  other 
language  could  he  employ  than  to  say  the  same 
things  which  Epicurus  says  :  that  the  gods  take 
no  notice  ;  that  they  are  not  affected  with  anger 
nor  kind  feeling  ;  that  the  punishment  of  a  future 
state  is  not  to  be  dreaded,  because  souls  die  after 

'  [For  his  pious  talk,  however,  see  T.  'Lcw'xs,,  Plato,  etc.,  p.  258.] 

^   [These  operations  of  the  unbelieving    mind    have  appeared  in 

our  day  in  the  Commuitisme  of  Paris.     They  already  threaten  the 

American  Republic,  the  mass  of  the  population  being  undisciplined 

in  moral  principle,  and  our  lawgivers  as  well.] 


death,  and  that  there  is  no  future  state  of  pun- 
ishment at  all ;  that  pleasure  is  the  greatest  good  ; 
that  there  is  no  society  among  men  ;  that  every 
one  consults  for  his  own  interest ;  that  there  is 
no  one  who  loves  another,  unless  it  be  for  his 
own  sake  ;  that  death  is  not  to  be  feared  by  a 
brave  man,  nor  any  pain ;  for  that  he,  even  if  he 
should  be  tortured  or  burnt,  should  say  that  he 
does  not  regard  it.  There  is  evidendy  sufficient 
cause  why  any  one  should  regard  this  as  the  ex- 
pression of  a  wise  man,  since  it  can  most  fittingly 
be  applied  to  robbers  ! 

CHAP.  XVIII.  —  THE  PYTHAGOREANS  AND  STOICS, 
WHILE  THEY  HOLD  THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE 
SOUL,  FOOLISHLY  PERSUADE  A  VOLUNTARY  DEATH. 

Others,  again,  discuss  things  contrary  to  these, 
namely,  that  the  soul  survives  after  death  ;  and 
these  are  chiefly  the  Pythagoreans  and  Stoics. 
And  although  they  are  to  be  treated  with  indul- 
gence because  they  perceive  the  truth,  yet  I  can- 
not but  blame  them,  because  they  fell  upon  the 
truth  not  by  their  opinion,  but  by  accident.  And 
thus  they  erred  in  some  degree  even  in  that  very 
matter  which  they  rightly  perceived.  For,  since 
they  feared  the  argument  by  which  it  is  inferred 
that  the  soul  must  necessarily  die  with  the  body, 
because  it  is  born  with  the  body,  they  asserted 
that  the  soul  is  not  born  with  the  body,  but  rather 
introduced  into  it,  and  that  it  migrates  from  one 
body  to  another.  They  did  not  consider  that  it 
was  possible  for  the  soul  to  survive  the  body, 
unless  it  should  appear  to  have  existed  previous- 
ly to  the  body.  There  is  therefore  an  equal  and 
almost  similar  error  on  each  side.  But  the  one 
side  are  deceived  with  respect  to  the  past,  the 
other  with  respect  to  the  future.  For  no  one 
saw  that  which  is  most  true,  that  the  soul  is  both 
created  and  does  not  die,  because  they  were 
ignorant  why  that  came  to  pass,  or  what  was  the 
nature  of  man.  Many  therefore  of  them,  be- 
cause they  suspected  that  the  soul  is  immortal, 
laid  violent  hands  upon  themselves,  as  though 
they  were  about  to  depart  to  heaven.  Thus  it 
was  with  Cleanthes^  and  Chrysippus,-*  with  Zeno,5 
and  Empedocles,''  who  in  the  dead  of  night  cast 
himself  into  a  cavity  of  the  burning  yEtna,  that 
when  he  had  suddenly  disappeared  it  might  be 
believed  that  he  had  departed  to  the  gods ;  and 
thus  also  of  the  Romans  Cato  died,  who  through 
the  whole  of  his  life  was  an  imitator  of  Socratic 


3  Cleanthes  was  a  Stoic  philosopher,  who  used  to  draw  water  by 
night  for  his  support,  that  he  might  devote  himself  to  the  study  of 
philosophy  by  day.     He  ended  his  life  by  refusing  to  take  food. 

*  Chry^,ippus  was  a  disciple  of  Zeno,  and,  after  Cleanthes,  the 
chief  of  the  Stoic  sect.  According  to  some  accounts,  he  died  from 
an  excessive  draught  of  wine;  according  to  others,  from  excessive 
laughter. 

5  Zeno,  the  chief  of  the  Stoic  sect.  He  is  said  to  have  died  from 
suffocation. 

*>  Empedocles  was  a  philosopher  and  poet.  There  are  various 
accounts  of  his  death;  that  mentioned  in  the  text  is  usually  received. 


Chap.  XIX.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


89 


ostentation.  For  Democritus '  was  of  another 
persuasion.     But,  however, 

"By  his  own  spontaneous  act  he  offered  up  his  head  to 
death;  "- 

and  nothing  can  be  more  wicked  than  this.  For 
if  a  homicide  is  guilty  because  he  is  a  destroyer 
of  man,  he  who  puts  himself  to  death  is  under 
the  same  guilt,  because  he  puts  to  death  a  man. 
Yea,  that  crime  may  be  considered  to  be  greater, 
the  punishment  of  which  belongs  to  God  alone. 
For  as  we  did  not  come  into  this  life  of  our  own 
accord  ;  so,  on  the  other  hand,  we  can  only  with- 
draw from  this  habitation  of  the  body  which  has 
been  appointed  for  us  to  keep,  by  the  command 
of  Him  who  placed  us  in  this  body  that  we  may 
inhabit  it,  until  He  orders  us  to  depart  from  it ; 
and  if  any  violence  is  offered  to  us,  we  must 
endure  it  with  equanimity,  since  the  death  of 
an  innocent  person  cannot  be  unavenged,  and 
since  we  have  a  great  Judge  who  alone  always 
has  the  power  of  taking  vengeance  in  His 
hands. 

All  these  philosophers,  therefore,  were  homi- 
cides ;  and  Cato  himself^  the  chief  of  Roman 
wisdom,  who,  before  he  put  himself  to  death,  is 
said  to  have  read  through  the  treatise  of  Plato 
which  he  wrote  on  the  immortality  of  the  soul, 
and  was  led  by  the  authority  of  the  philosopher 
to  the  commission  of  this  great  crime  ;  yet  he, 
however,  appears  to  have  had  some  cause  for 
death  in  his  hatred  of  slavery.  Why  should  I  speak 
of  the  Ambraciot,^  who,  having  read  the  same 
treatise,  threw  himself  into  the  sea,  for  no  other 
cause  than  that  he  believed  Plato?  —  a  doctrine 
altogether  detestable  and  to  be  avoided,  if  it 
drives  men  from  life.  But  if  Plato  had  known 
and  taught  by  whom,  and  how,  and  to  whom, 
and  on  account  of  what  actions,  and  at  what 
time,  immortality  is  given,  he  would  neither  have 
driven  Cleombrotus  nor  Cato  to  a  voluntary  death, 
but  he  would  have  trained  them  to  live  with  jus- 
tice. For  it  appears  to  me  that  Cato  sought 
a  cause  for  death,  not  so  much  that  he  might 
escape  from  Caesar,  as  that  he  might  obey  the 
decrees  of  the  Stoics,  whom  he  followed,  and 
might  make  his  name  distinguished  bysome  great 
action  ;  and  I  do  not  see  what  evil  could  have 
happened  to  him  if  he  had  lived.  For  Caius 
Caesar,  such  was  his  clemency,  had  no  other  ob- 
ject, even  in  the  very  heat  of  civil  war,  than  to 
appear  to  deserve  well  of  the  state,  by  preserving 
two  excellent  citizens,  Cicero  and  Cato.  But 
let  us  return  to  those  who  praise  death  as  a 
benefit.  You  complain  of  life  as  though  you 
had  lived,  or  had  ever  settled  with  yourself  why 
you  were  born  at  all.      May  not   therefore   the 


*  There  are 

*  Lucretius, 
3  Cleombrotus  of  Ambracia, 


arious  accounts  respecting  the  death  of  Democritus. 


true  and  common  Father  of  all  justly  find  fault 
with  that  saying  of  Terence  :  ■*  — 

"  First,  learn  in  what  life  consists  ;  then,  if  you  shall  be 
dissatisfied  with  life,  have  recourse  to  death." 

You  are  indignant  that  you  are  exposed  to  evils  ; 
as  though  you  deserved  anything  good,  who  are 
ignorant  of  your  Father,  Lord,  and  King ;  who, 
although  you  behold  with  your  eyes  the  bright 
light,  are  nevertheless  blind  in  mind,  and  he  in 
the  depths  of  the  darkness  of  ignorance.  And 
this  ignorance  has  caused  tliat  some  have  not 
been  ashamed  to  say,  that  we  are  born  for  this 
cause,  that  we  may  suffer  the  punishment  of  our 
crimes  ;  but  I  do  not  see  what  can  be  more 
senseless  than  this.  For  where  or  what  crimes 
could  we  have  committed  when  we  did  not  even 
exist?  Unless  we  shall  happen  to  believe  that 
foolish  old  man,5  who  falsely  said  that  lie  had 
lived  before,  and  that  in  his  former  life  he  had 
been  Euphorbus.  He,  I  believe,  because  he 
was  born  of  an  ignoble  race,  chose  for  himself  a 
family  from  the  poems  of  Homer.  O  wonder- 
ful and  remarkable  memory  of  Pythagoras  !  O 
miserable  forgetfulness  on  the  part  of  us  all, 
since  we  know  not  who  we  were  in  our  former 
life  !  But  perhaps  it  was  caused  by  some  error, 
or  favour,  that  he  alone  did  not  touch  the  abyss 
of  Lethe,  or  taste  the  water  of  oblivion  ;  doubt- 
less the  trifling  old  man  (as  is  wont  to  be  the 
case  with  old  women  who  are  free  from  occupa- 
tion) invented  fables  as  it  were  for  credulous  in- 
fants. But  if  he  had  thought  well  of  those  to 
whom  he  spoke  these  things ;  if  he  had  con- 
sidered them  to  be  men,  he  would  never  have 
claimed  to  himself  the  liberty  of  uttering  such 
perverse  falsehoods.  But  the  folly  of  this  most 
trifling  man  is  desen-ing  of  ridicule.  What  shall 
we  do  in  the  case  of  Cicero,  who,  having  said  in 
the  beginning  of  his  Consolatioji  that  men  were 
born  for  the  sake  of  atoning  for  their  crimes,  after- 
wards repeated  the  assertion,  as  though  rebuking 
him  who  does  not  imagine  that  life  is  a  punish- 
ment? He  was  right,  therefore,  in  saying  before- 
hand that  he  was  held  by  error  and  wretched 
ignorance  of  the  truth. 

CHAP.  XIX.  —  CICERO  AND  OTHERS  OF  THE  WISEST 
MEN  TEACH  THE  IMMORTALITY  OF  THE  SOUL,  BUT 
IN  AN  UNBELIEVINC;  MANNER  ;  AND  TH.Vr  A  GOOD 
OR  AN  EVIL  DE-VrH  MUST  I3E  WEIGHED  FRO.M  THE 
PREVIOUS  LIFE. 

But  those  who  assert  the  advantage  of  death, 
because  they  know  nothing  of  the  truth,  thus 
reason  :   If  there  is  nothing  after  death,  death  is 


*  Heautontim.,  v.  2.  18.  This  advice  is  given  to  a  young  man, 
who,  not  knowing  the  vahie  of  hfe,  is  prepared  rashly  to  throw  it 
away  in  consequence  of  some  check  to  his  plans. 

5  Pythagoras  taught  the  doctrine  of  the  transmigration  of  souls, 
and  affirmed  that  he  had  lived  already  as  Euphorbus,  one  of  the 
heroes  of  Troy,  who  was  slain  by  Menelaus  in  the  Trojan  war. 
Laclantius  again  refers  to  this  subject,  book  vii.  ch.  23,  iii/ra. 


90 


THE    DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  III, 


not  an  evil  ;  for  it  takes  away  the  perception  of 
evil.  But  if  the  soul  survives,  death  is  even  an 
advantage ;  because  immortality  follows.  And 
this  sentiment  is  thus  set  forth  by  Cicero  con- 
cerning the  Laws  : '  "  We  may  congratulate  our- 
selves, since  death  is  about  to  bring  either  a 
better  state  than  that  which  exists  in  life,  or  at 
any  rate  not  a  worse.  For  if  the  soul  is  in  a 
state  of  vigour  without  the  body,  it  is  a  divine 
life ;  and  if  it  is  without  perception,  assuredly 
there  is  no  evil."  Cleverly  argued,  as  it  ap- 
peared to  himself,  as  though  there  could  be  no 
other  state.  But  each  conclusion  is  false.  For 
the  sacred  writings  ^  teach  that  the  soul  is  not 
annihilated  ;  but  that  it  is  either  rewarded  ac- 
cording to  its  righteousness,  or  eternally  punished 
according  to  its  crimes.  For  neither  is  it  right, 
that  he  who  has  lived  a  life  of  wickedness  in 
prosperity  should  escape  the  punishment  which 
he  deserves  ;  nor  that  he  who  has  been  wretched 
on  account  of  his  righteousness,  should  be  de- 
prived of  his  reward.  And  this  is  so  true,  that 
Tully  also,  in  his  Consolation,  declared  that  the 
righteous  and  the  wicked  do  not  inhabit  the 
same  abodes.  P'or  those  same  wise  men,  he 
says,  did  not  judge  that  the  same  course  was 
open  for  all  into  the  heaven  ;  for  they  taught 
that  those  who  were  contaminated  by  vices  and 
crimes  were  thrust  down  into  darkness,  and  lay 
m  the  mire  ;  but  that,  on  the  other  hand,  souls 
that  were  chaste,  pure,  upright,  and  uncontami- 
nated,  being  also  refined  by  the  study  and  prac- 
tice of  virtue,  by  a  light  and  easy  course  take 
their  flight  to  the  gods,  that  is,  to  a  nature  re- 
sembling their  own.  But  this  sentiment  is  op- 
posed to  the  former  argument.  For  that  is 
bas:id  on  the  assumption  that  every  man  at  his 
birth  is  presented  with  immortality.  What  dis- 
tinction, therefore,  will  there  be  between  virtue 
and  guilt,  if  it  makes  no  difference  whether  a 
man  be  Aristides  or  Phalaris,  whether  he  be 
Cato  or  Catiline?  But  a  man  does  not  perceive 
this  opposition  between  sentiments  and  actions, 
unless  he  is  in  possession  of  the  truth.  If  any 
one,  therefore,  should  ask  me  whether  death  is  a 
good  or  an  evil,  I  shall  reply  that  its  character 
depends  upon  the  course  of  the  life.  For  as 
life  itself  is  a  good  if  it  is  passed  virtuously,  but 
an  evil  if  it  is  spent  viciously,  so  also  death  is 
to  be  weighed  in  accordance  with  the  past  ac- 
tions of  life.  And  so  it  comes  to  pass,  that  if 
life  has  been  passed  in  the  service  of  God,  death 
is  not  an  evil,  for  it  is  a  trajislation  to  immor- 
tality. But  if  not  so,  death  must  necessarily  be 
an  evil,  since  it  transfers  men,  as  I  have  said,  to 
everlasting  punishment.^ 


What,  then,  shall  we  say,  but  that  they  are  in 
error  who  either  desire  death  as  a  good,  or  flee 
from  life  as  an  evil  ?  unless  they  are  most  unjust, 
who  do  not  weigh  the  fewer  evils  against  the 
greater  number  of  blessings.  For  when  they  pass 
all  their  lives  in  a  variety  of  the  choicest  gratifi- 
cations, if  any  bitterness  has  chanced  to  succeed 
to  these,  they  desire  to  die  ;  and  they  so  regard  it 
as  to  appear  never  to  have  fared  well,  if  at  any 
time  they  happen  to  fare  ill.  Therefore  they  con- 
demn the  whole  of  life,  and  consider  it  as  nothing 
else  than  filled  with  evils.  Hence  arose  that  fool- 
ish sentiment,  that  this  state  which  we  imagine 
to  be  life  is  death,  and  that  that  which  we  fear 
as  death  is  life  ;  and  so  that  the  first  good  is  not 
to  be  born,  that  the  second  is  an  early  death. 
And  that  this  sentiment  may  be  of  greater  weight, 
it  is  attributed  to  Silenus."*  Cicero  in  his  Conso- 
lation says  :  "  Not  to  be  born  is  by  far  the  best 
thing,  and  not  to  fall  upon  these  rocks  of  life. 
But  the  next  thing  is,  if  you  have  been  born,  to 
die  as  soon  as  possible,  and  to  flee  from  the  vio- 
lence of  fortune  as  from  a  conflagration."  That 
he  believed  this  most  foolish  expression  appears 
from  this,  that  he  added  something  of  his  own 
for  its  embellishment.  I  ask,  therefore,  for  whom 
he  thinks  it  best  not  to  be  born,  when  there  is  no 
one  at  all  who  has  any  perception  ;  for  it  is  the  per- 
ception which  causes  anything  to  be  good  or  bad. 
In  the  next  place,  why  did  he  regard  the  whole  of 
life  as  nothing  else  than  rocks,  and  a  conflagra- 
tion ;  as  though  it  were  either  in  our  power  not  to 
be  born,  or  life  were  given  to  us  by  fortune,  and 
not  by  God,  or  as  though  the  course  of  life  ap- 
peared to  bear  any  resemblance  to  a  conflagration? 

The  saying  of  Plato  is  not  dissimilar,  that  he 
gave  thanks  to  nature,  first  that  he  was  born  a 
human  being  rather  than  a  dumb  animal ;  in  the 
next  place,  that  he  was  a  man  rather  than  a 
woman  ;  that  he  was  a  Greek  rather  than  a  bar- 
barian ;  5  lastly,  that  he  was  an  Athenian,  and 
that  he  was  born  in  the  time  of  Socrates.  It  is 
impossible  to  say  what  great  blindness  and  errors 
are  produced  by  ignorance  of  the  truth.  I 
would  altogether  contend  that  nothing  in  the 
affairs  of  men  was  ever  spoken  more  foolishly. 
As  though,  if  he  had  been  born  a  barbarian,  or  a 
woman,  or,  in  fine,  an  ass,  he  would  be  the  same 
Plato,  and  not  that  very  being  which  had  been 
produced.  I3ut  he  evidently  believed  Pythago- 
ras, who,  in  order  that  he  might  prevent  men 
from  feeding  on  animals,  said  that  souls  passed 
from  the  bodies  of  men  to  the  bodies  of  other 
animals  ;  which  is  both  foolish  and  impossible. 
It  is  foolish,  because  it  was  unnecessary  to  intro- 
duce souls  that  have  long  existed  into  new  bod- 


<  Sileniis  was   the  constant  companion    of  Dionysus.      He  was 
'  This  passage  is  not  contained  in  Cicero's  treatise  on  the  Laws,     recarded  as  an  inspired  prophet,  who  knew  all  the  past  and  the  most 
but  the  substance  of  it  is  in  the  Tusculan  QrtcsU'oHS.  \  distant  future,  and  as  a  sage  who  despised  all  the  gifts  of  fortune. 

2  See  Dan.  xii. ;  Matt,  iii.,  xiii.,  xxv.;  John  xii.  I        5  The  Creeks  included  all  nations,  except  themselves,  under  the 

3  [See  vol.  iii.  p.  231,  and  same  treatise  sj>arsim.\  \  general  name  of  barbarians. 


Chap.  XX.] 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


91 


ies,  when  the  same  Artificer  who  at  one  time  had 
made  the  first,  was  ahvays  able  to  make  fresh 
ones ;  it  is  impossible,  because  the  soul  endued 
with  right  reason  can  no  more  change  tjie  nature 
of  its  condition,  than  fire  can  rush  downwards, 
or,  like  a  river,  pour  its  flame  obliquely.'  The  j 
wise  man  therefore  imagined,  that  it  might  come  ' 
to  pass  that  the  soul  which  was  then  in  Plato 
might  be  shut  up  in  some  other  animal,  and 
might  be  endued  with  the  sensibility  of  a  man, 
so  as  to  understand  and  grieve  that  it  was  bur- 
thened  with  an  incongruous  body.  How  much 
more  rationally  would  he  have  acted,  if  he  had 
said  that  he  gave  thanks  because  he  was  born 
with  a  good  capacity,  and  capable  of  receiving 
instruction,  and  that  he  was  possessed  of  those 
resources  which  enabled  him  to  receive  a  liberal 
education  !  For  what  benefit  was  it  that  he  was 
born  at  Athens  ?  Have  not  many  men  of  distin- 
guished talent  and  learning  lived  in  other  cities, 
who  were  better  individually  than  all  the  Athen- 
ians? How  many  thousands  must  we  believe 
that  there  were,  who,  though  born  at  Athens, 
and  in  the  times  of  Socrates,  were  neverthe- 
less unlearned  and  foolish?  For  it  is  not  the 
walls  or  the  place  in  which  any  one  was  born 
that  can  invest  a  man  with  wisdom.  Of  what 
avail  was  it  to  congratulate  himself  that  he  was 
born  in  the  times  of  Socrates?  Was  Socrates 
able  to  supply  talent  to  learners?  It  did  not 
occur  to  Plato  that  Alcibiades  also,  and  Critias, 
were  constant  hearers  of  the  same  Socrates,  the 
one  of  whom  was  the  most  active  enemy  of  his 
country,  the  other  the  most  cruel  of  all  tyrants. 

CHAP.    XX.  SOCRATES   HAD    MORE    KNOWLEDGE  IN 

PHILOSOPHY     THAN     OTHER     MEN,    ALTHOUGH     IN 
M.ANY    THINGS    HE   ACTED    FOOLISHLY. 

Let  US  now  see  what  there  was  so  great  in 
Socrates  himself,  that  a  wise  man  deservedly 
gave  thanks  that  he  was  born  in  his  times.  I  do 
not  deny  that  he  was  a  little  more  sagacious  than 
the  others  who  thought  that  the  nature  of  things 
could  be  comprehended  by  the  mind.  And  in 
this  I  judge  that  they  were  not  only  senseless, 
but  also  impious  ;  because  they  wished  to  send 
their  inquisitive  eyes  into  the  secrets  of  that  heav- 
enly providence.  We  know  that  there  are  at 
Rome,  and  in  many  cities,  certain  sacred  things 
which  it  is  considered  impious  for  men  to  look 
upon.  Therefore  they  who  are  not  permitted  to 
pollute  those  objects  abstain  from  looking  upon 
them  ;  and  if  by  error  or  some  accident  a  man 
has  happened  to  see  them,  his  guilt  is  expiated 
first  by  his  punishment,  and  afterwards  by  a  rej^e- 
tition  of  sacrifice.  What  can  you  do  in  the  case 
of  those  who  wish  to  pry  into  unpermitted  things? 
Truly  they  are  much  more  wicked  who  seek  to 


profane  the  secrets  of  the  world  and  this  heav- 
enly temple  with  impious  disputations,  than  those 
who  entered  the  temple  of  Vesta,  or  the  Good  , 
Goddess,  or  Ceres.  And  these  shrines,  though  it 
is  not  lawful  for  men  to  approach  them,  were  yet 
constructed  by  men.  But  these  men  not  only 
escape  the  charge  of  impiety,  but,  that  which  is 
much  more  unbecoming,  they  gain  the  fame  of 
eloquence  and  the  glory  of  talent.  W' hat  if  they 
were  able  to  investigate  anything?  For  they  are 
as  foolish  in  asserting  as  they  are  wicked  in 
searching  out ;  since  they  are  neither  able  to 
find  out  anything,  nor,  even  if  they  had  found 
out  anything,  to  defend  it.  For  if  even  by  chance 
they  have  seen  the  truth — a  thing  which  often 
happens  —  they  so  act  that  it  is  refuted  by  others 
as  false.  For  no  one  descends  from  heaven  to 
pass  sentence  on  the  opinions  of  individuals ; 
wherefore  no  one  can  doubt  that  those  who  seek 
after  these  things  are  foolish,  senseless,  and  insane. 
Socrates  therefore  had  something  of  human 
wisdom,^  who,  when  he  understood  that  these 
things  could  not  possibly  be  ascertained,  re- 
moved himself  from  questions  of  this  kind  ;  but 
I  fear  that  he  so  acted  in  this  alone.  For  many 
of  his  actions  are  not  only  undeserving  of  praise, 
but  also  most  deserving  of  censure,  in  which 
things  he  most  resembled  those  of  his  own  class. 
Out  of  these  I  will  select  one  which  may  be 
judged  of  by  all.  Socrates  used  this  well-known 
proverb  :  "  That  which  is  above  us  is  nothing  to 
us."  Let  us  therefore  fall  down  upon  the  earth, 
and  use  as  feet  those  hands  which  have  been 
given  us  for  the  production  of  excellent  works. 
The  heaven  is  nothing  to  us,  to  the  contempla- 
tion of  which  we  have  been  raised ;  ^  in  fine,  the 
light  itself  can  have  no  reference  to  us ;  un- 
doubtedly the  cause  of  our  sustenance  is  from 
heaven.  But  if  he  perceived  this,  that  we  ought 
not  to  discuss  the  nature  of  heavenly  things,  he 
was  unable  even  to  comprehend  the  nature  of 
those  things  which  he  had  beneath  his  feet. 
What  then?  did  he  err  in  his  words?  It  is  not 
probable  ;  but  he  undoubtedly  meant  that  which  , 
he  said,  that  we  are  not  to  devote  ourselves  to 
religion  ;  but  if  he  were  openly  to  say  this,  no 
one  would  suffer  it. 

For  who  cannot  perceive  that  this  world,  com- 
pleted with  such  wonderful  method,  is  governed 
by  some  providence,  since  there  is  nothing  which 
can  exist  without  some  one  to  direct  it?  Thus, 
a  house  deserted  by  its  inhabitant  falls  to  decay  ; 
a  ship  without  a  i)ilot  goes  to  the  bottom ; 
and  a  body  abandoned  by  the  soul  wastes  away. 
Much  less  can  we  suppose  that  so  great  a  fiibric 
could  either  have  been  constructed  without  an 


1  In  transversum,  "  crosswise  or  transversely,' 


2  Lactantius  here  uses  cor,  "  the  heart,"  for  wisdom,  regarding 
the  heart  as  the  seat  of  wisdom 

3  The  aUusion  is  to  the  upright  figure  of  man,  as  opposed  to  the 
other  animals,  which  look  down  upon  the  earth,  whereas  man  looks 
upward.     [Our  author  is  partial  to  this  idea.     See  p.  41,  i«/ /-a. J 


92 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  III, 


Artificer,  or  have  existed  so  long  without  a  Ruler. 
But  if  he  wished  to  overthrow  those  public  su- 
perstitions, I  do  not  disapprove  of  this ;  yea,  I 
shall  rather  praise  it,  if  he  shall  have  found  any- 
thing better  to  take  their  place.  But  the  same 
man  swore '  by  a  dog  and  a  goose.  Oh  buffoon 
(as  Zeno  the  Epicurean^  says),  senseless,  aban- 
doned, desperate  man,  if  he  wished  to  scoff  at 
religion ;  madman,  if  he  did  this  seriously,  so  as 
to  esteem  a  most  base  animal  as  God  !  For  who 
can  dare  to  find  fault  with  the  superstitions  of 
the  Egyptians,  when  Socrates  confirmed  them  at 
Athens  by  his  authority  ?  But  was  it  not  a  mark 
of  consummate  vanity,  that  before  his  death  he 
asked  his  friends  to  sacrifice  for  him  a  cock 
which  he  had  vowed  to  ^sculapius?  He  evi- 
dently feared  lest  he  should  be  put  upon  his  trial 
before  Rhadamanthus,  the  judge,  by  /Esculapius 
on  account  of  the  vow.  I  should  consider  him 
most  mad  if  he  had  died  under  the  influence  of 
disease.  But  since  he  did  this  in  his  sound 
mind,  he  who  thinks  that  he  was  wise  is  himself 
of  unsound  mind.  Behold  one  in  whose  times 
the  wise  man  congratulates  himself  as  having 
been  born ! 

CHAP.    XXI.  —  OF    THE    SYSTEM    OF   PLATO,    WHICH 
WOCLD  LEAD  TO  THE  OVERTHROW  OF   STATES. 

Let  us,  however,  see  what  it  was  that  he 
learned  from  Socrates,  who,  having  entirely  re- 
jected natural  philosophy,  betook  himself  to  in- 
quiries about  virtue  and  duty.  And  thus  I  do 
not  doubt  that  he  instructed  his  hearers  in  the 
precepts  of  justice.  Therefore,  under  the  teach- 
ing of  Socrates,  it  did  not  escape  the  notice  of 
Plato,  that  the  force  of  justice  consists  in  equal- 
ity, since  all  are  born  in  an  equal  condition. 
Therefore  (he  says)  they  must  have  nothing 
private  or  their  own ;  but  that  they  may  be 
equal,  as  the  method  of  justice  requires,  they 
must  possess  all  things  in  common.  This  is 
capable  of  being  endured,  as  long  as  it  appears 
to  be  spoken  of  money.  But  how  impossible 
and  how  unjust  this  is,  I  could  show  by  many 
things.  Let  us,  however,  admit  its  possibility. 
For  grant  that  all  are  wise,  and  despise  money. 
To  what,  then,  did  that  community  lead  him? 
Marriages  also,  he  says,  ought  to  be  in  common  ; 
so  that  many  men  may  flock  together  like  dogs 
to  the  same  woman,  and  he  who  shall  be  supe- 
rior in  strength  may  succeed  in  obtaining  her ; 
or  if  they  are  patient  as  philosophers,  they  may 
await  their  turns,  as  in  a  brothel.  Oh  the  won- 
derful equality  of  Plato  !  Where,  then,  is  the 
virtue    of    chastity?    where    conjugal    fidelity? 

•  This  oath  is  mentioned  by  Athenscus.  Tertullian  makes  an  ex- 
cuse for  it,  as  though  it  were  done  in  mockery  of  the  gods.  Socrates 
was  called  the  Athenian  buffoon,  because  he  taught  many  things  in  a 
jesting  manner. 

^  To  be  distinguished  from  Zeno  of  Citium,  the  Stoic,  and  also 
from  Zeno  of  Elea. 


And  if  you  take  away  these,  all  justice  is  taken 
away.  But  he  also  says  that  states  would  be 
prosperous,  if  either  philosophers  were  their 
kings,  or  .their  kings  were  philosophers.  But  if 
you  were  to  give  the  sovereignty  to  this  man  of 
such  justice  and  equity,  who  had  deprived  some 
of  their  own  property,  and  given  to  some  the 
property  of  others,  he  would  prostitute  the  mod- 
esty of  women  ;  a  thing  which  was  never  done,  I 
do  not  say  by  a  king,  but  not  even  by  a  tyrant. 

But  what  motive  did  he  advance  for  this  most 
degrading  advice  ?  The  state  will  be  in  harmony, 
and  bound  together  with  the  bonds  of  mutual 
love,  if  all  shall  be  the  husbands,  and  fathers, 
and  wives,  and  children  of  all.  What  a  con- 
fusion of  the  human  race  is  this?  How  is  it 
possible  for  affection  to  be  preserved  where  there 
is  nothing  certain  to  be  loved  ?  What  man  will 
love  a  woman,  or  what  woman  a  man,  unless 
they  shall  always  have  lived  together,  —  unless  de- 
votedness  of  mind,  and  faith  mutually  preserved, 
shall  have  made  their  love  indi\isible?  But  this 
virtue  has  no  place  in  that  promiscuous  pleasure. 
Moreover,  if  all  are  the  children  of  all,  who  will 
be  able  to  love  children  as  his  own,  when  he  is 
either  ignorant  or  in  doubt  whetlier  they  are  his 
own  ?  Who  will  bestow  honour  upon  any  one  as 
a  father,  when  he  does  not  know  from  whom  he 
was  born?  From  which  it  comes  to  pass,  that 
he  not  only  esteems  a  stranger  as  a  father,  but 
also  a  father  as  a  stranger.  Why  should  I  say 
that  it  is  possible  for  a  wife  to  be  common,  but 
impossible  for  a  son,  who  cannot  be  conceived 
except  from  one?  The  community,  therefore, 
is  lost  to  him  alone,  nature  herself  crying  out 
against  it.  It  remains  that  it  is  only  for  the  sake 
of  concord  that  he  would  have  a  community  of 
wives.  But  there  is  no  more  vehement  cause 
of  discords,  than  the  desire  of  one  woman  by 
many  men.  And  in  this  Plato  might  have  been 
admonished,  if  not  by  reason,  yet  certainly  by 
example,  both  of  the  dumb  animals,  which  fight 
most  vehemently  on  this  account,  and  of  men, 
who  have  always  carried  on  most  severe  wars 
with  one  another  on  account  of  this  matter. 

CHAP.    XXII.  OF    THE    PRECEPTS    OF    PLATO,    AND 

CENSURES    OF    THE    SAME. 

It  remains  that  the  community  of  which  we 
have  spoken  admits  of  nothing  else  but  adulteries 
and  lusts,  for  the  utter  extinction  of  which  virtue 
is  especially  necessary.  Therefore  he  did  not 
find  the  concord  which  he  sought,  because  he 
did  not  see  whence  it  arises.  For  justice  has 
no  weight  in  outward  circumstances,  not  even  in 
the  body,^  but  it  is  altogether  employed  on  the 
mind    of  man.     He,   therefore,   who  wishes   to 


3  The  Stoics  not  only  regarded  accidental   things,  but  also  our 
bodies  themselves,  as  being  without  us. 


Chap.  XXIII.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


93 


place  men  on  an  equality,  ought  not  to  take  away  nation  has  existed  in  the  world  so 
marriage  and  wealth,  but  arrogance,  pride,  and  |  vain  as  to  live  in  this  manner.^ 
haughtiness,  that  those  who  are  powerful  and 
lifted  up  on  high  may  know  that  they  are  on  a 
level  even  with  the  most  needy.  For  insolence 
and  injustice  being  taken  from  the  rich,  it  will 
make  no  difference  whether  some  are  rich  and 
others  poor,  since  they  will  be  equal  in  spirit, 
and  nothing  but  reverence  towards  God  can  pro- 
duce this  result.  He  thought,  therefore,  that  he 
had  found  justice,  whereas  he  had  altogether  re- 
moved it,  because  it  ought  not  to  be  a  commu- 
nity of  perishable  things,  but  of  minds.  For  if 
justice  is  the  mother '  of  all  virtues,  when  they 
are  severally  taken  away,  it  is  also  itself  over- 
thrown. But  Plato  took  away  above  all  things 
frugality,  which  has  no  existence  when  there  is  no 
property  of  one's  own  which  can  be  possessed  ; 
he  took  away  abstinence,  since  there  will  be 
nothing  belonging  to  another  from  which  one 
can  abstain;  he  took  away  temperance  and 
chastity,  which  are  the  greatest  virtues  in  each 
sex  ;  he  took  away  self-respect,  shame,  and  mod- 
esty, if  those  things  which  are  accustomed  to  be 
judged  base  and  disgraceful  begin  to  be  account- 
ed honourable  and  lawful.  Thus,  while  he 
wishes  to  confer  virtue  upon  all,  he  takes  it  away 
from  all.  For  the  ownership  of  property  con- 
tains the  material  both  of  vices  and  of  virtues, 
but  a  community  of  goods  contains  nothing  else 
than  the  licentiousness  of  vices.  For  men  who 
have  many  mistresses  can  be  called  nothing  else 
than  luxurious  and  prodigal.  And  likewise 
women  who  are  in  the  possession  of  many  men, 
must  of  necessity  be  not  adulteresses,  because 
they  have  no  fixed  marriage,  but  prostitutes  and 
•  harlots.  Therefore  he  reduced  human  life,  I  do 
not  say  to  the  likeness  of  dumb  animals,  but  of 

the  herds  and  brutes.     For  almost  all  the  birds 

contract  marriages,  and  are  united  in  pairs,  and 

defend  their  nests,  as  though  their  marriage-beds, 

with  harmonious  mind,  and   cherish  their  own 

young,  because  they  are  well  known  to  them  ; 

and  if  you  put  others  in  their  way,  they  repel 

them.     But  this  wise  man,  contrary  to  the  cus- 
tom of  men,  and  contrary  to  nature,  chose  more 

foolish  objects  of  imitation  ;  and   since  he   saw 

that  the  duties  of  males  and  females  were  not 

separated   in   the    case    of    other    animals,   he 

thought  that  women  also  ought  to  engage   in 

warfare,  and  take  a  share  in  the  public  counsels, 

and  undertake  magistracies,  and  assume  com- 
mands.     And   therefore  he   assigned   to   them 

horses   and    arms :    it   follows   that    he    should 

have  assigned  to  men  wool  and  the  loom,  and 

the  carrying  of  infants.     Nor  did  he  see  the  im- 
possibility of  what  he  said,  from  the  fact  that  no 


foolish  or  so 


CHAP.  XXIII.  OF    THE    ERRORS    OF    CERTAIN    PHI- 
LOSOPHERS,   AND    OF   THE   SUN   AND    MOON. 

Since,  therefore,  the  leading  men  among  the 
philosophers  are  themselves  discovered  to  be  of 
such   emptiness,  what  shall  we   think   of  those 
lesser  ^  ones,  who  are  accustomed  never  to  ap- 
pear to  themselves  so  wise,  as  when  they  boast 
of  their   contempt   of  money?      Brave    spirit! 
But  I  wait  to  see  their  conduct,  and  what  are 
the  results  of  that  contempt.     They  avoid  as  an 
evil,  and  abandon  the  property  handed  down  to 
them  from  their  parents.     And  lest  they  should 
suffer  shipwreck  in  a  storm,  they  plunge  head- 
long of  their  own  accord  in  a  calm,  being  resolute 
not  by  virtue,  but  by  perverse   fear ;   as  those 
who,  through  fear  of  being  slain  by  the  enemy, 
slay  themselves,  that  by  death  they  may  avoid 
death.     So  these  men,  without  honour  and  with- 
out influence,  throw  away  the  means  by  which 
they  might  have  acquired  the  glory  of  liberality. 
Democritus  is  praised  because  he  abandoned  his 
fields,  and  suffered  them  to  become  public  pas- 
tures.    I  should  approve  of  it,  if  he  had  given 
them.     But  nothing  is  done  wisely  which  is  use- 
less and  evil  if  it  is  done  by  all.     But  this  negli- 
gence is  tolerable.     What  shall  I  say  of  him  who 
changed  his  possessions  into' money,  which  he 
threw  into  the  sea?     I  doubt  whether  he  was  in 
his  senses,  or  deranged.     Away,  he  says,  ye  evil 
desires,  into  the  deep.     I  will   cast  you  away, 
lest  I  myself  should  be  cast  away  by  you.     If 
you  have  so  great  a  contempt  for  money,  employ 
it  in  acts  of  kindness  and  humanity,  bestow  it 
upon  the  poor;   this,  which  you  are  about  to 
throw  away,  may  be  a  succour  to  many,  so  that 
they  may  not  die  through  famine,  or  thirst,  or 
nakedness.     Imitate  at  least  the  madness  and 
fury  of  Tuditanus  ;  •»  scatter  abroad  your  property 
to  be  seized  by  the  people.     You  have  it  in  your 
power  both  to  escape  the  possession  of  money, 
and  yet  to   lay  it  out   to  advantage  ;  for  what- 
ever has  been  profitable  to  many  is  securely  laid 
out. 

But  who  approves  of  the  equality  of  faults  as 
laid  down  by  Zeno  ?  But  let  us  omit  that  which 
is  always  received  with  derision  by  all.  This  is 
sufficient  to  prove  the  error  of  this  madman, 
that  he  places  pity  among  vices  and  diseases. 
He  deprives  us  of  an  affection,  which  involves 
almost  the  whole  course  of  human  life.  For 
since  the  nature  of  man  is  more  feeble  than 
that  of  the  other  animals,  which  divine  provi- 


'  Justice  comprises  within  herself  all  the  virtues.  And  thus 
Aristotle  calls  her  the  mother  of  the  other  virtues,  because  she 
cherishes  as  it  were  in  her  bosom  all  the  rest. 


Alas !  that  such 


2  [This  caustic  review  of  Plato  is  painfully  just. 
opprohria  should  be  incnpnble  of  reply.  1 

3  That  is,  philo.sophers  of  less  repute  .ind  fame. 

*  Cicero  speaks  of  luditanuS  as  scattering  money  from  the  ros- 
trum among  the  people. 


94 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  III. 


dence  has  armed  with  natural  means  of  protec- 
tion,' either  to  endure  the  severity  of  the  seasons 
or  to  ward  off  attacks  from  their  bodies,  because 
none  of  these  things  has  been  given  to  man,  he 
has  received  in  the  place  of  all  these  things  the 
affection  of  pity,  which  is  truly  called  humanity, 
by  which  we  might  mutually  protect  each  other. 
For  if  a  man  were  rendered  savage  by  the  sight 
of  another  man,  which  we  see  happen  in  the 
case  of  those  animals  which  are  of  a  solitary  ^ 
nature,  there  would  be  no  society  among  men, 
no  care  or  system  in  the  building  of  cities  ;  and 
thus  life  would  not  even  be  safe,  since  the  weak- 
ness of  men  would  both  be  exposed  to  the  at- 
tacks of  the  other  animals,  and  they  would 
rage  among  themselves  after  the  manner  of  wild 
beasts.  Nor  is  his  madness  less  in  other  things. 
For  what  can  be  said  respecting  him  who  as- 
serted that  snow  was  black?  How  naturally  it 
followed,  that  he  should  also  assert  that  pitch 
was  white  !  This  is  he  who  said  that  he  was 
born  for  this  purpose,  that  he  might  behold  the 
heaven  and  the  sun,  who  beheld  nothing  on  the 
earth  when  the  sun  was  shining.  Xenophanes 
most  foolishly  believed  mathematicians  who  said 
that  the  orb  of  the  moon  was  eighteen  times 
larger  than  the  earth  ;  and,  as  was  consistent 
with  this  folly,  he  said  that  within  the  concave 
surface  of  the  moon  there  was  another  earth, 
and  that  there  another  race  of  men  live  in  a 
similar  manner  to  that  in  which  we  live  on  this 
earth.  Therefore  these  lunatics  have  another 
moon,  to  hold  forth  to  them  a  light  by  night, 
as  this  does  to  us.  And  perhaps  this  globe  of 
ours  may  be  a  moon  to  another  earth  below 
this. 3  Seneca  says  that  there  was  one  among 
the  Stoics  who  used  to  deliberate  whether  he 
should  assign  to  the  sun  also  its  own  inhabitants  ; 
he  acted  foolishly  in  doubting.  For  what  injury 
would  he  have  inflicted  if  he  had  assigned  them? 
But  I  believe  the  heat  deterred  him,  so  as  not 
to  imperil  so  great  a  multitude ;  lest,  if  they 
should  perish  through  excessive  heat,  so  great  a 
calamity  should  be  said  to  have  happened  by 
his  fault. 


CH.AP.    XXIV, OF    THE    ANTIPODES,    THE     HEAVEN, 

AND   THE    STARS. 

How  is  it  with  those  who  imagine  that  there 
are  antipodes  *  opposite  to  our  footsteps  ?  Do  they 
say  anything  to  the  purpose  ?  Or  is  there  any 
one  so  senseless  as  to  believe  that  there  are  men 
whose  footsteps  are  higher  than  their  heads?  or 
that  the  things  which  with  us  are  in  a  recumbent 


'   [Anacreon,  Ode  2.     toi?  avhpairiv  <f)pon7/ia.] 

2  Animals  of  a  solitary  nature,  as  opposed  to  those  of  gregarious 
habits. 

3  [He  was  nearer  truth  than  he  imagined,  if  the  planet  Mars 
may  be  called  below  us.] 

*  LVol.  V.  p.  14.] 


position,  with  them  hang  in  an  inverted  direc- 
tion? that  the  crops  and  trees  grow  downwards? 
that  the  rains,  and  snow,  and  hail  fall  upwards 
to  the  earth  ?  And  does  any  one  wonder  that 
hanging  gardens  5  are  mentioned  among  the 
seven  wonders  of  the  world,  when  philosophers 
make  hanging  fields,  and  seas,  and  cities,  and 
mountains  ?  The  origin  of  this  error  must  also 
be  set  forth  by  us.  For  they  are  always  deceived 
in  the  same  manner.  For  when  they  have  as- 
sumed anything  false  in  the  commencement  of 
their  investigations,  led  by  the  resemblance  of 
the  truth,  they  necessarily  fall  into  those  things 
which  are  its  consequences.  Thus  they  fall  into 
many  ridiculous  things ;  because  those  things 
which  are  in  agreement  with  false  things,  must 
themselves  be  false.  But  since  they  placed  con- 
fidence in  the  first,  they  do  not  consider  the 
character  of  those  things  which  follow,  but  de- 
fend them  in  every  way  ;  whereas  they  ought  to 
judge  from  those  which  follow,  whether  the  first 
are  true  or  false. 

What  course  of  argument,  therefore,  led  them 
to  the  idea  of  the  antipodes?  They  saw  the 
courses  of  the  stars  travelling  towards  the  west ; 
they  saw  that  the  sun  and  the  moon  always  set 
towards  the  same  quarter,  and  rise  from  the 
same.  But  since  they  did  not  perceive  what 
contrivance  regulated  their  courses,  nor  how  they 
returned  from  the  west  to  the  east,  but  supposed 
that  the  heaven  itself  sloped  downwards  in  every 
direction,  which  appearance  it  must  present  on 
account  of  its  immense  breadth,  they  thought 
that  the  world  is  round  like  a  ball,  and  they 
fancied  that  the  heaven  revolves  in  accordance 
with  the  motion  of  the  heavenly  bodies  ;  and 
thus  that  the  stars  and  sun,  when  they  have  set,' 
by  the  very  rapidity  of  the  motion  of  the  world  ^ 
are  borne  back  to  the  east.  Therefore  they  both 
constructed  brazen  orbs,  as  though  after  the  fig- 
ure of  the  world,  and  engraved  upon  them  certain 
monstrous  images,  which  they  said  were  constel- 
lations. It  followed,  therefore,  from  this  rotund- 
ity of  the  heaven,  that  the  earth  was  enclosed  in 
the  midst  of  its  curved  surface.  But  if  this  were 
so,  the  earth  also  itself  must  be  like  a  globe  ;  for 
that  could  not  possibly  be  anything  but  round, 
which  was  held  enclosed  by  that  which  was 
round.  But  if  the  earth  also  were  round,  it 
must  necessarily  happen  that  it  should  present 
the  same  appearance  to  all  parts  of  the  heaven  ; 
that  is,  that  it  should  raise  aloft  mountains,  ex- 
tend plains,  and  have  level  seas.  And  if  this  were 
so,  that  last  consequence  also  followed^  that  there 
would  be  no  part  of  the  earth  uninhabited  by 
men  and  the  other  animals.  Thus  the  rotundity 
of  the  earth  leads,  in  addition,  to  the  invention 
of  those  suspended  antipodes. 


5  He  alludes  to  the  hanging  gardens  of  Semiramis  at  Babylon. 

6  l^VVorld  here  means  universe.     See  vol.  ii.  p.  136,  note  2.] 


Chap.  XXV.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


95 


But  if  you  inquire  from  those  who  defend 
these  marvellous  fictions,  why  all  things  do  not 
fall  into  that  lower  part  of  the  heaven,  they  reply 
that  such  is  the  nature  of  things,  that  heavy 
bodies  are  borne  to  the  middle,  and  that  they 
are  all  joined  together  towards  the  middle,  as  we 
see  spokes  in  a  wheel ;  but  that  the  bodies 
which  are  light,  as  mist,  smoke,  and  fire,  are 
borne  away  from  the  middle,  so  as  to  seek  the 
heaven.  I  am  at  a  loss  what  to  say  respecting 
those  who,  when  they  have  once  erred,  consist- 
ently persevere  in  their  folly,  and  defend  one 
vain  thing  by  another ;  but  that  I  sometimes 
imagine  that  they  either  discuss  philosophy  for 
the  sake  of  a  jest,  or  purposely  and  knowingly 
undertake  to  defend  falsehoods,  as  if  to  exercise 
or  display  their  talents  on  false  subjects.  But  I 
should  be  able  to  prove  by  many  arguments  that 
it  is  impossible  for  the  heaven  to  be  lower  than 
the  earth,  were  it  not  that  this  book  must  now 
be  concluded,  and  that  some  things  still  remain, 
which  are  more  necessary  for  the  present  work. 
And  since  it  is  not  the  work  of  a  single  book  to 
run  over  the  errors  of  each  individually,  let  it  be 
sufficient  to  have  enumerated  a  few,  from  which 
the  nature  of  the  others  may  be  understood. 

CHAP.  XXV. OF  LE.'^RNING  PHILOSOPHY,  AViD  VVH.'^T 

GREAT   QUALIFICATIONS   ARE   NECESSARY    FOR   ITS 
PURSUIT. 

We  must  now  speak  a  few  things  concerning 
philosophy  in  general,  that  having  strengthened 
our  cause  we  may  conclude.  That  greatest  imi- 
tator of  Plato  among  our  writers  thought  that 
philosophy  was  not  for  the  multitude,  because 
none  but  learned  men  could  attain  to  it.  "  Phi- 
losophy," says  Cicero,'  "  is  contented  with  a 
few  judges,  of  its  own  accord  designedly  avoid- 
ing the  multitude."  It  is  not  therefore  wisdom, 
if  it  avoids  the  concourse  of  men  ;  since,  if 
wisdom  is  given  to  man,  it  is  given  to  all  without 
any  distinction,  so  that  there  is  no  one  at  all 
who  cannot  accjuire  it.  But  they  so  embrace 
virtue,  which  is  given  to  the  human  race,  that 
they  alone  of  all  appear  to  wish  to  enjoy  that 
which  is  a  public  good  ;  being  as  envious  as  if 
they  should  wish  to  bind  or  tear  out  the  eyes  of 
others  that  they  may  not  see  the  sun.  For  what 
else  is  it  to  deny  wisdom  to  men,  than  to  take 
away  from  their  minds  the  true  and  divine  light  ? 
But  if  the  nature  of  man  is  capable  of  wisdom, 
it  was  befitting  that  both  workmen,  and  country 
people,  and  women,  and  all,  in  short,  who  bear 
the  human  form,  should  be  taught  to  be  wise  ; 
and  that  the  people  should  be  brought  together 
from  every  language,  and  condition,  and  sex,  and 
age.  Therefore  it  is  a  very  strong  argument  that 
philosophy  neither  tends   to  wisdom,  nor  is  of 


'  Tusc,  ii.  I. 


itself  wisdom,  that  its  mystery  is  only  made 
known  by  the  l^eard  and  cloak  of  the  philoso- 
phers.- The  Stoics,  moreover,  perceived  this, 
who  said  that  philosophy  was  to  be  studied  both 
by  slaves  and  women  ;  Epicurus  also,  who  invites 
those  who  are  altogether  unacquainted  with  let- 
ters to  philosophy  ;  and  Plato  also,  who  wished 
to  compose  a  state  of  wise  men. 

They  attempted,  indeed,  to  do  that  which 
truth  required ;  but  they  were  unable  to  proceed 
beyond  words.  First,  because  instruction  in 
many  arts  is  necessary  for  an  application  to 
philosophy.  Common  learning  must  be  acquired 
on  account  of  practice  in  reading,  because  in  so 
great  a  variety  of  subjects  it  is  impossible  that 
all  things  should  be  learned  by  hearing,  or 
retained  in  the  memory.  No  little  attention 
also  must  be  given  to  the  grammarians,  in  order 
that  you  may  know  the  right  method  of  speak- 
ing. That  must  occupy  many  years.  Nor  must 
there  be  ignorance  of  rhetoric,  that  you  may  be 
able  to  utter  and  express  the  things  which  you 
have  learned.  Geometry  also,  and  music,  and 
astronomy,  are  necessary,  because  these  arts 
have  some  connection  with  philosophy  ;  and  the 
whole  of  these  subjects  cannot  be  learned  by 
women,  who  must  learn  within  the  years  of  their 
maturity  the  duties  which  are  hereafter  about  to 
be  of  service  to  them  for  domestic  uses  ;  nor  by 
servants,  who  must  live  in  service  during  those 
years  especially  in  which  they  are  able  to  learn  ; 
nor  by  the  poor,  or  labourers,  or  rustics,  who 
have  to  gain  their  daily  support  by  labour.  And 
on  this  account  Tully  says  that  philosophy  is 
averse  from  the  multitude.  But  yet  Epicurus 
will  receive  the  ignorant. ^  How,  then,  will  they 
understand  those  things  which  are  said  respecting 
the  first  principles  of  things,  the  perplexities  and 
intricacies  of  which  are  scarcely  attained  to  by 
men  of  cultivated  minds? 

Therefore,  in  subjects  which  are  involved  in 
obscurity,  and  confused  by  a  variety  of  intellects, 
and  set  off  by  the  studied  language  of  eloquent 
men,  what  place  is  there  for  the  unskilful  and 
ignorant?  Lastly,  they  never  taught  any  women 
to  study  philosophy,  except  Themiste  ■*  only, 
within  the  whole  memory  of  man  ;  nor  slaves, 
except  Phaedo  5  only,  who  is  said,  when  living  in 
oppressive  slavery,  to  have  been  ransomed  and 
taught  by  Cebes.  They  also  enumerate  Plato 
and  Diogenes  :  these,  however,  were  not  slaves, 
though  they  hatl  follen  into  servitude,  for  they 


2  A  long  beard  and  cloak  were  the  badges  of  the  philosophers. 
[See  vol.  ii.  p.  321,  note  9.  J 

i  [Platonic  philosophy  being  addressed  to  the  mind,  and  the 
Epicurean  to  lusts  and  passions.] 

*  Themiste  is  said  to  have  been  the  wife  of  Txontiiis;  Epicurus 
is  reported  to  have  written  to  her.  Themistoclea,  the  sister  of  Pythag. 
oras,  is  mentioned  as  a  student  of  philosophy;  besides  many  other 
women  in  different  ages. 

5  Plato  detlicated  to  Phxdo  his  treatise  on  the  immortality  of  the 
soul:  according  to  other  accounts,  Pha;do  was  ransomed  by  Crito 
or  Alcibiades  at  the  suggestion  of  Socrates. 


96 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  III. 


had  been  taken  captive.  A  certain  Aniceris  is 
said  to  have  ransomed  Plato  for  eight  sesterces. 
And  on  this  account  Seneca  severely  rebuked 
the  ransomer  himself,  because  he  set  so  small 
value  upon  Plato.  He  was  a  madman,  as  it 
seems  to  me,  who  was  angry  with  a  man  because 
he  did  not  tlirow  away  much  money  ;  doubtless 
he  ought  to  have  weighed  gold  as  though  to 
ransom  the  corpse  of  Hector,  or  to  have  insisted 
upon  the  payment  of  more  money  than  the  seller 
demanded.  Moreover,  they  taught  none  of  the 
barbarians,  with  the  single  exception  of  Anachar- 
sis  the  Scythian,  who  never  would  have  dreamed 
of  philosophy  had  he  not  previously  learned  both 
language  and  literature. 

CHAP.     XXVI, IT     IS     DIVINE     INSTRUCTION     ONLY 

WHICH    BESTOWS   WISDOM  ;     AND    OF    WHAT    EFFI- 
CACY   THE    LAW    OF    GOD    IS. 

That,  therefore,  which  they  perceived  to  be 
justly  required  by  the  demands  of  nature,  but 
which  they  were  themselves  unable  to  perform, 
and  saw  that  the  philosophers  could  not  effect, 
is  accomplished  only  by  divine  instruction  ;  for 
that  only  is  wisdom.  Doubtless  they  were  able 
to  persuade  any  one  who  do  not  even  persuade 
themselves  of  anything  ;  or  they  will  crush  the 
desires,  moderate  the  anger,  and  restrain  the 
lusts  of  any  one,  when  they  themselves  both 
yield  to  vices,  and  acknowledge  that  they  are 
overpowered  by  nature.  But  what  influence  is 
exerted  on  the  souls  of  men  by  the  precepts  of 
God,  because  of  their  simplicity  and  truth,  is 
shown  by  daily  proofs.  Give  me  a  man  who  is 
passionate,  scurrilous,  and  unrestrained  ;  with  a 
very  few  words  of  God, 

"  I  will  render  him  as  gentle  as  a  sheep." ' 

Give  me  one  who  is  grasping,  covetous,  and  tena- 
cious ;  I  will  presently  restore  him  to  you  liberal, 
and  freely  bestowing  his  money  with  full  hands. 
Give  me  a  man  who  is  afraid  of  pain  and  death  ; 
he  shall  i:)resently  despise  crosses,  and  fires,  and 
the  bull  of  Phalaris.^  Give  me  one  who  is  lust- 
ful, an  adulterer,  a  glutton  ;  you  shall  presently 
see  him  sober,  chaste,  and  temperate.  Give  me 
one  who  is  cruel  and  bloodthirsty  :  that  fury  shall 
presently  be  changed  into  true  clemency.  Give 
me  a  man  who  is  unjust,  foolish,  an  evil-doer; 
forthwith  he  shall  be  just,  and  wise,  and  innocent : 
for  by  one  laver^  all  his  wickedness  shall  be 
taken  away.  So  great  is  the  power  of  divine 
wisdom,  that,  when  infused  into  the  breast  of 
man,  by  one  impulse  it  once  for  all  expels  folly, 
which  is  the  mother  of  faults,  for  the  effecting 
of  which  there  is  no  need  of  payment,  or  books, 

'  Terence,  Adelphi,  iv.  i. 

*  Perlllus  invented  the  brazen  bull,  which  the  tyrant  Phalaris  used 
as  an  instrument  of  torture.  It  was  so  constructed  that  the  groans 
of  the  victiins  appeared  to  resemble  the  bellowing  of  the  bull. 

^  The  baptismal  font.     L'-^->  ^^  signifying  Zech.  xiii.  i.j 


or  nightly  studies.  These  results  are  accom- 
plished gratuitously,  easily,  and  quickly,  if  only 
the  ears  are  open  and  the  breast  thirsts  for  wis- 
dom. Let  no  one  fear  :  we  do  not  sell  water, 
nor  offer  the  sun  for  a  reward.  The  fountain  of 
God,  most  abundant  and  most  full,  is  open  to 
all  ;  and  this  heavenly  light  rises  for  all,"*  as  many 
as  have  eyes.  Did  any  of  the  philosophers  effect 
these  things,  or  is  he  able  to  effect  them  if  he 
wishes?  For  though  they  spend  their  lives  in 
the  study  of  philosophy,  they  are  neither  able  to 
improve  any  other  person  nor  themselves  (if 
nature  has  presented  any  obstacle).  Therefore 
their  wisdom,  doing  its  utmost,  does  not  eradi- 
cate, but  hide  vices.  But  a  few  precepts  of  God 
so  entirely  change  the  whole  man,  and  having 
put  off  the  old  man,  render  him  new,  that  you 
would  not  recognise  him  as  the  same. 

CHAP.     XXVII.  HOW     LHTLE     THE     PRECEPTS     OF 

PHILOSOPHERS     CONTRIBUTE    TO    IRUE     WISDOM, 
WHICH    VOU    WILL    FIND    IN    RELIGION    ONLY. 

What,  then?     Do  they  enjoin  nothing  similar? 
I  Yes,  indeed,  many  things  ;  and  they  frequently 
1  approach  the  truth.     But  those   precepts  have 
!  no  weight,   because   they  are  human,  and   are 
j  without  a  greater,  that  is,  that  divine  authority. 
j  No   one    therefore  believes  them,  because  the 
j  hearer  imagines  himself  to  be  a  man,  just  as  he 
I  is,  who  enjoins  them.     Moreover,  there  is  no 
I  certainty   with    them,  nothing   which   proceeds 
from  knowledge.     But  since  all  things  are  done 
by  conjecture,  and  many  differing  and  various 
things  are  brought  forward,  it  is  the  part  of  a 
most  foolish  man  to  be  willing  to  obey  their  pre- 
cepts, since  it  is  doubted  whether  they  are  true 
or  false  ;  and  therefore  no  one  obeys  them,  be- 
cause no  one  wishes  to  labour  for  an  uncertainty. 
The  Stoics  say  that  it  is  virtue  which  can  alone 
produce  a  happy  life.     Nothing  can  be  said  with 
greater  truth,     liut  what  if  he  shall  be  tormented, 
or  afflicted  with  pain  ?     Will  it  be  possible  for 
any  one  to  be  happy  in  the  hands  of  the  execu- 
tioners?    But  truly  pain  inflicted  upon  the  body 
is   the   material   of  virtue ;   therefore   he   is   not 
wretched    even    in   tortures.      Epicurus    speaks 
much  more  strongly.     The  wise  man,  he  says,  is 
always  happy  ;   and  even  when  shut  up  in  the 
bull  of  Phalaris  he  will  utter  this  speech  :  "  It  is 
pleasant,  and  I  do  not  care  for  it."     Who  would 
not  laugh  at  him?     Especially,  because  a  man 
who  is  devoted  to  pleasure  took  upon  himself 
the  character  of  a  man  of  fortitude,  and  that  to 
an  immoderate  degree  ;  for  it  is  impossible  that 
any  one  should  esteem   tortures  of  the  body  as 
pleasures,  since  it  is  sufficient  for  discharging  the 
office  of  virtue  that   one   sustains   and   endures 
them.     What    do    you,   Stoics,   say?     What    do 

*  See  John  i.  9, 


Chap.  XXVIIL] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


97 


you,  Epicurus?  The  wise  man  is  happy  even 
when  he  is  tortured.  If  it  is  on  account  of  the 
glory  of  his  endurance,  he  will  not  enjoy  it,  for 
perchance  he  will  die  under  the  tortures.  If  it 
is  on  account  of  the  recollection  of  the  deed, 
either  he  will  not  perceive  it  if  souls  shall  perish, 
or,  if  he  shall  perceive  it,  he  will  gain  nothing 
from  it. 

What  other  advantage  is  there  then  in  virtue  ? 
what  happiness  of  life  ?  Is  it  that  a  man  may 
die  with  equanimity?  You  present  to  me  the 
adv'antage  of  a  single  hour,  or  perhaps  moment, 
for  the  sake  of  which  it  may  not  be  expedient 
to  be  worn  out  by  miseries  and  labours  through- 
out the  whole  of  life.  But  how  much  time  does 
death  occupy?  on  the  arrival  of  which  it  now 
makes  no  difference  whether  you  shall  have 
undergone  it  with  equanimity  or  not.  Thus  it 
happens  that  nothing  is  sought  from  virtue  but 
glory.  But  this  is  either  superfluous  and  short- 
lived, or  it  will  not  follow  from  the  depraved 
judgments  of  men.  Therefore  there  is  no  fruit 
from  virtue  where  virtue  is  subject  to  death  and 
decay.  Therefore  they  who  said  these  things 
saw  a  certain  shadow '  of  virtue  ;  they  did  not 
see  virtue  itself.  For  they  had  their  eyes  fixed 
on  the  earth,  nor  did  they  raise  their  counte- 
nances on  high  that  they  might  behold  her 

"Who  showed  herself  from  the  quarters  of  heaven." - 

This  is  the  reason  why  no  one  obeys  their  pre- 
cepts ;  inasmuch  as  they  either  train  men  to 
vices,  if  they  defend  pleasure  ;  or  if  they  up- 
hold virtue,  they  neither  threaten  sin  with  any 
punishment,  except  that  of  disgrace  only,  nor 
do  they  promise  any  reward  to  virtue,  except 
that  of  honour  and  praise  only,  since  they  say 
that  virtue  is  to  be  sought  for  its  own  sake,  and 
not  on  account  of  any  other  object.  The  wise 
man  therefore  is  happy  under  tortures ;  but 
when  he  suffers  torture  on  account  of  his  faith, 
on  account  of  justice,  or  on  account  of  God, 
that  endurance  of  pain  will  render  him  most 
happy.  For  it  is  God  alone  who  can  honour 
virtue,  the  reward  of  which  is  immortality  alone. 
And  they  who  do  not  seek  this,  nor  possess 
religion,  with  which  eternal  life  is  connected, 
assuredly  do  not  know  the  power  of  virtue,  the 
reward  of  which  they  are  ignorant ;  nor  look 
towards  heaven,  as  they  themselves  imagine  that 
they  do,  when  they  inquire  into  subjects  which 
do  not  admit  of  investigation,  since  there  is  no 
other  cause  for  looking  towards  heaven,  unless  it 
be  either  to  undertake  religion,  or  to  believe 
that  one's  soul  is  immortal.  For  if  any  one  un- 
derstands that  God  is  to  be  worshij^ped,  or  has 
the    hope    of  immortality   set   before    him,    his 


'  A  shadow;  outline,  or  resemblance, 
*  Lucretius,  i.  65. 


mind  ^  is  in  heaven ;  and  although  he  may  not 
behold  it  with  his  eyes,  yet  he  does  behold  it 
with  the  eye  of  his  soul.  But  they  who  do  not 
take  up  religion  are  of  the  earth,  for  religion  is 
from  heaven ;  and  they  who  think  that  the  soul 
perishes  together  with  the  body,  equally  look 
down  towards  the  earth  :  for  beyond  the  body, 
which  is  earth,  they  see  nothing  further,  which 
is  immortal.  It  is  therefore  of  no  profit  that ' 
man  is  so  made,  that  with  upright  body  he  looks 
towards  heaven,  unless  with  mind  raised  aloft  he 
discerns  God,  and  his  thoughts  are  altogether 
engaged  upon  the  hope  of  everlasting  life. 

CHAP.  XXVIII. OF  TRUE  RELIGION  AND  OF  NA- 
TURE, WHETHER  FORTUNE  IS  A  GODDESS,  AND 
OF   PHILOSOPHY. 

Wherefore  there  is  nothing  else  in  life  on  which 
our  plan  and  condition  can  depend  but  the 
knowledge  of  God  who  created  us,  and  the  re- 
ligious and  pious  worship  of  Him  ;  and  since 
the  philosophers  have  wandered  from  this,  it  is 
plain  that  they  were  not  wise.  They  sought  wis- 
dom, indeed  ;  but  because  they  did  not  seek  it 
in  a  right  manner,  they  sunk  down  to  a  greater 
distance,  and  fell  into  such  great  errors,  that  they 
did  not  even  possess  common  wisdom.  For 
they  were  not  only  unwilling  to  maintain  religion, 
but  they  even  took  it  away ;  while,  led  on  by  the 
appearance  of  false  virtue,  they  endeavour  to  free 
the  mind  from  all  fear :  a^id  this  overturning  of 
religion  gains  the  name  of  nature.  For  they, 
either  being  ignorant  by  whom  the  world  was 
made,  or  wishing  to  persuade  men  that  nothing 
was  completed  by  divine  intelligence,  said  that 
nature  was  the  mother  of  all  things,  as  though 
they  should  say  that  all  things  were  produced  of 
their  own  accord  :  by  which  word  they  altogether 
confess  their  own  ignorance.  For  nature,  apart 
from  divine  providence  and  power,  is  absolutely 
nothing.  But  if  they  call  God  nature,  what  per- 
verseness  is  it,  to  use  the  name  of  nature  rather 
than  of  God  !  ■♦  But  if  nature  is  the  plan,  or  ne- 
cessity, or  condition  of  birth,  it  is  not  by  itself 
capable  of  sensation  ;  but  there  must  necessarily 
be  a  divine  mind,  which  by  its  foresight  furnishes 
the  beginning  of  their  existence  to  all  things.  Or 
if  nature  is  heaven  and  earth,  and  everything 
which  is  created,  nature  is  not  God,  but  the  work 
of  God. 

By  a  similar  error  they  believe  in  the  existence 
of  fortune,  as  a  goddess  mocking  the  affairs  of 
men  with  various  casualties,  because  they  know 
not  from  what  source  things  good  and  evil  hap- 

3  Thus  St.  Paul,  Co!,  iii.  2,  exhorts  us  to  set  our  afTections  on 
things  above,  not  on  things  of  the  earth. 

*  [Quod  si  Deum  tintiirnm  vocant  quae  pcrversitas  est  naturam 
potius  quam  Deum  nominare.  Observe  this  terse  maxim  of  our  au- 
thor. It  rebukes  the  teachers  and  scientists  of  our  day,  who  seem 
afraid  to  "  look  through  nature  up  to  nature's  God,"  in  their  barren 
instruction.     They  go  back  to  Lucretius,  and  call  w.  f>rcgreis  .'J 


98 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  III, 


pen  to  them.  They  think  that  they  are  brought 
together  to  do  battle  with  her ;  nor  do  they  as- 
sign any  reason  by  whom  and  on  what  account 
they  are  thus  matched  ;  but  they  only  boast  that 
they  are  every  moment  carrying  on  a  contest  for 
life  and  death  with  fortune.  Now,  as  many  as 
have  consoled  any  persons  on  account  of  the 
death  and  removal  of  friends,  have  censured 
the  name  of  fortvme  with  the  most  severe  accusa- 
tions ;  nor  is  there  any  disputation  of  theirs  on 
the  subject  of  virtue,  in  which  fortune  is  not 
harassed.  M.  Tullius,  in  his  Consolation,  says 
that  he  has  always  fought  against  fortune,  and 
that  she  was  always  overpowered  by  him  when 
he  had  valiantly  beaten  back  the  attacks  of  his 
enemies  ;  that  he  was  not  subdued  by  her  even 
then,  when  he  was  driven  from  his  home  and 
deprived  of  his  country ;  but  then,  when  he  lost 
his  dearest  daughter,  he  shamefully  confesses 
that  he  is  o\'ercorae  by  fortune.  I  yield,  he  says, 
and  raise  my  hand.'  What  is  more  wretched 
than  this  man,  who  thus  lies  prostrate  ?  He  acts 
foolishly,  he  says ;  but  it  is  one  who  professes 
that  he  is  wise.  What,  then,  does  the  assump- 
tion of  the  name  imply?  What  that  contempt 
of  things  which  is  laid  claim  to  with  magnificent 
words  ?  What  that  dress,  so  different  from  others  ? 
Or  why  do  you  give  precepts  of  wisdom  at  all, 
if  no  one  has  yet  been  found  who  is  wise?  And 
does  any  one  bear  ill-will  to  us  because  we  deny 
that  philosophers  are  wise,  when  they  themselves 
confess  that  they  neither  have  knowledge  nor 
wisdom  ?  For  if  at  any  time  they  have  so  failed 
that  they  are  not  even  able  to  feign  anything,  as 
their  practice  is  in  other  cases,  then  in  truth  they 
are  reminded  of  their  ignorance  ;  and,  as  though 
in  madness,  they  spring  up  and  exclaim  that  they 
are  blind  and  foolish.  Anaxagoras  pronounces 
that  all  things  are  overspread  with  darkness. 
Empedocles  complains  that  the  paths  of  the 
senses  are  narrow,  as  though  for  his  reflections 
he  had  need  of  a  chariot  and  four  horses.  De- 
mocritus  says  that  the  truth  lies  sunk  in  a  well 
so  deep  that  it  has  no  bottom  ;  foolishly,  indeed, 
as  he  says  other  things.  For  the  truth  is  not, 
as  it  were,  sunk  in  a  well  to  which  it  was  per- 
mitted him  to  descend,  or  even  to  fall,  but,  as 
it  were,  placed  on  the  highest  top  of  a  lofty 
mountain,  or  in  heaven,  which  is  most  true.  For 
what  reason  is  there  why  he  should  say  that  it  is 
sunk  below  rather  than  that  it  is  raised  aloft? 
unless  by  chance  he  preferred  to  place  the  mind 
also  in  the  feet,  or  in  the  bottom  of  the  heels, 
rather  than  in  the  breast  or  in  the  head. 

So  widely  removed  were  they  from  the  truth 
itself,  that  even  the  posture  of  their  own  body  did 
not  admonish  them,  that  the  truth  must  be  sought 


'  To  raise  or  stretch  out  the   hand  was  an  acknowledgment  of 
defeat. 


for  by  them  in  the  highest  place.^  From  this 
despair  arose  that  confession  of  Socrates,  in 
which  he  said  that  he  knew  nothing  but  this  one 
thing  alone,  that  he  knew  nothing.  From  this 
flowed  the  system  of  the  Academy,  if  that  is  to 
be  called  a  system  in  which  ignorance  is  both 
learnt  and  taught.  But  not  even  those  who 
claimed  for  themselves  knowledge  were  able  con- 
sistently to  defend  that  very  thing  which  they 
thought  that  they  knew.  For  since  they  were  not 
in  agreement  ^  with  one  another,  through  their 
ignorance  of  divine  things  they  were  so  incon- 
sistent and  uncertain,  and  often  asserting  things 
contrary  to  one  another,  that  you  are  unable  to 
determine  and  decide  what  their  meaning  was. 
Why  therefore  should  you  fight  against  those 
men  who  perish  by  their  own  sword?  Why 
should  you  labour  to  refute  those  whom  their 
own  speech  refutes  and  presses?*  Aristotle, 
says  Cicero,  accusing  the  ancient  philosophers, 
declares  that  they  are  either  most  foolish  or  most 
vainglorious,  since  they  thought  that  philosophy 
was  perfected  by  their  talents ;  but  that  he  saw, 
because  a  great  addition  had  been  made  in  a 
few  years,  that  philosophy  would  be  complete  in 
a  short  time.  What,  then,  was  that  time?  In 
what  manner,  when,  or  by  whom,  was  philosophy 
completed  ?  For  that  which  he  said,  that  they 
were  most  foolish  in  supposing  that  philosophy 
was  made  perfect  by  their  talents,  is  true  ;  but  he 
did  not  even  himself  speak  with  sufficient  dis- 
cretion, who  thought  that  it  had  either  been 
begun  by  the  ancients,  or  increased  by  those  who 
were  more  recent,  or  that  it  would  shortly  be 
brought  to  perfection  by  those  of  later  times. 
For  that  can  never  be  investigated  which  is  not 
sought  by  its  own  way. 

CHAP.  XXIX.  —  OF  FORTUNE  AGAIN,  AND  VIRTUE. 

But  let  us  return  to  the  subject  which  we  laid 
aside.  Fortune,  therefore,  by  itself,  is  nothing ; 
nor  must  we  so  regard  it  as  though  it  had  any 
perception,  since  fortune  is  the  sudden  and  un- 
expected occurrence  of  accidents.  But  philoso- 
phers, that  they  may  not  sometimes  fail  to  err, 
wish  to  be  wise  in  a  foolish  matter ;  and  say  that 
she  is  not  a  goddess,  as  is  generally  believed, 
but  a  god.  Sometimes,  however,  they  call  this 
god  nature,  sometimes  fortune,  "  because  he 
brings  about,"  says  the  same  Cicero,  "  many 
things  unexpected  by  us,  on  account  of  our  want 
of  intelligence  and  our  ignorance  of  causes." 
Since,  therefore,  they  are  ignorant  of  the  causes 
on  account  of  which  anything  is  done,  they  must 
also  be  ignorant  of  him  who  does  them.     The 


^  [See  p.  91,  note  3,  supra,  and  sparsiin  in  this  work.] 
3  Literally,  "  their  accounts  did  not  square." 

<  Afficit,  "  presses  and  harasses."     Another   reading  is  affligit, 
"  casts  to  the  ground." 


Chap.  XXIX.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


99 


same  writer,  in  a  work  of  great  seriousness,  in 
which  he  was  giving  to  his  son  precepts  of  Hfe 
drawn  from  philosophy,  says,  "  Who  can  be  ig- 
norant that  the  power  of  fortune  is  great  on  either 
side  ?  For  both  when  we  meet  with  a  prosper- 
ous breeze  from  her  we  gain  the  issues  which  we 
desire,  and  when  she  has  breathed  contrary  to 
us  we  are  dashed  on  the  rocks."  '  First  of  all, 
he  who  says  that  nothing  can  be  known,  spoke 
this  as  though  he  himself  and  all  men  had  knowl- 
edge. Then  he  who  endeavours  to  render  doubt- 
ful even  the  things  which  are  plain,  thought  that 
this  was  plain,  which  ought  to  have  been  to  him 
especially  doubtful ;  for  to  a  wise  man  it  is  alto- 
gether false.  Who,  he  says,  knows  not?  I  in- 
deed know  not.  Let  him  teach  me,  if  he  can, 
what  that  power  is,  what  that  breeze,  and  what 
the  contrary  breath. 

It  is  disgraceful,  therefore,  for  a  man  of  talent 
to  say  that,  which  if  you  were  to  deny  it,  he 
would  be  unable  to  prove.  Lastly,  he  who  says 
that  the  assent  must  be  withheld  because  it  is 
the  part  of  a  foolish  man  rashly  to  assent  to 
things  which  are  unknown  to  him,  he,  I  say,  al- 
together believed  the  opinions  of  the  vulgar  and 
uninstructed,  who  think  that  it  is  fortune  which 
gives  to  men  good  and  evil  things.  For  they 
represent  her  image  with  the  horn  of  plenty  and 
with  a  rudder,  as  though  she  both  gave  wealth 
and  had  the  government  of  human  affairs.  And 
to  this  opinion  Virgil  ^  assented,  who  calls  for- 
tune omnipotent ;  and  the  historian  ^  who  says, 
But  assuredly  fortune  bears  sway  in  everything. 
What  place,  then,  remains  for  the  other  gods? 
Why  is  she  not  said  to  reign  by  herself,  if  she 
has  more  power  than  others ;  or  why  is  she  not 
alone  worshipped,  if  she  has  power  in  all  things  ? 
Or  if  she  inflicts  evils  only,  let  them  bring  for- 
ward some  cause  why,  if  she  is  a  goddess,  she 
envies  men,  and  desires  their  destruction,  though 
she  is  religiously  worshipped  by  them  ;  why  she 
is  more  favourable  to  the  wicked  and  more  un- 
favourable to  the  good ;  why  she  plots,  afflicts, 
deceives,  exterminates  ;  who  appointed  her  as 
the  perpetual  harasser  of  the  race  of  men  ;  why, 
in  short,  she  has  obtained  so  mischievous  a 
power,  that  she  renders  all  things  illustrious  or 
obscure  according  to  her  caprice  rather  than  in 
accordance  with  the  truth.  Philosophers,  I  say, 
ought  rather  to  have  inquired  into  these  things, 
than  rashly  to  have  accused  fortune,  who  is  in- 
nocent :  for  although  she  has  some  existence, 
yet  no  reason  can  be  brought  forward  by  them 
why  she  should  be  as  hostile  to  men  as  she  is 
supposed  to  be.  Therefore  all  those  speeches 
in  which  they  rail  at  the  injustice  of  fortune,  and 


'  Cicero,  De  OJJtc,  ii.  6.    The  expressions  are  borrowed  from  the 
figure  of  a  ship  at  sea. 
*  /En.,  viii.  33. 
^  Sallust,  Cat.,  viii. 


in  opposition  to  fortune  arrogantly  boast  of 
their  own  virtues,  are  nothing  else  but  the  rav- 
ings of  thoughtless  levity. 

Wherefore  let  them  not  envy  us,  to  whom  God 
has  revealed  the  truth  :  who,  as  we  know  that 
fortune  is  nothing,  so  also  know  that  there  is  a 
wicked  and  crafty  spirit  who  is  unfriendly  to  the 
good,  and  the  enemy  of  righteousness,  who  acts 
in  opposition  to  God ;  the  cause  of  whose  en- 
mity we  have  explained  in  the  second  book.* 
He  therefore  lays  plots  against  all ;  but  those 
who  are  ignorant  of  God  he  hinders  by  error, 
he  overwhelms  with  folly,  he  overspreads  with 
darkness,  that  no  one  may  be  able  to  attain  to 
the  knowledge  of  the  divine  name,  in  which 
alone  are  contained  both  wisdom  and  everlasting 
life.  Those,  on  the  other  hand,  who  know  God, 
he  assails  with  wiles  and  craft,  that  he  may  en- 
snare them  with  desire  and  lust,  and  when  they 
are  corrupted  by  the  blandishments  of  sin,  may 
impel  them  to  death ;  or,  if  he  shall  have  not 
succeeded  by  stratagem,  he  attempts  to  cast 
them  down  by  force  and  violence.  For  on  this 
account  he  was  not  at  once  thrust  down  by  God 
to  punishment  at  the  original  transgression,  that 
by  his  malice  he  may  exercise  man  to  virtue  : 
for  unless  this  is  in  constant  agitation,  unless  it 
is  strengthened  by  continual  harassing,  it  cannot 
be  perfect,  inasmuch  as  virtue  is  dauntless  and 
unconquered  patience  in  enduring  evils.  From 
which  it  comes  to  pass  that  there  is  no  virtue  if 
an  adversary  is  wanting.  When,  therefore,  they 
perceived  the  force  of  this  perverse  power  op- 
posed to  virtue,  and  were  ignorant  of  its  name, 
they  invented  for  themselves  the  senseless  name 
of  fortune ;  and  how  far  this  is  removed  from 
wisdom,  Juvenal  declares  in  these  verses  :  5  — 

"  No  divine  power  is  absent  if  there  is  prudence ;  but 
we  make  you  a  goddess,  O  Fortune,  and  place 
you  in  heaven." 

It  was  folly,  therefore,  and  error,  and  blindness, 
and,  as  Cicero  says,^  ignorance  of  facts  and 
causes,  which  introduced  the  names  of  Nature 
and  Fortune.  But  as  they  are  ignorant  of  their 
adversary,  so  also  they  do  not  indeed  know 
virtue,  the  knowledge  of  which  is  derived  from 
the  idea  of  an  adversary.  And  if  this  is  joined 
with  wisdom,  or,  as  they  say,  is  itself  also 
wisdom,  they  must  be  ignorant  in  what  subjects 
it  is  contained.  For  no  one  can  possibly  be 
furnished  with  true  arms  if  he  is  ignorant  of  the 
enemy  against  whom  he  must  be  armed  ;  nor 
can  he  overcome  his  adversary,  who  in  fighting 
does  not  attack  his  real  enemy,  but  a  shadow. 
For  he  will  be  overthrown,  who,  having  his  at- 


■*  Chapter  xvi. 

5  Satire  x.  365:  NulUim  mimen  abest.  Others  read,  Nullum 
numen  babes.  You  have  no  divine  power,  O  Fortune,  if  there  is 
prudence,  etc. 

*  Acad.,  i.  7.     [Let  our  sophists  feel  this  rebuke  of  Tully.] 


lOO 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  III. 


tention  fixed  on  another  object,  shall  not  pre- 
viously have  foreseen  or  guarded  against  the 
blow  aimed  at  his  vitals. 

CHAP.  XXX.  —  THE  CONCLUSION  OF  THE  THINGS 
BEFORE  SPOKEN  ;  AND  BY  WHAT  WEANS  WE  MUST 
PASS  FROM  THE  VANITY  OF  THE  PHILOSOPHERS 
TO  TRUE  WISDOM,  AND  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE 
TRUE  GOD,  IN  WHICH  ALONE  ARE  VIRTUE  AND 
HAPPINESS. 

I  have  taught,  as  far  as  niy  humble  talents 
permitted,  that  the  philosophers  held  a  course 
widely  deviating  from  the  truth.  I  perceive,  how- 
ever, how  many  things  I  have  omitted,  because 
it  was  not  my  province  to  enter  into  a  dispu- 
tation against  philosophers.  But  it  was  neces- 
sary for  me  to  make  a  digression  to  this  subject, 
that  I  might  show  that  so  many  and  great  intel- 
lects have  expended  themselves  in  vain  on  false 
subjects,  lest  any  one  by  chance  being  shut  out 
by  corrupt  superstitions,  should  wish  to  betake 
himself  to  them  as  though  about  to  find  some 
certainty.  Therefore  the  only  hope,  the  only 
safety  for  man,  is  placed  in  this  doctrine,  which 
we  defend.  All  the  wisdom  of  man  consists  in 
this  alone,  the  knowledge  and  worship  of  God  : 
this  is  our  tenet,  this  our  opinion.  Therefore 
with  all  the  power  of  my  voice  I  testify,  I  pro- 
claim, I  declare  :  Here,  here  is  that  which  all 
philosophers  have  sought  throughout  their  whole 
life  ;  and  yet,  they  have  not  been  able  to  investi- 
gate, to  grasp,  and  to  attain  to  it,  because  they 
either  retained  a  religion  which  was  corrupt,  or 
took  it  away  altogether.  Let  them  therefore  all 
depart,  who  do  not  instruct  human  life,  but  throw 
it  into  confusion.  For  what  do  they  teach  ?  or 
whom  do  they  instruct,  who  have  not  yet  in- 
structed themselves?  whom  are  the  sick  able  to 


heal,  whom  can  the  blind  guide?  Let  us  all, 
therefore,  who  have  any  regard  for  wisdom,  be- 
take ourselves  to  this  subject.  Or  shall  we  wait 
until  Socrates  knows  something  ?  or  Anaxagoras 
finds  light  in  the  darkness?  or  until  Democritus 
draws  forth  truth  from  the  well?  or  Empedocles 
extends  the  paths  of  his  soul  ?  or  until  Arcesilas 
and  Carneades  see,  and  feel,  and  perceive  ? 

Lo,  a  voice  from  heaven  teaching  the  truth, 
and  displaying  to  us  a  light  brighter  than  the 
sun  itself. '  Why  are  we  unjust  to  ourselves, 
and  delay  to  take  up  wisdom,  which  learned 
men,  though  they  wasted  their  lives  in  its  pur- 
suit, were  never  able  to  discover.  Let  him  who 
wishes  to  be  wise  and  happy  hear  the  voice  of 
God,  learn  righteousness,  understand  the  mystery 
of  his  birth,  despise  human  affairs,  embrace 
divine  things,  that  he  may  gain  that  chief  good 
to  which  he  was  born.  Having  overthrown  all 
false  religions,  and  having  refuted  all  the  argu- 
ments, as  many  as  it  was  customary  or  possible 
to  bring  forward  in  their  defence ;  then,  having 
proved  the  systems  of  philosophy  to  be  false,  we 
must  now  come  to  true  religion  and  wisdom, 
since,  as  I  shall  teach,  they  are  both  connected 
together ;  that  we  may  maintain  it  either  by 
arguments,  or  by  examples,  or  by  competent 
witnesses,  and  may  show  that  the  folly  with  which 
those  worshippers  of  gods  do  not  cease  to  up- 
braid us,  has  no  existence  with  us,  but  lies  alto- 
gether with  them.  And  although,  in  the  former 
books,  when  I  was  contending  against  false  re- 
ligions, and  in  this,  when  I  was  overthrowing 
false  wisdom,  I  showed  where  the  truth  is,  yet 
the  next  book  will  more  plainly  indicate  what  is 
true  reliofion  and  what  true  wisdom. 


'  [A  noble  utterance  from  Christian  philosophy,  now  first  gaining 
the  ear  and  heart  of  humanity.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 
BOOK   IV. 


OF   TRUE   WISDOM   AND    RELIGION. 


CHAP.  I.  —  OF  THE  FORMER  RELIGION  OF  MEN, 
AND  HOW  ERROR  WAS  SPREAD  OVER  EVERY 
AGE,  AND  OF   THE    SEVEN  WISE    MEN    OF    GREECE. 

When  I  reflect,  O  Emperor  Constantine,  and 
often  revolve  in  my  mind  the  original  condition 
of  men,  it  is  accustomed  to  appear  alike  wonder- 
ful and  unworthy  that,  by  the  folly  of  one  age 
embracing  various  superstitions,  and  believing  in 
the  existence  of  many  gods,  they  suddenly  ar- 
rived at  such  ignorance  of  themselves,  that  the 
truth  being  taken  away  from  their  eyes,  the  re- 
ligion of  the  true  God  was  not  observed,  nor  the 
condition  of  human  nature,  since  men  did  not 
seek  the  chief  good  in  heaven,  but  on  earth. 
And  on  this  account  assuredly  the  happiness  of 
the  ancient  ages  was  changed.  For,  having  left 
God,  the  parent  and  founder  of  all  things,  men 
began  to  worship  the  senseless  works '  of  their 
own  hands.  And  what  were  the  effects  of  this 
corruption,  or  what  evils  it  introduced,  the  sub- 
ject itself  sufficiendy  declares.  For,  turning  away 
from  the  chief  good,  which  is  blessed  and  ever- 
lasting on  this  account,  because  it  cannot  be 
seen,^  or  touched,  or  comprehended,  and  from 
the  virtues  which  are  in  agreement  with  that 
good,  and  which  are  equally  immortal,  gliding 
down  to  these  corrupt  and  frail  gods,  and  devot- 
ing themselves  to  those  things  by  which  the  body 
only  is  adorned,  and  nourished,  and  delighted, 
they  sought  eternal  death  for  themselves,  to- 
gether with  their  gods  and  goods  relating  to  the 
body,  because  all  bodies  are  subject  to  death. 
Superstitions  of  this  kind,  therefore,  were  fol- 
lowed by  injustice  and  impiety,  as  must  necessa- 
rily be  the  case.  For  men  ceased  to  raise  their 
countenances  to  the  heaven  ;  but,  their  minds 
being  depressed  downwards,  clung  to  goods  of 
the  earth,  as  they  did  to  earth-born  superstitions. 
There  followed   the  disagreement  of  mankind, 

'  Figments.     [Rom.  i.  21-23. 1 

^  Thus  St.  Paul,  I  Cor.  ii.  9:  '"  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard, 
neither  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things  which  God  hath 
prepared  for  them  that  love  Him." 


and  fraud,  and  all  wickedness ;  because,  despis- 
ing eternal  and  incorruptible  goods,  which  alone 
ought  to  be  desired  by  man,  they  rather  chose 
temporal  and  short-lived  things,  and  greater 
trust  was  placed  by  men  in  evil,  inasmuch  as 
they  preferred  vice  to  virtue,  because  it  had  pre- 
sented itself  as  nearer  at  hand.^ 

Thus  human  life,  which  in  former  ages  had 
been  occupied  with  the  clearest  light,  was  over- 
spread with  gloom  and  darkness ;  and  in  con- 
formity with  this  depravity,  when  wisdom  was 
taken  away,  then  at  length  men  began  to  claim 
for  themselves  the  name  of  wise.  For  at  the 
time  when  all  were  wise,  no  one  was  called  by 
that  name.  And  would  that  this  name,  once 
common  to  all  the  class,  though  reduced  to  a 
few,  still  retained  its  power !  For  those  few 
might  perhaps  be  able,  either  by  talent,  or  by 
authority,  or  by  continual  exhortations,  to  free 
the  people  from  vices  and  errors.  But  so  en- 
tirely had  wisdom  died  out,  that  it  is  evident, 
from  the  very  arrogance  of  the  name,  that  no 
one  of  those  who  were  so  called  was  really 
wise.  And  yet,  before  the  discovery  of  this 
philosophy,  as  it  is  termed,  there  are  said  to 
have  been  seven,-*  who,  because  they  ventured 
to  inquire  into  and  discuss  natural  subjects, 
deserved  to  be  esteemed  and  called  wise  men. 

O  wretched  and  calamitous  age,  in  which 
through  the  whole  world  there  were  only  seven 
who  were  called  by  the  name  of  men,  for  no 
one  can  justly  be  called  a  man  unless  he  is  wise  ! 
But  if  all  the  others  besides  themselves  were 
foolish,  even  they  themselves  were  not  wise,  be- 
cause no  one  can  be  truly  wise  in  the  judgment 
of  the  foolish.  So  far  were  they  removed  from 
wisdom,  that  not  even  afterwards,  when  learning 
increased,  and  many  and  great  intellects  were 
always  intent  upon  this  very  subject,  could  the 


3  In  its  rewards. 

*  The  seven  wise  men  were.  Thales,  Pittactis,  Pias,  Solon,  Cle- 
obulus,  Chilo,  and  Pcriander.  I'o  these  some  add  Anacharsis  the 
Scythian.     [Vol.  v.  p.  ii,  supra.     For  Thales,  vol.  ii.  p.  140.] 


I02 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[EooK  IV. 


truth  be  perceived  and  ascertained.  For,  after 
the  renown  of  those  seven  wise  men,  it  is  incredi- 
ble with  how  great  a  desire  of  inquiring  into  the 
truth  all  Greece  was  inflamed.  And  first  of  all, 
they  thought '  the  very  name  of  wisdom  arrogant, 
and  did  not  call  themselves  wise  men,  but  desirous 
of  wisdom.  By  which  deed  they  both  condemned 
those  who  had  rashly  arrogated  to  themselves  the 
name  of  wise  men,  of  error  and  folly,  and  them- 
selves also  of  ignorance,  which  indeed  they  did 
not  deny.  For  wherever  the  nature  of  the  sub- 
ject had,  as  it  were,  laid  its  hands  upon  their 
minds,  so  that  they  were  unable  to  give  any 
account,  they  were  accustomed  to  testify  that 
they  knew  nothing,  and  discerned  nothing. 
Wherefore  they  are  found  to  be  much  wiser, 
who  in  some  degree  saw  themselves,  than  those 
who  had  believed  that  they  were  wise. 

CHAP.  II. WHERE  WISDOM   IS  TO   BE   FOUND  ;  WHY 

PYTHAGOR^^S  AND   PLATO  DID  NOT  APPROACH  THE 
JEWS. 

Wherefore,  if  they  were  not  wise  who  were  so 
called,  nor  those  of  later  times,  who  did  not 
hesitate  to  confess  their  want  of  wisdom,  what 
remains  but  that  wisdom  is  to  be  sought  else- 
where, since  it  has  not  been  found  where  it  was 
sought.  But  what  can  we  suppose  to  have  been 
the  reason  why  it  was  not  found,  though  sought 
with  the  greatest  earnestness  and  labour  by  so 
many  intellects,  and  during  so  many  ages,  unless 
it  be  that  philosophers  sought  for  it  out  of  their 
own  limits?  And  since  they  traversed  and  ex- 
plored all  parts,  but  nowhere  found  any  wisdom, 
and  it  must  of  necessity  be  somewhere,  it  is  evi- 
dent that  it  ought  especially  to  be  sought  there 
where  the  title  of  folly  ^  appears  ;  under  the  cov- 
ering of  which  God  hides  the  treasury  of  wisdom 
and  truth,  lest  the  secret  of  His  divine  work 
should  be  exposed  to  view.^  Whence  I  am 
accustomed  to  wonder  that,  when  Pythagoras, 
and  after  him  Plato,  inflamed  with  the  love  of 
searching  out  the  truth,  had  penetrated  as  far  as 
to  the  Egyptians,  and  Magi,  and  Persians,  that 
they  might  become  acquainted  with  their  re- 
ligious rites  and  institutions  (for  they  suspected 
that  wisdom  was  concerned  with  religion),  they 
did  not  approach  the  Jews  only,  in  whose  pos- 
session alone  it  then  was,  and  to  whom  they 
might  have  gone  more  easily.  But  I  think  that 
they  were  turned  away  from  them  by  divine  provi- 
dence, that  they  might  not  know  the  truth,  be- 
cause it  was  not  yet  permitted  for  the  religion  of 
the  true  God  and  righteousness  to  become  known 
to  men  of  other  nations.'*     For  God  had  deter- 

*  This  was  the  opinion  of  Pythagoras.     See  Book  iii.  2. 
^  See  I  Cor.  i.  20-22. 

3  (  "  Thou  art  a  God  that  hidest  thyself,"  Isa.  xlv.  15.  Wisdom 
must  be  searched  after  as  hidden  treasurej 

*  See  Eph  i.  9,  10;  Col.  i.  26,  27.  [This  is  a  mysterious  truth: 
God's  election  of  men  and  nations  has  been  according  to  their  desire 
to  be  enlightened.     Christ  must  be  the  "  Desire  of  Nations."] 


mined,  as  the  last  time  drew  near,'  to  send  from 
heaven  a  great  leader,^  who  should  reveal  to  for- 
eign nations  that  which  was  taken  away  from  a 
perfidious  7  and  ungrateful  people.  And  I  will 
endeavour  to  discuss  the  subject  in  this  book, 
if  I  shall  first  have  shown  that  wisdom  is  so 
closely  united  with  religion,  that  the  one  cannot 
be  separated  from  the  other. 

CHAP.  III.  —  WISDOM  AND  RELIGION  CANNOT  BE 
SEPARATED  :  THE  LORD  OF  NATURE  MUST  NECES- 
SARILY BE  THE  FATHER  OF  EVERY  ONE. 

The  worship  of  the  gods,  as  I  have  taught  in 
the  former  book,  does  not  imply  wisdom  ;  not 
only  because  it  gives  up  man,  who  is  a  divine 
animal,  to  earthly  and  frail  things,  but  because 
nothing  is  fixed  in  it  which  may  avail  for  the 
cultivation  of  the  character  and  the  framing  of 
the  life  ;  nor  does  it  contain  any  investigation 
of  the  truth,  but  only  the  rite  of  worship,  which 
does  not  consist  in  the  service  of  the  mind,  but 
in  the  employment  of  the  body.  And  therefore 
that  is  not  to  be  deemed  true  religion,  because 
it  instructs  and  improves  men  by  no  precepts  of 
righteousness  and  virtue.  Thus  philosophy,  in- 
asmuch as  it  does  not  possess  true  religion,  that 
is,  the  highest  piety,  is  not  true  wisdom.  For 
if  the  divinity  which  governs  this  world  supports 
mankind  with  incredible  beneficence,  and  cher- 
ishes it  as  with  paternal  indulgence,  wishes  truly 
that  gratitude  should  be  paid,  and  honour  given 
to  itself,  man  cannot  preserve  his  piety  if  he 
shall  prove  ungrateful  for  the  heavenly  benefits  ; 
and  this  is  certainly  not  the  part  of  a  wise  man. 
Since,  therefore,  as  I  have  said,  philosophy  and 
the  religious  system  of  the  gods  are  separated, 
and  far  removed  from  each  other ;  seeing  that 
some  are  professors  of  wisdom,  through  whom 
it  is  manifest  that  there  is  no  approach  to  the 
gods,  and  that  others  are  priests  of  religion, 
through  whom  wisdom  is  not  learned ;  it  is 
manifest  that  the  one  is  not  true  wisdom,  and 
that  the  other  is  not  true  religion.  Therefore 
philosophy  was  not  able  to  conceive  the  truth, 
nor  was  the  religious  system  of  the  gods  able  to 
give  an  account  of  itself,  since  it  is  without  it. 
But  where  wisdom  is  joined  by  an  inseparable 
connection  with  religion,  both  must  necessarily 
be  true  ;  because  in  our  worship  we  ought  to  be 
wise,  that  is,  to  know  the  proper  object  and 
mode  of  worship,  and  in  our  wisdom  to  worship, 
that  is,  to  complete  our  knowledge  by  deed  and 
action. 

Where,  then,  is  wisdom  joined  with  religion  } 
There,  indeed,  where  the  one  God  is  worshipped, 
where  life  and  every  action  is  referred  to  one 


5  The  last  time  is  the  last  dispensation,  the  time  of  the  new  cove- 
nant.    Heb.  i.  2. 

6  See  Isa.  Iv.  4:  "Behold,  I  have  given  Him  for  a  leader  and 
commander  to  the  people." 

7  Matt.  xxi. 


Chap.  IV.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


103 


source,  and  to  one  supreme  authority  :  in  short, 
the  teachers  of  wisdom  are  the  same,  who  are 
also  the  priests  of  God.'  Nor,  however,  let  it 
affect  any  one,  because  it  often  has  happened, 
and  may  happen,  that  some  philosopher  may 
undertake  a  priesthood  of  the  gods  ;  and  when 
this  happens,  philosophy  is  not,  however,  joined 
with  religion  ;  but  philosophy  will  both  be  un- 
employed amidst  sacred  rites,  and  religion  will 
be  unemployed  when  philosophy  shall  be  treated 
of.  For  that  system  of  religious  rites  is  dumb, 
not  only  because  it  relates  to  gods  who  are 
dumb,  but  also  because  its  observance  is  by  the 
hand  and  the  fingers,  not  by  the  heart  and 
tongue,  as  is  the  case  with  ours,  which  is  true. 
Therefore  religion  is  contained  in  wisdom,  and 
wisdom  in  religion.  The  one,  then,  cannot  be 
separated  from  the  other ;  because  wisdom  is 
nothing  else  but  the  worship  of  the  true  God 
with  just  and  pious  adoration.  But  that  the 
worship  of  many  gods  is  not  in  accordance  with 
nature,  may  be  inferred  and  conceived  even  by 
this  argument :  that  every  god  who  is  worshipped 
by  man  must,  amidst  the  solemn  rites  and 
prayers,  be  invoked  as  father,  not  only  for  the 
sake  of  honour,  but  also  of  reason  ;  because  he 
is  both  more  ancient  than  man,  and  because  he 
affords  life,  safety,  and  sustenance,  as  a  father 
does.  Therefore  Jupiter  is  called  father  by 
those  who  pray  to  him,  as  is  Saturnus,  and  Janus, 
and  Liber,  and  the  rest  in  order  ;  which  Lucilius- 
laughs  at  in  the  council  of  the  gods  :  "  So  that 
there  is  none  of  us  who  is  not  called  excellent 
father  of  the  gods ;  so  that  father  Neptunus, 
Liber,  father  Saturnus,  Mars,  Janus,  father  Quiri- 
nus,  are  called  after  one  name."  But  if  nature 
does  not  permit  that  one  man  should  have  many 
fathers  (for  he  is  produced  from  one  only),  there- 
fore the  worship  of  many  gods  is  contrary  to 
nature,  and  contrary  to  piety. 

One  only,  therefore,  is  to  be  worshipped,  who 
can  truly  be  called  Father.  He  also  must  of 
necessity  be  Lord,  because  as  He  has  power  to 
indulge,  so  also  has  He  power  to  restrain.  He 
is  to  be  called  Father  on  this  account,  because 
He  bestows  upon  us  many  and  great  things  ; 
and  Lord  on  this  account,  because  He  has  the 
greatest  power  of  chastising  and  punishing.  But 
that  He  who  is  Father  is  also  Lord,  is  shown 
even  by  reference  to  civil  law.^  For  who  will  be 
able  to  bring  up  sons,  unless  he  has  the  power 
of  a  lord  over  them  ?  Nor  without  reason  is  he 
called  father  of  a  household,-*  although  he  only 
has  sons  :  for  it  is  plain  that  the  name  of  father 


'  [Tidem  sunt  doctores  sapientia;  quiet  De.  saccrdotes.] 
^  [Tlie  satirist,  not  Cicero's  friend;   Nat.  Dcor.,  iii.] 
3  Fathers  in  ancient  times  had  the  greatest  power  over  their  chil- 
dren, so  that  they  had  the  right  of  life  and  death,  as  inasters  had  over 
tiicir  slaves. 

*  Pater  familias  —  a  title  given  to  the  master  of  a  household, 
whether  he  had  sons  or  not  ;  the  slaves  of  a  house  were  called 
/amilia. 


embraces  also  slaves,  because  "  household  "  fol- 
lows ;  and  the  name  of  "  household  "  comprises 
also  sons,  because  the  name  of  "  father  "  pre- 
cedes :  from  which  it  is  evident,  that  the  same 
person  is  both  father  of  his  slaves  5  and  lord  of 
his  sons.  Lastly,  the  son  is  set  at  liberty  as  if  he 
were  a  slave ;  and  the  liberated  slave  receives 
the  name  *"  of  his  patron,  as  if  he  were  a  son. 
But  if  a  man  is  named  father  of  a  household, 
that  it  may  appear  that  he  is  possessed  of  a 
double  power,  because  as  a  father  he  ought  to 
indulge,  and  as  a  lord  to  restrain,  it  follows  that 
he  who  is  a  son  is  also  a  slave,  and  that  he  who 
is  a  father  is  also  a  lord.  As,  therefore,  by  the 
necessity  of  nature,  there  cannot  be  more  than 
one  father,  so  there  can  only  be  one  lord.  For 
what  will  the  slave  do  if  many  lords  ^  shall  give 
commands  at  variance  with  each  other?  There- 
fore the  worship  of  many  gods  is  contrary  to 
reason  and  to  nature,  since  there  cannot  be 
many  fathers  or  lords  ;  but  it  is  necessary  to 
consider  the  gods  both  as  fathers  and  lords. 

Therefore  the  truth  cannot  be  held  where  the 
same  man  is  subject  to  many  fathers  and  lords, 
where  the  mind,  drawn  in  different  directions  to 
many  objects,  wanders  to  and  fro,  hither  and 
thither.  Nor  can  religion  have  any  firmness, 
when  it  is  without  a  fixed  and  settled  dwelling- 
place.  Therefore  there  can  be  no  true  worship 
of  many  gods ;  just  as  that  cannot  be  called 
matrimony,  in  which  one  woman  has  many  hus- 
bands, but  she  will  either  be  called  a  harlot  or 
an  adulteress.  For  when  a  woman  is  destitute 
of  modesty,  chastity,  and  fidelity,  she  must  of 
necessity  be  without  virtue.  Thus  also  the  reli- 
gious system  of  the  gods  is  unchaste  and  unholy, 
because  it  is  destitute  of  faith,  for  that  unsettled 
and  uncertain  honour  has  no  source  or  origin. 

CHAP.    IV. OF   WISDOM    LIKEWISE,    AND    RELIGION, 

AND    OF   THE    RIGHT    OF    FATHER   AND    LORD. 

By  these  things  it  is  evident  how  closely  con- 
nected are  wisdom  and  religion.  Wisdom  re- 
lates to  sons,  and  this  relation  requires  love ; 
religion  to  servants,  and  this  relation  requires 
fear.  For  as  the  former  are  bound  to  love  and 
honour  their  father,  so  are  the  latter  bound  to 
respect  and  venerate  their  lord.  But  with  re- 
spect to  God,  who  is  one  only,  inasmuch  as  He 
sustains  the  twofold  character  both  of  Father 
and  Lord,  we  are  bound  both  to  love  Him,  inas- 
much as  we  are  sons,  and  to  fear  Him,  inasmuch 


5  It  has  been  judged  better  to  keep  the  words  "slave"  and 
"  lord  "  throughout  the  passage,  for  the  sake  of  uniformity  of  ex- 
pression, though  in  some  places  "servant"  and  "master"  might 
seem  more  appropriate. 

*>  .Among  the  Romans  slaves  had  no  fircfttomen  or  distinguishing 
name;  when  a  slave  was  set  at  liberty,  he  was  allowed  to  assume  the 
name  of  his  master  as  a  prceiiotiicn.  Thus,  in  Persius  (^ai.,  v.), 
"  Damn,"  the  liberated  slave,  becomes  "  Marcus  Dama." 

'  Thus  the  slave  in  Terence  wished  to  know  how  many  masters 
he  had. 


I04 


THE  DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  IV. 


as  we  are  servants.'  Religion,  therefore,  cannot 
be  divided  from  wisdom,  nor  can  wisdom  be 
separated  from  religion ;  because  it  is  the  same 
God,  who  ought  to  be  understood,  which  is  the 
part  of  wisdom,  and  to  be  honoured,  which  is 
the  part  of  religion.  But  wisdom  precedes, 
religion  follows ;  for  the  knowledge  of  God 
comes  first,  His  worship  is  the  result  of  knowl- 
edge. Thus  in  the  two  names  there  is  but  one 
meaning,  though  it  seems  to  be  different  in  each 
case.  For  the  one  is  concerned  with  the  under- 
standing, the  other  with  action.  But,  however, 
they  resemble  two  streams  flowing  from  one 
fountain.  But  the  fountain  of  wisdom  and  reli- 
gion is  God ;  and  if  these  two  streams  shall  turn 
aside  from  Him,  they  must  be  dried  up  :  for 
they  who  are  ignorant  of  Him  cannot  be  wise 
or  religious. 

Thus  it  comes  to  pass  that  philosophers,  and 
those  who  worship  many  gods,  either  resemble 
disinherited  sons  or  runaway  slaves,  because  the 
one  do  not  seek  their  father,  nor  the  other  their 
master.  And  as  they  who  are  disinherited  do 
not  attain  to  the  inheritance  of  their  father,  nor 
runaway  slaves  impunity,  so  neither  will  philoso- 
phers receive  immortality,  which  is  the  inherit- 
ance of  the  heavenly  kingdom,  that  is,  the  chief 
good,  which  they  especially  seek ;  nor  will  the 
worshippers  of  gods  escape  the  penalty  of  ever- 
lasting death,  which  is  the  punishment  of  the 
true  Master  against  those  who  are  deserters^ 
of  His  majesty  and  name.  But  that  God  is 
Father  and  also  Lord  was  unknown  to  both,  to 
the  worshippers  of  the  gods  as  well  as  to  the 
professors  of  wisdom  themselves  :  inasmuch  as 
they  either  thought  that  nothing  at  all  was  to  be 
worshipped  ;  or  they  approved  of  false  religions  ; 
or,  although  they  understood  the  strength  and 
power  of  the  Supreme  God  (as  Plato,  who  says 
that  there  is  one  God,  Creator  of  the  world,  and 
Marcus  TuUius,  who  acknowledges  that  man  has 
been  produced  by  the  Supreme  God  in  an  ex- 
cellent condition),  nevertheless  they  did  not 
render  the  worship  due  to  Him  as  to  the  su- 
preme Father,  which  was  their  befitting  and 
necessary  duty.  But  that  the  gods  cannot  be 
fathers  or  lords,  is  declared  not  only  by  their 
multitude,  as  I  have  shown  above,^  but  also  by 
reason :  because  it  is  not  reported  that  man 
was  made  by  gods,  nor  is  it  found  that  the  gods 
themselves  preceded  the  origin  of  man,  since  it 
appears  that  there  were  men  on  the  earth  before 
the  birth  of  Vulcan,  and  Liber,  and  Apollo,  and 
Jupiter  himself.     But  the  creation  of  man  is  not 


'  Fear,  in  the  language  of  the  prophets  often  implies  reverence 
of  the  divine  majesty.  Lactantius  seems  to  refer  to  Mai.  i.  6 :  "A 
son  honoureth  his  father,  and  a  servant  his  master:  if  then  I  be  a 
father,  where  is  mine  honour  ?  and  if  I  be  a  master,  where  is  my 
fear  ?  " 

2  Literally,  runaways.  The  reference  is,  as  before,  to  runaway 
slaves. 

3  Chap.  iii.  [p.  103]. 


accustomed  to  be  assigned  to  Satumus,  nor  to 
his  father  Coelus. 

But  if  none  of  those  who  are  worshipped  is 
said  to  have  originally  formed  and  created  man, 
it  follows  that  none  of  these  can  be  called  the 
father  of  man,  and  so  none  of  them  can  be  God. 
Therefore  it  is  not  lawful  to  worship  those  by 
whom  man  was  not  produced,  for  he  could  not 
be  produced  by  many.  Therefore  the  one  and 
only  God  ought  to  be  worshipped,  who  was  be- 
fore Jupiter,  and  Saturnus,  and  Ccelus  himself, 
and  the  earth.  For  He  must  have  fashioned 
man,  who,  before  the  creation  of  man,  finished 
the  heaven  and  the  earth.  He  alone  is  to  be 
called  Father  who  created  us ;  He  alone  is  to 
be  considered  Lord  who  rules,  who  has  the  true 
and  perpetual  power  of  life  and  death.  And  he 
who  does  not  adore  Him  is  a  foolish  servant, 
who  flees  from  or  does  not  know  his  Master; 
and  an  undutiful  son,  who  either  hates  or  is  igno- 
rant of  his  true  Father. 

CHAP.    V. THE    ORACLES  OF   THE    PROPHETS  MUST 

BE    LOOKED    INTO  ;     AND     OF    THEIR   TIMES,    AND 
THE   TIMES   OF  THE   JUDGES   AND   KINGS. 

Now,  since  I  have  shown  that  wisdom  and  re- 
ligion cannot  be  separated,  it  remains  that  we 
speak  of  religion  itself,  and  wisdom.  I  am  aware, 
indeed,  how  difficult  it  is  to  discuss  heavenly 
subjects  ;  but  still  the  attempt  must  be  ventured, 
that  the  truth  may  be  made  clear  and  brought  to 
light,  and  that  many  may  be  freed  from  error  and 
death,  who  despise  and  refuse  the  truth,  while  it 
is  concealed  under  a  covering  of  folly.  But  be- 
fore I  begin  to  speak  of  God  and  His  works,  I 
must  first  speak  a  few  things  concerning  the 
prophets,  whose  testimony  I  must  now  use,  which 
I  have  refrained  from  doing  in  the  former  books. 
Above  all  things,  he  who  desires  to  comprehend 
the  truth  ought  not  only  to  apply  his  mind  to 
understand  the  utterances  of  the  prophets,  but 
also  most  diligently  to  inquire  into  the  times 
during  which  each  one  of  them  existed,  that  he 
may  know  what  future  events  they  predicted,  and 
after  how  many  years  their  predictions  were  ful- 
filled.'^  Nor  is  there  any  difficulty  in  making 
these  computations ;  for  they  testified  under 
what  king  each  of  them  received  the  inspiration 
of  the  Divine  Spirit.  And  many  have  written 
and  published  books  re.specting  the  times, 
making  their  commencement  from  the  prophet 
Moses,  who  lived  about  seven  hundred  years  be- 
fore the  Trojan  war.  But  he,  when  he  had  gov- 
erned the  people  for  forty  years,  was  succeeded 
by  Joshua,  who  held  the  chief  place  twenty-seven 
years. 

After  this  they  were  under  the  government  of 
judges  during  i/iree  hundred  and  seventy  years. 


•*  [See  Pusey's  Z'flw/V//  t\%<3  Minor  Prophets. \ 


Chap.  VII.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


xl05 


Then  their  condition  was  changed,  and  they  be- 
gan to  have  kings  ;  and  when  they  had  ruled  dur- 
ing /c>?ir  /lundred  and /i/(\' yeavs,  until  the  reign 
of  Zedekiah,  the  Jews  having  been  besieged  by 
the  king  of  Babylon,  and  carried  into  captivity,' 
endured  a  long  servitude,  until,  in  the  seventieth 
year  afterwards,  the  captive  Jews  were  restored 
to  their  own  lands  and  settlements  by  Cyrus  the 
elder,  who  attained  the  supreme  power  over  the 
Persians,  at  the  time  when  Tarquinius  Superbus 
reigned  at  Rome.  W'herefore,  since  the  whole 
series  of  times  may  be  collected  both  from  the 
Jewish  histories  and  from  those  of  the  Greeks 
and  Romans,  the  times  of  the  prophets  individ- 
ually may  also  be  collected  ;  the  last  of  whom 
was  Zechariah,  and  it  is  agreed  on  that  he  proph- 
esied in  the  time  of  King  Darius,  in  the  second 
year  of  his  reign,  and  in  the  eighth  month.  Of 
so  much  greater  antiquity-  are  the  prophets 
found  to  be  than  the  Greek  writers.  And  I  bring 
forward  all  these  things,  that  they  may  perceive 
their  error  who  endeavour  to  refute  Holy  Scrip- 
ture, as  though  it  were  new  and  recently  com- 
posed, being  ignorant  from  what  fountain  the 
origin  of  our  holy  religion  flowed.  But  if  any 
one,  having  put  together  and  examined  the  times, 
shall  duly  lay  the  foundation  of  learning,  and 
fully  ascertain  the  truth,  he  will  also  lay  aside 
his  error  when  he  has  gained  the  knowledge  of 
the  truth. 

CHAP.    VI. ALMIGHTY    GOD    BEG.\T    HIS    SON  ;    AND 

THE   TESTIMONIES    OF   THE  SIBYLS    AND    OF   TRIS- 
MEGISTUS   CONCERNING   HIM. 

God,  therefore,  the  contriver  and  founder  of 
all  things,  as  we  have  said  in  the  second  book, 
before  He  commenced  this  excellent  work  of  the 
world,  begat  a  pure  and  incorruptible  Spirit, 
whom  He  called  His  Son.  And  although  He 
had  afterwards  created  by  Himself  innumerable 
other  beings,  whom  we  call  angels,  this  first-be- 
gotten, however,  was  the  only  one  whom  He 
considered  worthy  of  being  called  by  the  divine 
name,  as  being  powerful  in  His  Father's  excel- 
lence and  majesty.  But  that  there  is  a  Son  of 
the  Most  High  God,  who  is  possessed  of  the 
greatest  power,  is  shown  not  only  by  the  unani- 
mous utterances  of  the  prophets,  but  also  by  the 
declaration  of  Trismegistus  and  the  predictions 
of  the  Sibyls.  Hermes,  in  the  book  which  is 
entitled  T/ie  Perfect  Word,  made  use  of  these 
words  :  "  The  Lord  and  Creator  of  all  things, 
whom  we  have  thought  right  to  call  God,  since 
He  made  the  second  God  visible  and  sensible. 
But  I  use  the  term  sensible,  not  because  He 
Himself    perceives    (for   the    question    is    not 


whether  He  Himself  perceives),  but  because  He 
leads  3  to  perception  and  to  intelligence.  Since, 
therefore,  He  made  Him  first,  and  alone,  and 
one  only.  He  appeared  to  Him  beautiful,  and 
most  full  of  all  good  things ;  and  He  hallowed 
Him,  and  altogether  loved  Him  as  His  own 
Son."  The  Erythrjean  Sibyl,  in  the  beginning 
of  her  poem,  which  she  commenced  with  the 
Supreme  God,  proclaims  the  Son  of  God  as  the 
leader  and  commander  of  all,  in  these  verses  :  — 

"  The  nourisher  and  creator  of  all  things,  who  placed 
the  sweet  breath  in  all,  and  made  God  the  leader 
of  all." 

And  again,  at  the  end  of  the  same  poem  :  — 

"  But  whom  God  gave  for  faithful  men  to  honour." 

And  another  Sibyl  enjoins  that  He  ought  to  be 
known  :  — 
"  Know  Him  as  your  God,  who  is  the  Son  of  God." 

Assuredly  He  is  the  very  Son  of  God,  who  by 
that  most  wise  King  Solomon,  full  of  divine  in- 
spiration, spake  these  things  which  we  have 
added  :  ■♦  "  God  founded  5  me  in  the  beginning 
of  His  ways,  in  His  work  before  the  ages.  He 
set  me  up  in  the  beginning,  before  He  made 
the  earth,  and  before  He  established  the  depths, 
before  the  fountains  of  waters  came  forth  :  the 
Lord  begat  me  before  all  the  hills ;  He  made 
the  regions,  and  the  uninhabitable^  boundaries 
under  the  heaven.  When  He  prepared  the 
heaven,  I  was  by  Him  :  and  when  He  separated 
His  own  seat,  when  He  made  the  strong  clouds 
above  the  winds,  and  when  He  strengthened  the 
mountains,  and  placed  them  under  heaven  ;  when 
He  laid  the  strong  foundations  of  the  earth,  I 
was  with  Him  arranging  all  things.  I  was  He  in 
whom  He  delighted :  I  was  daily  delighted, 
when  He  rejoiced,  the  world  being  completed." 
But  on  this  account  Trismegistus  spoke  of  Him 
as  "  the  artificer  of  God,"  and  the  Sibyl  calls 
Him  "  Counsellor,"  because  He  is  endowed  by 
God  the  Father  with  such  wisdom  and  strength, 
that  God  employed  both  His  wisdom  and  hands 
in  the  creation  of  the  world. 

CHAP.  VII.  —  OF  THE   NAME   OF   SON,  AND  WHENCE 
HE  IS  CALLED  JESUS  AND  CHRIST. 

Some  one  may  perhaps  ask  who  this  is  who  is 
so  powerful,  so  beloved  by  God,  and  what  name 
He  has,  who  was  not  only  begotten  at  first  be- 
fore the  world, 7  but  who  also  arranged  it  by  His 


'  See  2  Kings  xxv. ;  Jer.  xxxix.  antl  Hi. 

^  The  sameis  asserted  by  Justin  Martyr  [vol.  i.  p.  277],  Eusebius, 
Augustine,  and  other  writers.  See  Augustine,  De  Civitate  Dei,  book 
xviii.  37.  Pythagoras,  one  of  the  most  ancient  of  the  Greek  philoso- 
phers, was  contemporary  with  the  latest  prophets. 


3  Literally,  "  sends."  The  passage  appears  to  be  corrupt;  utto- 
ircTTTfi  has  been  suggested  instead  of  im-oire/mret,  "  falls  imder  percep- 
tion," "  is  an  object  of  perception." 

*  Prov.  viii.  22-31.     Lactantius  quotes  from  the  Scptuagint. 

5  According  to  the  Hebrew,  "  possessed  me  in  the  beginning," 
and  so  the  authorized  version. 

<>  Fines  inhabitabiles.  Other  editions  read  terms  inhabitabiles, 
"uninhabitable  lands." 

7  Literally,  "  whose  first  nativity  not  only  preceded  the  world." 
He  speaks  of  the  eternal  generation  of  the  Son,  as  distinguished  from 
His  incarnation,  which  he  afterwards  speaks  of  as  His  second 
nativity.     [See  vol.  vi.  p.  7.] 


io6 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES 


[Book  IV. 


wisdom  and  constructed  it  by  His  might.  First  | 
of  all,  it  is  befitting  that  we  should  know  that 
His  name  is  not  known  even  to  the  angels  who 
dwell  in  heaven,  but  to  Himself  only,  and  to 
God  the  Father;  nor  will  that  name  be  pub- 
lished, as  the  sacred  writings  relate,  before  that 
the  purpose  of  God  shall  be  fulfilled.  In  the 
next  place,  we  must  know  that  this  name  cannot 
be  uttered  by  the  mouth  of  man,  as  Hermes 
teaches,  saying  these  things  :  "  Now  the  cause  of 
this  cause  is  the  will  of  the  divine  good  which 
produced  God,  whose  name  cannot  be  uttered 
by  the  mouth  of  man."  And  shortly  afterwards 
to  His  Son  :  "  There  is,  O  Son,  a  secret  word 
of  wisdom,  holy  respecting  the  only  Lord  of  all 
things,  and  the  God  first  perceived '  by  the 
mind,  to  speak  of  whom  is  beyond  the  power 
of  man."  But  although  His  name,  which  the 
supreme  Father  gave  Him  from  tlie  beginning,  is 
known  to  none  but  Himself,  nevertheless  He  has 
one  name  among  the  angels,  and  another  among 
men,  since  He  is  called  Jesus  -  among  men  :  for 
Christ  is  not  a  proper  name,  but  a  title  of  power 
and  dominion  ;  for  by  this  the  Jews  were  accus- 
tomed to  call  their  kings.  But  the  meaning  of 
this  name  must  be  set  forth,  on  account  of  the 
error  of  the  ignorant,  who  by  the  change  of  a 
letter  are  accustomed  to  call  Him  Chrestus.^ 
The  Jews  had  before  been  directed  to  compose 
a  sacred  oil,  with  which  those  who  were  called 
to  the  priesthood  '^  or  to  the  kingdom  might  be 
anointed.  And  as  now  the  robe  of  purple  5  is 
a  sign  of  the  assumption  of  royal  dignity  among 
the  Romans,  so  with  them  the  anointing  with 
the  holy  oil  conferred  the  title  and  power  of 
king.  But  since  the  ancient  Greeks  used  the 
word  xp^ecrOai  to  express  the  art  of  anointing, 
which  they  now  express  by  aXdcf>ecr6aL,  as  the 
verse  of  Homer  shows, 

"But  the  attendants  washed,  and  anointed*  them  with 
oil;" 

on  this  account  we  call  Him  Christ,  that  is,  the 
Anointed,  who  in  Hebrew  is  called  the  Messias. 
Hence  in  some  Greek  writings,  which  are  badly 
translated  7  from  the  Hebrew,  the  word  e/evu- 
iiienos^  is  found  written,  from  the  word  akiphes- 
tJiai,'>  anointing.  But,  however,  by  either  name 
a  king  is  signified  :  not  that  He  has  ol)tained  this 
earthly  kingdom,  the  time  for  receiving  which 

*  Or,  perceiving. 

2  Jesus,  that  is,  [Joshua  =  ]  Saviour. 

3  Suetonius  speaks  of  Christ  as  Chrestus.  The  Christians  also 
were  called  Chrestians,  as  Tertullian  shows  in  his  A/>ology.  The  word 
Xpr/oTo;  has  the  signification  of  kind,  gentle,  good.     [Vol.  i.  p.  163.] 

*  Each  has  reference  to  Christ,  as  He  is  King  and  Priest.  Of  the 
anointing  of  kings,  see  1  Sam.,  and  of  priests,  Lev.  viii.  [Of  prophets, 
I  Kings  xix.  16.]  The  priesthood  of  Christ  is  most  fully  set  forth  in 
the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews. 

5  Thus  Horatius,  Carm.,  i.  35,  "  Purpurei  metuunt  tyranni;  " 
and  Gray,  Ode  to  Adversity,  "  Purple  tyrants  vainly  groan." 

'  Interpretatae  sunt,  used  here  in  a  passive  sense. 

9  dAei^eaflat, 


has  not  yet  arrived,  but  that  He  sways  a  heavenly 
and  eternal  kingdom,  concerning  which  we  shall 
speak  in  the  last  book.  But  now  let  us  speak 
of  His  first  nativity. 

CHAP.     VIII. OF     THE     BIRTH     OF     JESUS     IN    THE 

SPIRIT    AND     IN     THE     FLESH  :      OF     SPIRITS    AND 
THE     TESTIMONIES     OF    PROPHETS. 

For  we  especially  testify  that  He  was  twice 
born,  first  in  the  spirit,  and  afterwards  in  the 
flesh.  Whence  it  is  thus  spoken  by  Jeremiah  :  '° 
"Before  I  formed  Thee  in  the  womb  I  knew 
Thee."  And  likewise  by  the  same:  "Who  was 
blessed  before  He  was  born  ;  "  "  which  was  the 
case  with  no  one  else  but  Christ.  For  though 
He  was  the  Son  of  God  from  the  beginning,'^ 
He  was  born  again  '^  a  second  time  '^  according 
to  the  flesh  :  and  this  twofold  birth  of  His  has 
introduced  great  terror  into  the  minds  of  men, 
and  overspread  with  darkness  even  those  who 
retained  the  mysteries  of  true  religion.  But  we 
will  show  this  plainly  and  clearly,  that  they  who 
love  wisdom  may  be  more  easily  and  diligently 
instructed.  He  who  hears  the  Son  of  God  men- 
tioned ought  not  to  conceive  in  his  mind  so 
great  impiety  as  to  think  that  God  begat  Him 
by  marriage  and  union  with  a  woman,  which 
none  does  but  an  animal  possessed  of  a  body, 
and  subject  to  death.  But  with  whom  could 
God  unite  Himself,  since  He  is  alone?  or  since 
His  power  was  so  great,  that  He  accomplished 
whatever  He  wished,  assuredly  He  did  not  require 
the  co-operation  '5  of  another  for  procreation. 
Unless  by  chance  we  shall  [profanely]  imagine, 
as  Orpheus  supposed,  that  God  is  both  male  and 
female,  because  otherwise  He  would  have  been 
unable  to  beget,  unless  He  had  the  power  of 
each  sex,  as  though  He  could  have  intercourse 
with  Himself,  or  without  such  intercourse  be 
unable  to  produce. 

But  Hermes  also  was  of  the  same  opinion, 
when  he  says  that  He  was  "  His  own  father,"  and 
"  His  own  mother."  '^  But  if  this  were  so,  as  He 
is  called  by  the  prophets  father,  so  also  He  would 
be  called  mother.  In  what  manner,  then,  did 
He  beget  Him  ?  First  of  all,  divine  operations 
cannot  be  known  or  declared '^  by  any  one  ;  but 
nevertheless  the  sacred  writings  teach  us,  in 
which  it  is  laid  down  '^  that  this  Son  of  God  is  the 
speech,  or  even  the  reason  '^  of  God,  and  also 


•°  Jer.  i.  5.  It  can  only  be  in  a  secondary  sense  that  this  prophecy 
refers  to  Christ ;  in  its  primary  sense  it  refers  to  the  prophet  himself,  as 
the  context  plainly  shows. 

"  This  passage  is  not  found  in  Jeremiah,  or  in  the  Bible. 

'-  [See  vol.  iii.  p.  612.] 

'3  Regeneratus  est. 

'■»  Denuo,  i.e  ,  de  novo,  "afresh  " 

'S  Societate  alterius.  [Profanely  arguing  to  God  from  man.  Hu- 
manity has  a  procreant  power  of  a  lower  sort;  but  the  ideal  is  divine, 
and  needs  no  process  like  that  of  man's  nature.] 

'6  avTOTTOiTopa  Ka'i  avTOWTjTopa, 

I?  Thus  Isa.  liii.  8:  "  Who  shall  declare  His  generation?  " 

■^  Cautum  est. 

'9  Thus  Adyos  includes  the  two  senses  of  word  and  reason. 


Chap.  IX.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


107 


that  the  other  angels  are  spirits '  of  God.  For 
speech  is  breath  sent  forth  with  a  voice  signify- 
ing something.  But,  however,  since  breath  and 
speech  are  sent  forth  from  different  parts,  inas- 
much as  breath  proceeds  from  the  nostrils,  speech 
from  the  mouth,  the  difference  between  the  Son 
of  God  and  the  other  angels  is  great.  For  they 
proceeded  from  God  as  silent  spirits,  because 
they  w^ere  not  created  to  teach  ^  the  knowledge 
of  God,  but  for  His  service.  But  though  He  is 
Himself  also  a  spirit,  yet  He  proceeded  from 
the  mouth  of  God  with  voice  and  sound,  as  the 
Word,  on  this  account  indeed,  because  He  was 
about  to  make  use  of  His  voice  to  the  people  ; 
that  is,  because  He  was  about  to  be  a  teacher 
of  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  of  the  heavenly 
mystery  ^  to  be  revealed  to  man  :  which  word 
also  God  Himself  first  spoke,  that  through  Him 
He  might  speak  to  us,  and  that  He  might  reveal 
to  us  the  voice  and  will  of  God. 

With  good  reason,  therefore,  is  He  called  the 
Speech  and  the  Word  of  God,  because  God, 
by  a  certain  incomprehensible  energy  and  power 
of  His  majesty,  enclosed  the  vocal  spirit  pro- 
ceeding from  His  mouth,  which  he  had  not  con- 
ceived in  the  womb,  but  in  His  mind,  within  a 
form  which  has  life  through  its  own  perception 
and  wisdom,  and  He  also  foshioned  other  spirits 
of  His  into  angels.  Our  spirits  ■*  are  liable  to 
dissolution,  because  we  are  mortal :  but  the 
spirits  of  God  both  live,  and  are  lasting,  and 
have  perception ;  because  He  Himself  is  im- 
mortal, and  the  Giver  both  of  perception  s  and 
life.  Our  expressions,  altlfough  they  are  mingled 
with  the  air,  and  fade  away,  yet  generally  remain 
comprised  in  letters ;  how  much  more  must  we 
believe  that  the  voice  of  God  both  remains  for 
ever,  and  is  accompanied  with  perception  and 
power,  which  it  has  derived  from  God  tlie  Father, 
as  a  stream  from  its  fountain  !  But  if  any  one 
wonders  that  God  could  be  produced  from  God 
by  a  putting  forth  of  the  voice  and  breath,  if  he 
is  acquainted  with  the  sacred  utterances  of  the 
prophets  he  will  cease  to  wonder.  That  Solomon 
and  his  father  David  were  most  powerful  kings, 
and  also  prophets,  may  perhajis  be  known  even 
to  those  who  have  not  applied  themselves  to  the 
sacred  writings ;  the  one  of  whom,  who  reigned 
subsequently  to  the  other,  preceded  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  city  of  Troy  by  one  hundred  and 
forty  years.     His   father,  the   writer  of  sacred 


'  There  is  great  difficulty  in  translating  this  passage,  on  account 
of  the  double  sense  of  sjjiritus  (as  in  Greek,  ;7I'e^}^a),  incliidini; 
"  spirit"  and  "  breath."  It  is  impossible  to  express  the  sense  of  the 
whole  passage  by  either  word  singly.  There  is  the  same  difficulty 
with  regard  to  iri/eOjaa,  as  in  Heb.  i.  7:  "  He  makeih  His  angels 
spirits,"  more  correctly  "  winds."  See  Dclitzsch  on  Hebrews,  and 
conip.  Ps.  civ.  4. 

^  Ad  tradeiidam. 

3  Coclestis  arcani.     See  Rom.  xvi.  25. 

*  Lactantius  is  spe.iking  of  the  breath:  he  cannot  refer  to  the  soul, 
which  he  everywhere  speaks  of  as  immortal. 

5  Sensus. 


hymns,  thus  speaks  in  the  thirty-second  Psalm  :  ^ 
"  By  the  word  of  God  were  the  heavens  made 
firm  ;  and  all  their  power  7  by  the  breath  of  His 
mouth."  And  also  again  in  the  forty- fourth 
Psalm  :  ^  "  My  heart  hath  given  utterance  to  a 
good  word  ;  I  speak  of  my  doings  towards  the 
king ;  "  testifying,  in  truth,  that  the  works  of 
God  are  known  to  no  other  than  to  the  Son 
alone,  who  is  the  Word  of  God,  and  who  must 
reign  for  ever.  Solomon  also  shows  that  it  is 
the  Word  of  God,  and  no  other,9  by  whose  hands 
these  works  of  the  world  were  made.  "  I,"  He 
says,  "  came  forth  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Most 
High  before  all  creatures  :  I  caused  the  light 
that  faileth  not  to  arise  in  the  heavens,  and  cov- 
ered the  whole  earth  with  a  cloud.  I  have 
dwelt  in  the  height,  and  my  throne  is  in  the  pil- 
lar of  the  cloud."  ■"  John  also  thus  taught :  "  In 
the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was 
with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God.  The  same 
was  in  the  beginning  with  God.  All  things  were 
made  by  Him,  and  without  Him  was  not  any- 
thing made."  " 

CH.AP.    IX. OF   THE    WORD    OF    GOD, 

But  the  Greeks  speak  of  Him  as  the  Logos, ^^ 
more  befittingly  than  we  do  as  the  word,  or 
speech :  for  Logos  signifies  both  speech  and 
reason,  inasmuch  as  He  is  both  the  voice  and 
the  wisdom  of  God.  And  of  this  divine  speech 
not  even  the  philosophers  were  ignorant,  since 
Zeno  represents  the  Logos  as  the  arranger  of  the 
established  order  of  things,  and  the  framer  of 
the  universe  :  whom  also  He  calls  Fate,  and  the 
necessity  of  things,  and  God,  and  the  soul  of 
Jupiter,  in  accordance  with  the  custom,  indeed, 
by  which  they  are  wont  to  regard  Jupiter  as  God. 
But  the  words  are  no  obstacle,  since  the  senti- 
ment is  in  agreement  with  the  truth.  For  it  is 
the  spirit  of  God  which  he  named  the  soul  of 
Jupiter.  For  Trismegistus,  who  by  some  means 
or  other  searched  into  almost  all  truth,  often  de- 
scribed the  excellence  and  majesty  of  the  word, 
as  the  instance  before  mentioned  declares,  in 
which  he  acknowledges  that  there  is  an  ineffable 
and  sacred  speech,  the  relation  of  which  exceeds 
the  measure  of  man's  ability.  I  have  spoken 
briefly,  as  I  have  been  able,  concerning  the  first 
nativity.  Now  I  must  more  fully  discuss  the 
second,  since  this  is  the  subject  most  controvert- 
ed, that  we  may  hold  forth  the  light  of  under- 
standing to  those  who  desire  to  know  the  truth. 


*  In  our  version,  Ps.  xxxiii   6. 

7  Quoted  from  the  Septiiagint  version. 

5  Ps.  xlv.  I.     [See  vol.  i.  p.  213.  J 

9  Ipsum. 

'°  Ecclus  xxiv.  5-7.  This  book  is  attributed  to  Solomon  by  many 
of  the  Fathers,  though  it  bears  the  title  of  the  Wisdom  of  Jesus  the 
.son  of  .'^irach. 

"  John  i.  1-3. 


io8 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  IV. 


CHAP.    X. OF    THE    ADVENT    OF    JESUS  J     OF     THE 

FORTUNES   OF    THE    JEWS,    AND    THEIR   GOVERN- 
MENT,   UNTIL   THE    PASSION    OF   THE    LORD. 

In  the  first  place,  then,  men  ought  to  know 
that  the  arrangements  of  the  Most  High  God 
have  so  advanced  from  the  beginning,  that  it 
was   necessary,  as  the  end  of  the   world'  ap- 
proached, that  the  Son  of  God  should  descend 
to  the  earth,  that  He  might  build  a  temple  for 
God,  and   teach   righteousness;    but,    however, 
not  with  the  might  of  an  angel  or  with  heavenly 
power,  but  in  the  form  of  man  and  in  the  con- 
dition of  a  mortal,  that  when  He  had  discharged 
the  office  of  His  ministry,^  He  might  be  delivered 
into  the  hands  of  wicked  men,  and  might  under- 
go death,  that,  having  subdued  this  also  by  His 
might.  He  might  rise  again,  and  bring  to  man, 
whose  nature  He  had  put  on  ^  and  represented, 
the  hope  of  overcoming  death,  and  might  admit 
him  to  the  rewards  of  immortality.     And  that 
no  one  may  be  ignorant  of  this  arrangement, 
we  will  show  that  all  things  were  foretold  which 
we  see  fulfilled  in  Christ.     Let  no  one  believe 
our  assertion  unless  I  shall  show  that  the  prophets 
before  a   long  series  of  ages  published  that  it 
should  come  to  pass  at  length  that  the  Son  of 
God  should  be  born   as  a  man,  and  perform 
wonderful  deeds,  and  sow  *  the  worship  of  God 
throughout  the  whole  earth,  and  at  last  be  cru- 
cified, and  on  the   third  day  rise  again.     And 
when  I  shall  have  proved  all  these  things  by  the 
writings   of  those  very  men   who  treated  with 
violence  their  God  who  had  assumed  a  mortal 
body,  what  else  will  prevent  it  from  being  mani- 
fest  that   true  wisdom    is   conversant  with  this 
religion   only?     Now  the   origin   of  the  whole 
mystery  is  to  be  related. 

Our  ancestors,5  who  were  chiefs  of  the  He- 
brews, when  they  were  distressed  by  famine  and 
want,  passed  over  into  Egypt,  that  they  might 
obtain  a  supply  of  corn  ;  and  sojourning  there  a 
long  time,  they  were  oppressed  with  an  intolerable 
yoke  of  slavery.  Then  God  pitied  them,  and 
led  them  out,  and  freed  them  from  the  hand  of 
the  king  of  the  Egyptians,  after  four  hundred 
and  thirty''  years,  under  the  leadership  of  Moses, 
through  whom  the  law  was  afterwards  given  to 
them  by  God  ;  and  in  this  leading  out  God  dis- 
played the  power  of  His  majesty.  For  He  made 
His  people  to  pass  through  the  midst  of  the  Red 


Sea,  His  angel  ^  going  before  and  dividing  the 
water,  so  that  the  people  might  walk  over  the 
dry  land,  of  whom  it  might  more  truly  be  said 
(as  the  poet  says  **) ,  that  "  the  wave,  closing  over 
him  after  the  appearance  of  a  mountain,  stood 
around  him."     And  when  he  heard  of  this,  the 
tyrant  of  the  Egyptians  followed  with  this  great 
host   of  his   men,  and   rashly  entering  the  sea 
which   still   lay   open,  was   destroyed,   together 
with  his  whole  army,  by  the  waves  returning  "^  to 
their  place.     But  the  Hebrews,  when  they  had 
entered  into  the  wilderness,  saw  many  wonderful 
deeds.     For  when  they  suffered  thirst,  a  rock 
having   been  struck  with  a  rod,  a  fountain  of 
water  sprung  forth  and   refreshed   the   people. 
And  again,  when  they  were  hungry,  a  shower  '° 
of  heavenly  nourishment  descended.    Moreover, 
also,  the  wind  "  brought  quails  into  their  camp, 
so  that  they  were  not  only  satisfied  with  heavenly 
bread,  but  also  with  more  choice  banquets.    And 
yet,  in  return  for  these  divine  benefits,  they  did 
not  pay  honour  to  God  ;  but  when  slavery  had 
been  now  removed  from  them,  and  their  thirst 
and  hunger  laid  aside,  they  fell  away  into  luxury, 
and  transferred  their  minds  to  the  profane  rites 
of  the  Egyptians.    For  when  Moses,  their  leader, 
had   ascended   into   the    mountain,   and    there 
tarried  forty  days,  they  made  the  head  '^  of  an  ox 
in  gold,  which  they  call  Apis,'^  that  it    might 
go  before  them  as  a  standard.'^    With  which  sin 
and  crime  God  was  off'ended,  and  justly  visited 
the  impious  and  ungrateful  people  with  severe 
punishments,  and  made  them  subject  to  the  law  "5 
which  He  had  given  by  Moses. 

But  afterwards,  when  they  had  settled  in  a 
desert  part  of  Syria,  the  Hebrews  -^  lost  their 
ancient  name  ;  and  since  the  leader  of  their 
host  "7  was  Judas,  they  were  called  Jews,  '^  and 
the  land  which  they  inhabited  Judoea.     And  at 


»  The  boundary  of  the  age.  Thus  the  Scriptures  speak  of  the  end 
of  the  world,  the  last  davs. 

-  Magisterio,  "  teaching."  _  .  u 

3  An  expression  frequently  used  by  the  r  athers  to  denote  the 
assumption  of  our  nature  by  Christ.  

4  Seminaret,  "  sow"  or  "spread."  [I  have  put  sow  into  the 
text   andbrought  down  "spread,"  for  an  obvious  reason.] 

5  The  patriarchs.  The  idea  appears  to  be  that  Christians  from 
the  Gentiles,  having  succeeded  to  the  privileges  of  the  Jews,  are,  as 
it  were,  their  posterity.  .  .      .     ^  .        .     .       j 

6  The  duration  of  the  captivity  in  Egypt  was  two  hundred  and 
fifteen  years  The  period  of  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  is  reckoned 
from  the  call  of  Abram  out  of  Ur  of  the  Chaldees  to  the  final  depart- 
ure from  Egypt. 


^  The  Ancel  of  the  Covenant,  who  so  often  presented  Himself  to 
the  Hebrews.  See  Ex.  xxiii.  20.  [The  Jehovah-Angel  Compare 
lustin   vol   i.  pp.  223-226,  and  others /rt5««2,  this  series.) 

8  Virgil  Georg.,\v.  361.  He  describes  Aristaeus  as  descending 
to  the  chamber  of  his  mother  Cyiene,  in  the  depths  of  the  river 
Peneus.  The  waters  separate  on  each  side  to  make  a  way  for  him,  and 
then  close  over  his  head.  _^ 

9  Coeuntibus  aquis,  "  meeting  together.  ,^ 
10  See  Ps.  Ixxviii.  24:  "  He  rained  down  manna  upon  them  to  eat. 
"  See  Num.  xi   31.                                           .         ,       ■            ,.    1.     j 
12  Some  of  the  Fathers  think,  with  Lactantius,  that  it  was  the  head 

only,  and  not  the  whole  figure,  of  a  calf  which  they  made. 

■3  Apis  is  the  name  given  by  the  Egyptians  to  the  call  which  they 
worshipped. 

*■*  In  signo.  .  „«■  i_  k 

15  The  mor.il  law  had  been  already  given  to  Moses  on  the  moimt 
before  the  making  of  the  golden  calf  The  law  here  referred  to  may 
well  be  taken  to  express  the  burthensome  routine  of  the  ceremonial 
law  which  Peter  (Acts  xv.  10)  describes  as  "a  yoke  which  neither 
their  fathers  nor  they  were  able  to  bear."  [Our  author  expresses 
himself  with  accuracy:  He  subjected  them  by  the  oppresive  ceremo- 
nial law  to  the  moral  law  He  had  just  given.  1 

16  The  Hebrews  are  said  to  have  derived  their  name  from  Heber, 
the  descendant  of  Noah  by  Shem;  or  more  probably  from  Abrarn 
the  Hebrew,  that  is,  the  man  who  had  crossed  the  river,  —  a  name 
given  to  him  by  the  Canaanites.     See  Gen.  xiv.  13. 

J8  There"seems  to  be  no  authority  for  this  derivation  of  the  name. 
They  were  doubtless  called  Jews  fromjudah  As  those  who  returned 
from  the  captivity  at  Babylon  were  principally  of  the  tribe  of  Judah 
though  some  from  the  other  tribes  returned  with  them,  they  were 
called  Jews  after  the  captivity. 


Chap.  XI.] 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


109 


first,  indeed,  they  were  not  subject  to  the  domin- 
ion of  Kings,  but  civil  Judges  presided  over  the 
people  and  the  law :  they  were  not,  however, 
appointed  only  for  a  year,  as  the  Roman  consuls, 
but  supported  by  a  perpetual  jurisdiction.  Then, 
the  name  of  Judges  being  taken  away,  the  kingly 
power  was  introduced.  But  during  the  govern- 
ment of  the  Judges  the  people  had  often  under- 
taken corrupt  religious  rites ;  and  God,  offended 
by  them,  as  often  brought  them  into  bondage  to 
strangers,  until  again,  softened  by  the  repentance 
of  the  people.  He  freed  them  from  bondage. 
Likewise  under  the  Kings,  being  oppressed  by 
wars  with  their  neighbours  on  account  of  their 
iniquities,  and  at  last  taken  captive  and  led  to 
Babylon,  they  suffered  punishment  for  their  im- 
piety by  oppressive  slavery,  until  Cyrus  came  to 
the  kingdom,  who  immediately  restored  the  Jews 
by  an  edict.  Afterwards  they  had  tetrarchs  until 
the  time  of  Herod,  who  was  in  the  reign  of  Ti- 
berius Caesar ;  in  whose  fifteenth  year,  in  the 
consulship  of  the  two  Gemini,  on  the  23d  of 
March,'  the  Jews  crucified  Christ.  This  series 
of  events,  this  order,  is  contained  in  the  secrets 
of  the  sacred  writings.  But  I  will  first  show  for 
what  reason  Christ  came  to  the  earth,  that  the 
foundation  and  the  system  of  divine  religion 
may  be  manifest. 

CHAP.  XI. OF    THE    CAUSE    OF   THE    INCARNATION 

OF    CHRIST. 

When  the  Jews  often  resisted  wholesome  pre- 
cepts, and  departed  from  the  divine  law,  going 
astray  to  the  impious  worship  of  false  gods,  then 
God  filled  just  and  chosen  men  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  appointing  them  as  prophets  in  the  midst 
of  the  people,  by  whom  He  might  rebuke  with 
threatening  words  the  sins  of  the  ungrateful  peo- 
ple, and  nevertheless  exhort  them  to  repent  of 
their  wickedness ;  for  unless  they  did  this,  and, 
laying  aside  their  vanities,  return  to  their  God, 
it  would  come  to  pass  that  He  would  change 
His  covenant,^  that  is,  bestow^  the  inheritance 
of  eternal  life  upon  foreign  nations,  and  collect 
to  Himself  a  more  faithful  people  out  of  those 
who  were  aliens  ■♦  by  birth.  But  they,  when  re- 
buked by  the  prophets,  not  only  rejected  their 
words  ;  but  being  offended  because  they  were 
upbraided  for  their  sins,  they  slew  the  prophets 
themselves  with  studied  s  tortures :  all  which 
things  are  sealed  up  and  preserved  in  the  sacred 
writings.     For  the  prophet  Jeremiah  says  : ''  "  I 

'  There  appears  to  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  the  day  on  which 
our  Lord  suffered  was  the  14th  of  Nisan,  that  is,  .'\pril  7.  See  Gress- 
well's  Dissertations,  vo\.  ill.  p.  168;  also  Kllicott's  Lectures  on  the 
Life  of  Christ.  [Gresswell  is  not  to  be  too  readily  accepted  in  this. 
See  the  learned  inquiry  of  Dr.  Jarvis,  of  whom,  vol.  ii.  p.  477. J 

^  Testamenium,  properly  the  solemn  declaration  of  a  will. 

3  Converteret,  "  turn  to." 

<  Alienigenis.  Comp.  Eph.  ii.  12:  "Aliens  from  the  common- 
wealth of  Israel,  and  strangers  from  the  covenants  of  promise." 

5  Exquisitis. 

*  Jer.  XXV.  4-6. 


sent  to  you  my  servants  the  prophets ;  I  sent 
them  before  the  morning  light ;  but  ye  did  not 
hearken,  nor  incline  your  ears  to  hear,  when  I 
spake  unto  you  :  let  every  one  of  you  turn  from 
his  evil  way,  and  from  your  most  corrupt  affec- 
tions ;  and  ye  shall  dwell  in  the  land  which  I 
gave  to  you  and  to  your  fathers  for  ever.^  Walk 
ye  not  after  strange  gods,  to  serve  them  ;  and 
provoke  me  not  to  anger  with  the  works  of  your 
hands,  that  I  should  destroy  you."  The  proph- 
et Ezra^  also,  who  was  in  the  times  of  the  same 
Cyrus  by  whom  the  Jews  were  restored,  thus 
speaks  :  "  They  rebelled  against  Thee,  and  cast 
Thy  law  behind  their  backs,  and  slew  Thy  proph- 
ets which  testified  against  them,  that  they  might 
turn  unto  Thee." 

The  prophet  Elias  also,  in  the  third  book  of 
Kings  :  9  "  I  have  been  very  jealous  '°  for  the 
Lord  God  of  hosts,  because  the  children  of  Israel 
have  forsaken  Thee,  thrown  down  Thine  altars, 
and  slain  Thy  prophets  with  the  sword  ;  and  I 
only  am  left,  and  they  seek  my  life  to  take  it 
away."  On  account  of  these  impieties  of  theirs 
He  cast  them  off  for  ever  ;  "  and  so  He  ceased 
to  send  to  them  prophets.  But  He  commanded 
His  own  Son,  the  first-begotten,'^  the  maker  of 
all  things,  His  own  counsellor,  to  descend  from 
heaven,  that  He  might  transfer  the  sacred  reli- 
gion of  God  to  the  Gentiles, '^  that  is,  to  those  who 
were  ignorant  of  God,  and  might  teach  them 
righteousness,  which  the  perfidious  people  had 
cast  aside.  And  He  had  long  before  threatened 
that  He  would  do  this,  as  the  prophet  Malachi  '■* 
shows,  saying :  "  I  have  no  pleasure  in  you, 
saith  the  Lord,  and  I  will  not  accept  an  offering 
from  your  hands  ;  for  from  the  rising  of  the  sun 
even  unto  its  setting,  my  name  shall  be  great 'S 
among  the  Gentiles."  David  also  in  the  seven- 
teenth Psalm '^  says  :  "  Thou  wilt  make  me  the 
head  of  the  heathen  ;  a  people  whom  I  have 
not  known  shall  serve  me  "  Isaiah  '^  also  thus 
speaks :  "  I  come  to  gather  all  nations  and 
tongues  ;  and  they  shall  come  and  see  my  glory  ; 
and  I  will  send  among  them  a  sign,  and  I  will 
send  those  that  escape  of  them  unto  the  nations 
which  are  afar  off,  which  have  not  heard  my 
fame  ;  and  they  shall  declare  my  glory  among 


^  From  generation  to  generation. 

8  Neh.  i.\.  26.  The  book  of  Nehemiah  is  called  by  the  (/Ireek 
writers  the  second  book  of  Ezra.  The  words  quoted  are  spoken  by 
the  Levites. 

9  I  Kings  xix.  10.  The  Tst  and  2d  Samuel  are  in  the  Septuagint 
ist  and  2d  Kings,  and  ist  and  2d  Kings  are  3d  and  4th. 

'°  I  have  been  Jealous  with  jealousy  —  vEmulando  a:mulatiis  sum, 
—  a  Hebraism.     So  Luke  xxii.  15;  John  iii.  29. 

"  Fathers  were  said  to  disown  (abdicare)  and  cast  off  degenerate 
sons. 

'-  Thus  Col.  i.  18,  "who  is  the  beginning,  the  first-born  from  the 
dead  " 

"  The  nations. 

'*  Mai.  i.  10,  II. 

'5  In  the  Septuagint  5e5o|a<TTai,  "  h.as  been  glorified." 

'6  Ps.  xviii.43.  The  quotation  is  from  the  Septuagint,  icaTacrT^o-fi!; 
our  version  reads,  "  Thou  hast  made  me." 

'J  Isa.  Ixvi.  18,  19.  The  quotation  is  again  taken  from  the  Septua- 
gint. 


I  lO 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  IV. 


the  Gentiles."  Therefore,  when  God  wished  to 
send  to  the  earth  one  who  should  measure  '  His 
temple,  He  was  unwilling  to  send  him  with 
heavenly  power-  and  glory,  that  the  people  who 
had  been  ungrateful  towards  God  might  be  led 
into  the  greatest  error,  and  suffer  punishment  for 
their  crimes,  since  they  had  not  received  their 
Lord  and  God,  as  the  prophets  had  before  fore- 
told that  it  would  thus  happen.  For  Isaiah, 
whom  the  Jews  most  cruelly  slew,  cutting  him 
asunder  with  a  saw,^  thus  speaks  :  ^  "  Hear,  O 
hea\en ;  and  give  ear,  O  earth  :  for  the  Lord 
hath  spoken,  I  have  begotten  sons,  and  lifted'' 
them  up  on  high,  and  they  have  rejected  me. 
The  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass  his 
master's  stall ;  but  Israel  hath  not  known,  my 
people  has  not  understood."  Jeremiah  also 
says,  in  like  manner :  s  "  The  turtle  and  the 
swallow  hath  known  her  time,  and  the  sparrows 
of  the  field  have  observed  ^  the  times  of  their 
coming :  but  my  people  have  not  known  the 
judgment  of  the  Lord.  How  do  you  say,  We 
are  wise,  and  the  law  of  the  Lord  is  with  us? 
The  meting  out  ^  is  in  vain  ;  the  scribes  are  de- 
ceived and  confounded  :  the  wise  men  are  dis- 
mayed and  taken,  for  they  have  rejected  the 
word  of  the  Lord." 

Therefore  (as  I  had  begun  to  say),  when  God 
had  determined  to  send  to  men  a  teacher  of 
righteousness.  He  commanded  Him  to  be  born 
again  a  second  time  in  the  flesh,  and  to  be  made 
in  the  likeness  of  man  himself,  to  whom  he  was 
about  to  be  a  guide,  and  companion,  and 
teacher.  But  since  God  is  kind  and  merciful  ^ 
to  His  people.  He  sent  Him  to  those  very  per- 
sons whom  He  hated,''  that  He  might  not  close 
the  way  of  salvation  against  them  for  ever,  but 
might  give  them  a  free  opportunity  of  following 
God,  that  they  might  both  gain  the  reward  of 
life  if  they  should  follow  Him  (which  many  of 
them  do,  and  have  done),  and  that  they  might 
incur  the  penalty  of  death  by  their  fault  if  they 
should  reject  their  King.  He  ordered  Him 
therefore  to  be  born  again  among  them,  and  of 
their  seed,  lest,  if  He  should  be  born  of  another 
nation,  they  might  be  able  to  allege  a  just  excuse 
from  the  law  for  their  rejection  of  Him  ;  and  at 
the  same  time,  that  there   might  be  no  nation 


'  See  Ezek.  xli.,  where  an  angel  measures  the  temple;  and  Rev. 
XI.,  where  an  angel  directs  John  to  measure  it. 

2  The  Scriptures  do  not  make  mention  of  the  death  of  Isaiah.  It 
IS  supposed  that  there  is  an  allusion  to  it  in  Heb  xi.  37. 

■5  Isa.  i.  2,  3. 

*  Filios  genui  et  exaltavi.     This  is  quoted  from  the  Septuagint. 

5  Jer.  viii.  7-9. 

6  This  is  quoted  from  the  Septuagint;  literally,  have  watched  for, 
custodierunt. 

7  Metatura.  There  is  considerable  difference  in  the  readings  of 
this  passage.  The  text,  as  given  above,  deviates  considerably  from 
the  Septuagmt,  which  is  more  nearly  expressed  by  the  reading  of 
other  editions:  "  Incassum  facta  est  metatura  falsa,  scriba;  confusi 
sunt." 

^  Pius.     The  word  is  often  used  to  represent  kindness. 

9  Men  are  reprcented  as  being  enemies  to  God.  The  enmity  is 
on  man's  side,  but  if  persisted  in,  must  make  God  his  enemy.  See 
Rom.  v.  9,  10,  and  Isa.  Ixiii.  10. 


at  all  under  heaven  to  which  the  hope  of  immor- 
tality should  be  denied. 

CHAP.    XII. OF    THE    BIRTH    OF    JESUS    FROM    THE 

VIRGIN  ;  OF  HIS  LIFE,  DE.'VTH,  AND  RESURRECTION, 
AND  THE  TESTIMONIES  OF  THE  PROPHETS  RE- 
SPECTING THESE  THINGS. 

c 

Therefore  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  descend- 
ing from  heaven,  chose  the  holy  Virgin,  that 
He  might  enter  into  her  womb.'°  But  she, 
being  filled  by  the  possession"  of  the  Divine 
Spirit,  conceived ;  and  without  any  intercourse 
with  a  man,  her  virgin  womb  was  suddenly  im- 
pregned.  But  if  it  is  known  to  all  that  certain 
animals  are  accustomed  to  conceive "  by  the 
wind  and  the  breeze,  why  should  any  one  think 
it  wonderful  when  we  say  that  a  virgin  was  made 
fruitful  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  to  whom  what- 
ever He  may  wish  is  easy?  And  this  might 
have  appeared  incredible,  had  not  the  prophets 
many  ages  previously  foretold  its  occurrence. 
Thus  Solomon  speaks  :  '3  "The  womb  of  a  virgin 
was  strengthened,  and  conceived  ;  and  a  virgin 
was  made  fruitful,  and  became  a  mother  in  great 
pity."  Likewise  the  prophet  Isaiah, '■♦  whose 
words  are  these  :  "  Therefore  God  Himself  shall 
give  you  a  sign  :  Behold,  a  virgin  shall  conceive, 
and  bear  a  son  ;  and  ye  shall  call  His  name 
Emmanuel."  What  can  be  more  manifest  than 
this?  This  was  read  by  the  Jews,  who  denied 
Him.  If  any  one  thinks  that  these  things  are 
invented  by  us,  let  him  inquire  of  them,  let  him 
take  especially  from  them  :  the  testimony  is  suf- 
ficiently strong  to  prove  the  truth,  when  it  is 
alleged  by  enemies  themselves  But  He  was 
never  called  Emmanuel,  but  Jesus,  who  in  Latin 
is  called  Saving,  or  Saviour,'5  because  He  comes 
bringing  salvation  to  all  nations.  But  by  this 
name  the  prophet  declared  that  God  incarnate  was 
about  to  come  to  men.  For  Emmanuel  signifies 
God  with  us ;  because  when  He  was  born  of  a 
virgin,  men  ought  to  confess  that  God  was  with 
them,  that  is,  on  the  earth  and  in  mortal  flesh. 
Whence  David  '^  says  in  the  eighty-fourth  Psalm, 
"Truth  has  sprung  out  of  the  earth;"  because 
God,  in  whom  is  truth,  hath  taken  a  body  of 
earth,  that  He  might  open  a  way  of  salvation  to 
those  of  the  earth.  In  like  manner  Isaiah  also  :  '7 
"  But   they   disbelieved,  and   vexed    His    Holy 


'°  Se  insinuaret. 

"  Divino  spiritu  hausto. 

■^  So  Virgil,  Georgic  iii.  274:  — 

"  Et  saepe  sine  uUis 
Conjugiis  vento  gravid«e,  niirabile  dictu." 
This  theory  of  tlie  impregnation  of  mares  by  the  wind  was  general 
among  the  ancients. 

'3  This  passage  does  not  occur  in  the  writings  of  Solomon,  or  in 
the  Old  Testament.  [Possibly  from  some  copy  (North  African)  of 
the   '  Book  of  Wisdom,"  interpolated  from  a  marginal  comment.] 

'■*  Isa.  vii.  14. 

'5  Salutaris,  sive  Salvator. 

'^  Ps.  Ixxxv.  12,  quoted  from  the  Septuagint. 

"  Isa.  Ixiii.  10. 


Chap.  XIII.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


II I 


Spirit ;  and  He  was  turned  to  be  their  enemy. 
And  He  Himself  fought  against  them,  and  He 
remembered  the  days  of  old,'  who  raised  up 
from  the  earth  a  shepherd  of  the  sheep."  But 
who  this  shepherd  was  about  to  be,  he  declared 
in  another  place,-  saying  :  "  Let  the  heavens  re- 
joice, and  let  the  clouds  put  on  righteousness  ; 
let  the  earth  open,  and  put  forth  a  Saviour.  For 
I  the  Lord  have  begotten  Him."  But  the 
Saviour  is,  as  we  have  said  before,  Jesus.  But 
in  another  place  the  same  prophet  also  thus 
proclaimed  :  ^  "  Behold,  unto  us  a  child  is  born, 
unto  us  a  Son  is  given,  whose  dominion  is  upon 
His  shoulders,  and  His  name  is  called  Messenger 
of  great  counsel."  For  on  this  account  He  was 
sent  by  God  the  Father,  that  He  might  reveal  to 
all  the  nations  which  are  under  heaven  the  sacred 
mystery  of  the  only  true  God,  which  was  taken 
away  from  the  perfidious  people,  who  ofttimes 
sinned  against  God.  Daniel  also  foretold  similar 
things:'*  "I  saw,"  he  said,  "in  a  vision  of  the 
night,  and,  behold,  one  like  the  Son  of  man  com- 
ing with  the  clouds  of  heaven,  and  He  came  even 
to  the  Ancient  of  days.  And  they  who  stood  by 
brought  Him  near  5  before  Him.  And  there  was 
given  unto  Him  a  kingdom,  and  glory,  and  do- 
minion ;  and  all  people,  tribes,  and  languages 
shall  serve  Him  :  and  His  dominion  is  everlast- 
ing, which  shall  never  pass  away,  and  His  king- 
dom shall  not  be  destroyed."  How  then  do  the 
Jews  both  confess  and  expect  the  Christ  of  God? 
who  rejected  Him  on  this  account,  because  He 
was  born  of  man.  For  since  it  is  so  arranged  by 
God  that  the  same  Christ  should  twice  come  to 
the  earth,  once  to  announce  to  the  nations  the  one 
God,  then  again  to  reign,  why  do  they  who  did  not 
believe  in  His  first  advent  believe  in  the  second  ? 
But  the  prophet  comprises  both  His  advents 
in  few  words.  Behold,  he  says,  one  like  the  Son 
of  man  coming  with  the  clouds  of  heaven.  He 
did  not  say,  like  the  Son  of  God,  but  the  Son 
of  man,  that  he  might  show  that  He  had  ^  to  be 
clothed  with  flesh  on  the  earth,  that  having  as- 
sumed the  form  of  a  man  and  the  condition  of 
mortality,  He  might  teach  men  righteousness ; 
and  when,  having  completed  the  commands  of 
God,  He  had  revealed  the  truth  to  the  nations, 
He  might  also  suffer  death,  that  He  might  over- 
come and  lay  open  ^  the  other  world  also,  and 
thus  at  length  rising  again,  He  might  proceed  to 
His  Father  borne  aloft  on  a  cloud. ^  For  the 
prophet  said  in  addition :   And  came   even  to 

'  The  days  of  the  age.  In  the  next  clause  the  text  differs  both 
from  the  Hebrew  and  the  Septuagint  —  which  the  English  authorized 
version  follows  —  "  who  raised  up  out  of  the  sea." 

^  Isa.  xlv.  8,  quoted  from  the  Septuagint. 

3  Isa.  ix.  6,  from  the  Septuagint.  • 

■•  Dan.  vii.  13,  14  . 

5  Obtulerunt  eum,  "  presented  Him." 

*  Quod  came  indui  haberet  in  terra.  Another  reading  is  "  de- 
beret,"  but  the  present  is  in  accordance  with  the  style  of  Lactantius. 

'  Inferos  resignaret. 

'  Acts  i.  9:  "A  cloud  received  Him  out  of  their  sight." 


the  Ancient  of  days,  and  was  presented  to  Him. 
He  called  the  Most  High  God  the  Ancient  of 
days,  whose  age  and  origin  cannot  be  compre- 
hended ;  for  He  alone  was  from  generations, 
and  He  will  be  always  to  generations.^  But 
that  Christ,  after  His  passion  and  resurrection, 
was  about  to  ascend  to  God  the  Father,  David 
bore  witness  in  these  words  in  the  cixth  Psalm  :  ■" 
"  The  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  Thou  at  my 
right  hand,  until  I  make  Thine  enemies  Thy 
footstool."  Whom  could  this  prophet,  being 
himself  a  king,  call  his  Lord,  who  sat  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,  but  Christ  the  Son  of  God, 
who  is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  ?  And 
this  is  more  plainly  shown  by  Isaiah,"  when  he 
says  :  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  to  my  Lord 
Christ,  whose  right  hand  1  have  holden ;  I  will 
subdue  nations  before  Him,  and  will  break  the 
strength  of  kings.  I  will  open  before  Him 
gates,  and  the  cities  shall  not  be  closed.  I  will 
go  before  Thee,  and  will  make  the  mountains 
level ;  and  I  will  break  in  pieces  the  gates  of 
brass,  and  shatter  the  bars  of  iron ;  and  I  will 
give  Thee  the  hidden  and  invisible  treasures, 
that  Thou  mayest  know  that  I  am  the  Lord 
God,  which  call  Thee  by  Thy  name,  the  God  of 
Israel."  Lastly,  on  account  of  the  goodness  and 
faithfulness  which  He  displayed  towards  God  on 
earth,  there  was  given  to  Him  a  kingdom,  and 
glory,  and  dominion  ;  and  all  people,  tribes,  and 
languages  shall  serve  Him  ;  and  His  dominion 
is  everlasting,  and  that  which  shall  never  pass 
away,  and  His  kingdom  shall  not  be  destroyed. 
And  this  is  understood  in  two  ways  :  that  even 
now  He  has  an  everlasting  dominion,  when  all 
nations  and  all  languages  adore  His  name,  con- 
fess His  majesty,  follow  His  teaching,  and  imi- 
tate His  goodness  :  He  has  power  and  glory,  in 
that  all  tribes  of  the  earth  obey  His  precepts. 
And  also,  when  He  shall  come  again  with  majesty 
and  glory  to  judge  every  soul,  and  to  restore 
the  righteous  to  life,  then  He  shall  truly  have  the 
government  of  the  whole  earth  :  then,  every  evil 
having  been  removed  from  the  affairs  of  men,  a 
golden  age  (as  the  poets  call  it),  that  is,  a  time 
of  righteousness  and  peace,  will  arise.  But  we 
will  speak  of  these  things  more  fully  in  the  last 
book,  when  we  shall  speak  of  His  second  advent ; 
now  let  us  treat  of  His  first  advent,  as  we  began. 

CHAP.   XIII. OF   JF.SUS,   GOD   AND    MAN  ;    AND   THE 

TESTIMONIES  OF  THE  PROPHETS  CONCERNING  HIM. 

Therefore  the  Most  High  God,  and  Parent 
of  all,  when  He  had  purposed  to  transfer '-  Llis 


9   Ps.  XC.  2. 

lo  Ps.  ex.  I. 

"  Isa.  xlv.  1-3.  The  quotation  is  from  the  Septiiairint.  It  ex- 
pressly refers  to  Cyrus,  whom  God  raised  up  to  accomplish  His  will; 
but  the  prophecy  may  have  a  further  reference  to  Christ,  as  is  here 
supposed. 

'-  From  the  Israelites,  to  whom  He  first  revealed  Himself,  to  the 
Gentile  world  at  large. 


I  12 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  IV. 


religion,  sent  from  heaven  a  teacher  of  right- 
eousness, that  in  Him  or  through  Him  He  might 
give  a  new  law  to  new  worshippers  ;  not  as  He 
had  before  done,  by  the  instrumentality  of  man. 
Nevertheless  it  was  His  pleasure  that  He  should 
be  born  as  a  man,  that  in  all  things  He  might 
be  like  His  supreme  Father.  For  God  the 
Father  Flimself,  who  is  the  origin  and  source  of 
all  things,  inasmuch  as  He  is  without  parents,  is 
most  truly  named  by  Trismegistus  "  fatherless  " 
and  "  motherless,"  '  because  He  was  born  from 
no  one.  For  which  reason  it  was  befitting  that 
the  Son  also  should  be  twice  born,  that  He  also 
might  become  "  fatherless  "  and  "  motherless." 
For  in  His  first  nativity,  which  was  spiritual.  He 
was  "  motherless,"  because  He  was  begotten  by 
God  the  Father  alone,  without  the  office  of  a 
mother.  But  in  His  second,  which  was  in  the 
flesh.  He  was  born  of  a  virgin's  womb  without 
the  office  of  a  father,  that,  bearing  a  middle 
substance  between  God  and  man,  He  might  be 
able,  as  it  were,  to  take  by  the  hand  this  frail  and 
weak  nature  of  ours,  and  raise  it  to  immortality. 
He  became  both  the  Son  of  God  through  the 
Spirit,  and  the  Son  of  man  through  the  flesh,  — 
that  is,  both  God  and  man.  The  power  of  God 
was  displayed  in  Him,  from  the  works  which  He 
performed ;  the  frailty  of  the  man,  from  the 
passion  which  He  endured  :  on  what  account 
He  undertook  it  I  will  mention  a  little  later. 
In  the  meantime,  we  learn  from  the  predictions 
of  the  prophets  that  He  was  both  God  and  man 
—  composed  ^  of  both  natures.  Isaiah  testifies 
that  He  was  God  in  these  words  :  ^  "  Egypt  is 
wearied, ■♦  and  the  merchandise  of  Ethiopia,  and 
the  Sabaeans,  men  of  stature,  shall  come  over 
unto  Thee,  and  shall  be  Thy  servants  :  and  they 
shall  walk  behind  Thee  ;  in  chains  they  shall  fall 
down  unto  Thee,  and  shall  make  supplication 
unto  Thee,  Since  God  is  in  Thee,  and  there  is 
no  other  God  besides  Thee.  For  Thou  art  God, 
and  we  knew  Thee  not,  the  God  of  Israel,  the 
Saviour.  They  shall  all  be  confounded  and 
ashamed  who  oppose  Thee,  and  shall  fall  into 
confusion."  In  like  manner  the  prophet  Jere- 
miah 5  thus  speaks  :  "  This  is  our  God,  and  there 
shall  none  other  be  compared  unto  Him.  He 
hath  found  out  all  the  way  of  knowledge,  and 
hath  given  it  unto  Jacob  His  servant,  and  to 
Israel  His  beloved.  Afterward  He  was  seen 
upon  earth,  and  dwelt  among  men." 

1  ana.To>f>  and  a^jjTup.  See  Heb.  vii.  3,  where  Melchisedec  is  a 
type  of  Christ. 

2  Ex  utroque  genere  permistum.  Though  the  Godhead  and  the 
manhood  are  joined  together  in  one  person  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
there  is  no  confounding  of  the  two  natures:  each  is  whole  and  perfect. 
While  Nestorius  held  that  there  were  two  persons  in  Christ,  Euty- 
ches  fell  into  the  opposite  error,  and  taught  that  the  two  natures  were 
so  blended  together  as  to  form  one  mixed  nature.  The  expression  in 
the  text  is  not  very  clear. 

3  Isa.  xlv.  14-16. 

*  Fatigata  est  yEgyptus.     This  is  taken  from  the  Septuagint. 
S  This  quotation  is  from  the  apocryphal  book  of  Baruch  iii.  35-37, 
which  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as  the  book  of  Jeremiah  Baruch. 


David  also,  in  the  forty-fourth  Psalm  :  ^  "  Thy 
throne,  O  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever ;  a  sceptre 
of  righteousness  is  the  sceptre  of  Thy  kingdom. 
Thou  hast  loved  righteousness,  and  hated  wicked- 
ness ;  therefore  God,  Thy  God,  hath  anointed 
Thee  with  the  oil  of  gladness."  By  which  word 
he  also  shows  His  name,  since  (as  I  have  shown 
above)  He  was  called  Christ  from  His  anoint- 
ing. Then,  that  He  was  also  man,  Jeremiah 
teaches,  saying  :  7  "  And  He  is  a  man,  and  who 
hath  known  Him?"  Also  Isaiah  r'^  "And  God 
shall  send  to  them  a  man,  who  shall  save  them, 
shall  save  them  by  judging."  But  Moses  also, 
in  Numbers,''  thus  speaks  :  "  There  shall  arise  a 
star  out  of  Jacob,  and  a  man  '°  shall  spring  forth 
from  Israel."  On  which  account  the  Milesian 
Apollo,"  being  asked  whether  He  was  God  or 
man,  replied  in  this  manner :  "  He  was  mortal 
as  to  His  body,  being  wise  with  wondrous  works  ; 
but  being  taken  with  arms  under  Chaldean 
judges,  with  nails  and  the  cross  He  endured  a 
bitter  end."  In  the  first  verse  he  spoke  the 
truth,  but  he  skilfully  deceived  him  who  asked 
the  question,  who  was  entirely  ignorant  of  the 
mystery  of  the  truth.  For  he  appears  to  have 
denied  that  He  was  God.  But  when  he  acknowl- 
edges that  He  was  mortal  as  to  the  flesh,  which 
we  also  declare,  it  follows  that  as  to  the  spirit 
He  was  God,  which  we  affirm.  For  why  would 
it  have  been  necessary  to  make  mention  of  the 
flesh,  since  it  was  sufficient  to  say  that  He  was 
mortal?  But  being  pressed  by  the  truth,  he 
could  not  deny  the  real  state  of  the  case  ;  as 
that  which  he  says,  that  He  was  wise. 

What  do  you  reply  to  this,  Apollo?  If  he  is 
wise,  then  his  system  of  instruction  is  wisdom, 
and  no  other ;  and  they  are  wise  who  follow  it, 
and  no  others.  Why  then  are  we  commonly 
esteemed  as  foolish,  and  visionary,  and  senseless, 
who  follow  a  Master  who  is  wise  even  by  the 
confession  of  the  gods  themselves  ?  For  in  that 
he  said  that  He  wrought  wonderful  deeds,  by 
which  He  especially  claimed  faith  is  His  divinity, 
he  now  appears  to  assent  to  us,  when  he  says  the 
same  things  in  which  we  boast.  But,  however, 
he  recovers  himself,  and  again  has  recourse  to 
demoniacal  frauds.  For  when  he  had  been  com- 
pelled to  speak  the  truth,  he  now  appeared  to  be 
a  betrayer  of  the  gods  and  of  himself,  unless  he 
had,  by  a  deceptive  falsehood,  concealed  that 
which  the  truth  had  extorted  from  him.  He 
says,  therefore,  that  He  did  indeed  perform  won- 

6  Ps.  xlv.  6,  7. 

7  Jer.  xvii.  9.     The  passage  is  quoted  from  the  Septuagint. 
*  Isa.  xix.  20,  quoted  from  the  Septuagint. 

9  Num.  xxiv.  17.  The  well-known  prophecy  of  Balaam  is  here 
spoken  of  as  though  given  by  Moses,  who  only  records  it.  [In  an 
elucidation  touching  the  Sibyls,  I  shall  recur  to  the  case  of  Balaam.] 

'°  Exsurget  homo  ex  Israel.  This  is  taken  from  the  Septuagint, 
instead  of  the  ordinary  re.iding,  "  A  sceptre  shall  rise  out  of  Israel." 

"  [The  oracle  of  Apollo  Didymasus;  from  the  Milesian  temple 
burnt  by  Xerxes.  Readers  will  remember  the  humour  of  Arnobius 
about  these  divers  names,  vol.  vi.  p.  419,  this  series.] 


Chap.  XIV.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


1 1^^ 


derful  works,  yet  not  by  divine  power,  but  by 
magic.  What  wonder  if  Apollo  thus  persuaded 
men  ignorant  of  the  truth,  when  the  Jews  also, 
worshippers  (as  they  seemed  to  be)  of  the  Most 
High  God,  entertained  the  same  opinion,  though 
they  had  every  day  before  their  eyes  those  mira- 
cles which  the  prophets  had  foretold  to  them  as 
about  to  happen,  and  yet  they  could  not  be  in- 
duced by  the  contemplation  of  such  powers  to 
believe  that  He  whom  they  saw  was  God?  On 
this  account,  David,  whom  they  especially  read 
above  the  other  prophets,  in  the  twenty-seventh 
Psalm '  thus  condemns  them  :  "  Render  to  them 
their  desert,  because  they  regard  not  the  works 
of  the  Lord."  Both  David  himself  and  other 
prophets  announced  that  of  the  house  of  this 
very  David,  Christ  should  be  born  according  to 
the  flesh.  Thus  it  is  written  in  Isaiah  :  ^  "  And 
in  that  day  there  shall  be  a  root  of  Jesse,  and 
He  who  shall  arise  to  rule  over  the  nations,  in 
Him  shall  the  Gentiles  trust ;  and  His  rest  shall 
be  glorious."  And  in  another  place  :  ^  "  There 
shall  come  forth  a  rod  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse, 
and  a  blossom  ■♦  shall  grow  out  of  his  root ;  and 
the  Spirit  of  God  shall  rest  upon  Him,  the  spirit 
of  wisdom  and  understanding,  the  spirit  of  coun- 
sel and  of  might,  the  spirit  of  knowledge  and  of 
piety ;  and  He  shall  be  filled  5  with  the  spirit 
of  fear  of  the  Lord."  Now  Jesse  was  the  father 
of  David,  from  whose  root  he  foretold  that  a 
blossom  would  arise ;  namely  him  of  whom  the 
Sibyl  speaks,  "  A  pure  blossom  shall  spring 
forth." 

Also  in  the  second  book  of  Kings,  the  prophet 
Nathan  was  sent  to  David,  who  wished  to  build 
a  temple  for  God ;  and  this  was  the  word  of  the 
Lord  to  Nathan,  saying  :  ^  "Go  and  tell  my  ser- 
vant David,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Almighty,  Thou 
shalt  not  build  me  a  house  for  me  to  dwell  in  ; 
but  when  thy  days  be  fulfilled,  and  thou  shalt 
sleep  with  thy  fathers,  I  will  raise  up  thy  seed 
after  thee,  and  I  will  establish  His  kingdom. 
He  shall  build  me  a  house  for  my  name,  and  I 
will  set  up  His  throne  for  ever ;  and  I  will  be  to 
Him  for  a  father,  and  He  shall  be  to  me  for  a 
son ;  and  His  house  shall  be  established,''  and 
His  kingdom  for  ever."  But  the  reason  why 
the  Jews  did  not  understand  these  things  was 
this,  because  Solomon  the  son  of  David  built  a 
temple  for  God,  and  the  city  which  he  called 
from  his  own  name,  Jerusalem.^     Therefore  they 


'  Ps.  xxviii.  4,  5. 

^  Isa.  xi.  10. 

3  Isa.  xi.  I,  2. 

*  Flos.     Quoted  from  the  Septuagint,  a.v6o<;, 

5  Implcbit  eum  spiritus  timoris  Dei. 

^  2  Sam.  vii.  4,  5,  12-14,  16. 

^  Fidem  consequetiir,  following  the  Septuagint  ;rc(TTu)9)7<TeTai. 

'  Hierosolyma.  As  though  derived  from  itpov  and  'S.oKnixMv. 
But  Solom(m  was  not  the  founder  of  the  city.  The  name  is  probably 
derived  from  Salem,  of  which  city  Melchisedec  was  king.  Some  de- 
rive it  from  Jehus  (the  ancient  name  of  the  city)  and  Salem.  [See 
vol.  ii.  p.  107,  note  3,  this  series.] 


referred  the  predictions  of  the  prophets  to  him. 
Now  Solomon  received  the  government  of  the 
kingdom  from  his  father  himself.  But  the 
prophets  spoke  of  Him  who  was  then  born  after 
that  David  had  slept  with  his  fathers.  Besides, 
the  reign  of  Solomon  was  not  everlasting  ;  for  he 
reigned  forty  years.  In  the  next  place,  Solomon 
was  never  called  the  son  of  God,  but  the  son  of 
David  ;  and  the  house  which  he  built  was  not 
firmly  established,^  as  the  Church,  which  is  the 
true  temple  of  God,  which  does  not  consist  of 
walls,  but  of  the  heart '°  and  faith  of  the  men  who 
believe  on  Him,  and  are  called  faithful.  But 
that  temple  of  Solomon,  inasmuch  as  it  was  built 
by  the  hand,  fell  by  the  hand.  Lastly,  his  father, 
in  the  cxxvith  Psalm,  prophesied  in  this  manner 
respecting  the  works  of  his  son  :  "  "  Except  the 
Lord  build  the  house,  they  have  laboured  in  vain 
that  built  it ;  except  the  Lord  keep  the  city,  the 
watchman  hath  waked  but  in  vain." 


CH.\P.  XIV.  —  OF   THE   PRIESTHOOD  OF   JESUS   FORE- 
TOLD   BY    THE    PROPHETS. 

From  which  things  it  is  evident  that  all  the 
prophets  declared  concerning  Christ,  that  it 
should  come  to  pass  at  some  time,  that  being 
born  with  a  body '^  of  the  race  of  David,  He 
should  build  an  eternal  temple  in  honour  of  God, 
which  is  called  the  Church,  and  assemble  all 
nations  to  the  true  worship  of  God.  This  is  the 
faithful  house,  this  is  the  everlasting  temple  ;  and 
if  any  one  hath  not  sacrificed  in  this,  he  will 
not  have  the  reward  of  immortality.  And  since 
Christ  was  the  builder  of  this  great  and  eternal 
temple,  He  must  also  have  an  everlasting  priest- 
hood in  it ;  and  there  can  be  no  approach  to  the 
shrine  of  the  temple,  and  to  the  sight  of  God,  ex- 
cept through  Him  who  built  the  temple.  David 
in  the  cixth  Psalm  teaches  the  same,  saying  :  '^ 
"  Before  the  morning-star  I  begat  Thee.  The 
Lord  hath  sworn,  and  will  not  repent ;  Thou  art 
a  priest  for  ever,  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec." 
Also  in  the  first  book  of  Kings  :  '■»  "And  I  will 
raise  me  up  a  faithful  Priest,  who  shall  do  all 
things  that  are  in  mine  heart ;  and  I  will  build 
him  a  sure  's  house ;  and  he  shall  walk  in  my 
sight  '^  all  his  days."  But  who  this  was  about  to 
be,  to  whom  God  promised  an  everlasting  priest- 
hood, Zechariah  most  plainly  teaches,  even  men- 
tioning His  name  :  '^  "And  the  Lord  (jod  showed 


9  Non  est  fidem  consecuta,  as  above. 

'°  Thus  Peter  speaks,  i  Ep.  ii.  5,  "  Ye  are  built  up  a  spiritual 
house." 

"  Ps.  cxxvii.  I. 

'2  Corporaliter. 

'J  Ps.  ex.  3,  4,  quoted  from  the  Septuagint.  With  reference  to 
this  priesthood,  see  Hcb.  v. 

'■*  I  Sam.  ii.  35. 

'5  Fidelem,  i.e.,  firm  and  stedfast. 

'f"  In  conspectu  meo.  The  Septuagint,  ei'wirior  ^pi<rToO  fiou;  and 
so  the  English  authorized  version,  "  before  my  anointed." 

^^  Zecii.  iii.  i-S. 


114 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  IV. 


me  Jesus  '  the  great  Priest  standing  before  the 
face  of  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  and  the  adversary  ^ 
was  standing  at  His  right  hand  to  resist  Him. 
And  the  Lord  said  unto  the  adversary,  The  Lord 
who  hath  chosen  Jerusalem  rebuke  thee  ;  and 
lo,  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire.  And  Jesus 
was  clothed  with  filthy  garments,  and  He  was 
standing  before  the  face  of  the  angel.  And  He 
answered  and  spake  unto  those  that  stood  around 
before  His  face,  saying,  Take  away  the  filthy  gar- 
ments from  Him,  and  clothe  Him  with  a  flowing  ^ 
garment,  and  place  a  fair  mitre  ■♦  upon  His  head  ; 
and  they  clothed  Him  with  a  garment,  and  placed 
a  fair  mitre  upon  His  head.  And  the  angel  of 
the  Lord  stood,  and  protested,  saying  to  Jesus  : 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  If  Thou  wilt  walk 
in  my  ways,  and  keep  my  precepts,  Thou  shalt 
judge  my  house,  and  I  will  give  Thee  those  that 
may  walk  with  Thee  in  the  midst  of  these  that 
stand  by.  Hear,  therefore,  O  Jesus,  Thou  great 
Priest." 

Who,  therefore,  would  not  believe  that  the 
Jews  were  then  deprived  of  understanding,  who, 
when  they  read  and  heard  these  things,  laid  im- 
pious hands  upon  their  God?  But  from  the 
time  in  which  Zechariah  lived,  until  the  fifteenth 
year  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius  Csesar,  in  which 
Christ  was  crucified,  nearly  five  hundred  years 
are  reckoned  ;  since  he  flourished  in  the  time  of 
Darius  and  Alexander,5  who  lived  not  long  after 
the  banishment  of  Tarquinius  Superbus.  But 
they  were  again  misled  and  deceived  in  the  same 
manner,  in  supposing  that  these  things  were 
spoken  concerning  Jesus  ^  the  son  of  Nave,  who 
was  the  successor  of  Moses,  or  concerning  Jesus 
the  high  priest  the  son  of  Josedech  ;  to  whom 
none  of  those  things  which  the  prophet  related 
was  suited.  For  they  were  never  clothed  in 
filthy  garments,  since  one  of  them  was  a  most 
powerful  prince,  and  the  other  high  priest ;  or 
suffered  any  adversity,  so  that  they  should  be 
regarded  as  a  brand  plucked  from  the  fire  :  nor 
did  they  ever  stand  in  the  presence  of  God  and 
the  angels  ;  nor  did  the  prophet  speak  of  the 
past  so  much  as  of  the  future.  He  spoke, 
therefore,  of  Jesus  the  Son  of  God,  to  show  that 
He  would  first  come  in  humility  and  in  the  flesh. 
For  this  is  the  filthy  garment,  that  He  might  pre- 
pare a  temple  for  God,  and  might  be  scorched  7 


'  The  authorized  version  reads  Joshua,  which  has  the  same  mean- 
ing with  Jesus.  See  Heb.  iv.  8.  [Compare  Justin,  vol.  i.  note  4, 
p.  227.1 

2  Diabohis,  i.e.,  the  calumniator.  To  stand  on  the  right  hand  is 
to  accuse  with  authority.     See  Ps.  cix.  6. 

3  Tunica  talaris,  a  garment  reacliing  to  the  ankles;  in  Greek, 
jroSiipT??. 

*  Cidarim;  an  Eastern  word  denoting  a  head-dress  worn  by  the 
Persian  kings,  or,  as  in  this  passage,  the  mitre  of  the  Jewish  high  priest, 

5  Not  the  Great,  but  the  tenth,  a  much  earlier  king  of  .Macedon. 

'i.e.,  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  as  he  is  generally  called.  [Justin, 
vol.  i.  pp.  174,  266.] 

'  -Ambureretur.  The  word  is  applied  to  anything  which  is  partly 
burned,  burnt  around,  scorched.  Hence  Cicero  jestingly  speaks  of 
Munatius  Plancus.  at  whose  instigation  the  people  set  fire  lo  the 
senate-house,  as  tribunus  ambustus.     ac.,pro  Milone. 


as  a  brand  with  fire  —  that  is,  might  endure  tor- 
tures from  men,  and  at  last  be  extinguished.  For  a 
half-burnt  brand  drawn  forth  from  the  hearth  and 
extinguished,  is  commonly  so  called.**  But  in 
what  manner  and  with  what  commands  He  was 
sent  by  God  to  the  earth,  the  Spirit  of  God  de- 
clared through  the  prophet,  teaching  us  that  when 
He  had  faithfully  and  uniformly  fulfilled  the  \W11 
of  His  supreme  Father,  He  should  receive  judg- 
ment ^  and  an  everlasting  dominion.  If,  He 
says.  Thou  wilt  walk  in  my  ways,  and  keep  my 
precepts,  then  Thou  shalt  judge  my  house.  What 
these  ways  of  God  were,  and  what  His  precepts, 
is  neither  doubtful  nor  obscure.  For  God,  when 
He  saw  that  wickedness  and  the  worship  of  false 
gods  had  so  prevailed  throughout  the  world,  that 
His  name  had  now  also  been  taken  away  from 
the  memory  of  men  (since  even  the  Jews,  who 
alone  had  been  entrusted  with  the  secret  of  God, 
had  deserted  the  living  God,  and,  ensared  by  the 
deceits  of  demons,  had  gone  astray,  and  turned 
aside  to  the  worship  of  images,  and  when  re- 
buked by  the  prophets  did  not  choose  to  return 
to  God),  He  sent  His  Son'°  as  an  ambassador  to 
men,  that  He  might  turn  them  from  their  impious 
and  vain  worship  to  the  knowledge  and  worship 
of  the  true  God ;  and  also  that  He  might  turn 
their  minds  from  foolishness  to  wisdom,  and  from 
wickedness  to  deeds  of  righteousness.  These 
are  the  ways  of  God,  in  which  He  enjoined  Him 
to  walk.  These  are  the  precepts  which  He  or- 
dered to  be  observed.  But  He  exhibited  faith 
towards  Crod.  For  He  taught  that  there  is  but 
one  God,  and  that  He  alone  ought  to  be  wor- 
shipped. Nor  did  He  at  any  time  say  that  He 
Himself  was  God  ;  for  He  would  not  have  main- 
tained His  faithfulness,  if,  when  sent  to  abolish 
the  false  gods,  and  to  assert  the  existence  of  the 
one  God,  He  had  introduced  another  besides 
that  one.  This  would  have  been  not  to  proclaim 
one  God,  nor  to  do  the  work  of  Him  who  sent 
Him,  but  to  discharge  a  peculiar  office  for  Him- 
self, and  to  separate  Himself  from  Him  whom 
He  came  to  reveal.  On  which  account,  because 
He  was  so  faithful,  because  He  arrogated  nothing 
at  all  to  Himself,  that  He  might  fulfil  the  com- 
mands of  Him  who  sent  Him,  He  received  the 
dignity  of  everlasting  Priest,  and  the  honour  of 
supreme  King,  and  the  authority  of  Judge,  and 
the  name  of  God. 

CHAP.  XV.  —  OF  THE  LIFE  AND  MIRACLES  OF  JESUS, 
AND  TESTIMONIES  CONCERNING  THEM. 

Having  spoken  of  the  second  nativity,  in  which 
He  showed  Himself  in  the  flesh  to  men,  let  us 
come  to  those  wonderful  works,  on  account  of 


'  i.e.,  the  word  titto,  "  a  firebrand,"  is  thus  used. 
9  i.e.,  authority  to  judge.     [Ps.  Ixxii.  i  and  John  v.  22.] 
'°  After  these  words  some  editions,  "  principem  angelorum,"  the 
chief  of  angels. 


\ 


Chap.  XV.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


115 


which,  though  they  were  signs  of  heavenly  power, 
the  Jews  esteemed  Him  a  magician.  When  He 
first  began  to  reach  maturity '  He  was  baptized 
by  the  prophet  John  in  the  river  Jordan,  that  He 
might  wash  ^  away  in  the  spiritual  laver  not  His 
own  sins,  for  it  is  evident  that  He  had  none,  but 
those  of  the  flesh, ^  which  He  bare  ;  that  as  He 
saved  the  Jews  by  undergoing  circumcision,  so 
He  might  save  the  Gentiles  also  by  baptism  — 
that  is,  by  the  pouring  forth  ■♦  of  the  purifying 
dew.  Then  a  voice  from  heaven  was  heard  : 
"Thou  art  my  Son,  to-day  have  I  begotten 
Thee."  5  Which  voice  is  found  to  have  been 
foretold  by  David.  And  the  Spirit  of  God  de- 
scended upon  Him,  formed  after  the  appearance 
of  a  white  dove.''  From  that  time  He  began  to 
perform  the  greatest  miracles,  not  by  magical 
tricks,  which  display  nothing  true  and  substantial, 
but  by  heavenly  strength  and  power,  w^hich  were 
foretold  even  long  ago  by  the  prophets  who  an- 
nounced Him  ;  which  works  are  so  many,  that  a 
single  book  is  not  sufficient  to  comprise  them  all. 
I  will  therefore  enumerate  them  briefly  and  gen- 
erally, without  any  designation  of  persons  and 
places,  that  I  may  be  able  to  come  to  the  setting 
forth  of  His  passion  and  cross,  to  which  my  dis- 
course has  long  been  hastening.  His  powers 
were  those  which  Apollo  called  wonderful :  7  that 
wherever  He  journeyed,  by  a  single  word,  and  in 
a  single  moment.  He  healed  the  sick  and  infirm, 
and  those  afflicted  with  every  kind  of  disease  : 
so  that  those  who  were  deprived  of  the  use  of 
all  their  limbs,  having  suddenly  received  power, 
were  strengthened,  and  themselves  carried  their 
couches,  on  which  they  had  a  little  time  before 
been  carried.  But  to  the  lame,  and  to  those 
afflicted  with  some  defect  ^  of  the  feet.  He  not 
only  gave  the  power  of  walking,  but  also  of  run- 
ning. Then,  also,  if  any  had  their  eyes  blinded 
in  the  deepest  darkness,  He  restored  them  to 
their  former  sight.  He  also  loosened  the  tongues 
of  the  dumb,  so  that  ^  they  discoursed  and  spake 
eloquently.  He  also  opened  the  ears  of  the 
deaf,  and  caused  them  to  hear ; '°  He  cleansed 
the  polluted  and  the  blemished."  And  He  per- 
formed all  these  things  not  by  His  hands,  or  the 
application  of  any  remedy,'^  but  by  His  word 
and  command,  as  also  the  Sil)yl  had  foretold  : 


*  Cum  primus  coepit  adolescere. 

2  Abolcret. 

3  Not  of  His  own  flesh,  but  of  himi.in  n.iturc.  Our  Lord  Him- 
self gives  a  better  expl.Tiiatioii  of  His  baptism,  in  His  reply  to  the 
Baptist,  who  at  first  forbade  him:  "  Siiflcr  it  to  be  so  now,  for  thus  it 
becometh  us  to  fulfil  all  righteousness  "  (Matt.  iii.  i5>. 

^  Perfiisione. 

S  Compare  Matt.  iii.  17  with  Ps.  ii.  7. 

*  [  "  A  brilliant  dove"  is  the  idea.  Ps.  Ixviii.  13.  Comp.  Justin, 
vol.  i.  note  6,  p.  243.] 

'  Portentificas. 

*  Pedum  vitio  afflictos. 

9  In  cloquium  sermoncmque  solvebat. 
'°  Insinuabat  auditinn. 
"  Asperses  maculis,  i.e.,  lepers. 

'-  E.\cept  in  the  case  of  the  blind  man,  whose  eyes  He  anointed 
with  clay.     John  ix.  9. 


"  Doing  all  things  by  His  word,  and  healing  every 
disease." 

Nor,  indeed,  is  it  wonderful  that  He  did  won- 
derful things  by  His  word,  since  He  Himself  was 
the  Word  of  God,  relying  upon  heavenly  strength 
and  power.  Nor  was  it  enough  that  He  gave 
strength  to  the  feeble,  soundness  of  body  to  the 
maimed,  health  to  the  sick  and  languishing,  un- 
less He  also  raised  the  dead,  as  it  were  unbound 
from  sleep,  and  recalled  them  to  life. 

And  the  Jews,  then,  when  they  saw  these 
things,  contended  that  they  were  done  by  demo- 
niacal power,  although  it  was  contained  in  their 
secret  writings  that  aU  things  should  thus  come 
to  pass  as  they  did.  They  read  indeed  the  words 
of  other  prophets,  and  of  Isaiah, '3  saying  :  "  Be 
strong,  ye  hands  that  are  relaxed  ;  and  ye  weak 
knees,  be  comforted.  Ye  who  are  of  a  fearful''* 
heart,  fear  not,  be  not  afraid  :  our  Lord  shall 
execute  judgment ;  He  Himself  shall  come  and 
save  us.  Then  shall  the  eyes  of  the  blind  be 
opened,  and  the  ears  of  the  deaf  shall  hear : 
then  shall  the  lame  man  leap  as  a  deer,  and  the 
tongue  of  the  dumb  speak  plainly  :  '5  for  in  the 
wilderness  water  hath  broken  forth,  and  a  stream 
in  the  thirsty  land."  But  the  Sibyl  also  foretold 
the  same  things  in  these  verses  :  — 

"  And  there  shall  be  a  rising  again  of  the  dead  ;  and  the 
course  of  the  lame  shall  be  swift,  and  the  deaf 
shall  hear,  and  the  blind  shall  see,  the  dumb  shall 
speak." 

On  account  of  these  powers  and  divine  works 
wrought  by  Him  when  a  great  multitude  followed 
Him  of  the  maimed,  or  sick,  or  of  those  who  de- 
sired to  present  their  sick  to  be  healed.  He  went 
up  into  a  desert  mountain  to  pray  there.  And 
when  He  had  tarried  there  three  days,  and  the 
people  were  suffering  from  hunger,  He  called 
His  disciples,  and  asked  what  quantity  of  food  '^ 
they  had  with  them.  But  they  said  that  they 
had  five  loaves  and  two  fishes  in  a  wallet.  Then 
He  commanded  that  these  should  be  brought 
forward,  and  that  the  multitude,  distributed  by 
fifties,  should  recline  (?n  the  ground.  When  the 
disciples  did  this.  He  Himself  broke  the  bread 
in  pieces,  and  divided  the  flesh  of  the  fishes,  nnd 
in  His  hands  both  of  them  were  increa.sed.  And 
when  He  had  ordered  the  disciples  to  set  them 
before  the  people,  five  thousand  men  were  satis- 
fied, and  moreover  twelve  baskets  '^  were  filled 
from  the  fragments  which  remained.  What  can 
be  more  wonderful,  either  in  narration  or  in  ac- 


"  Tsa.  XXXV.  3-6.  The  passage  is  quoted  from  the  Septuagint. 
The  authorized  English  version  follows  tlie  Hebrew,  "  Strengthen  ye 
the  weak  hands,"  etc. 

'^  Piisilli  .aninii. 

's  Pima  erit,  "  shall  be  intelligible." 

'*>  Quantos  secum  cibos  gestarent.  See  Matt,  xiv.;  Mark  vi. ; 
Luke  ix.;  John  vi. 

■'  Cophuii.  This  miracle  is  always  distinguished  from  the  feeding 
of  the  four  thousand  by  the  use  of  this  word.  Thus  Juvenal:  "Ju- 
duiis,  quorum  cophinus,  fuenumque  supcUex." 


ii6 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  IV. 


tion  ?  But  the  Sibyl  had  before  foretold  that  it 
would  take  place,  whose  verses  are  related  to 
this  effect :  — 

"  With  five  loaves  at  the  same  time,  and  with  two  fishes, 
He  shall  satisfy  five  thousand  men  in  the  wilderness; 
And  afterwards  taking  all  the  fragments  that  remain, 
He  shall  fill  twelve  baskets  to  the  hope  of  many." 

I  ask,  therefore,  what  the  art  of  magic  could 
have  contrived  in  this  case,  the  skill  of  which  is 
of  avail  for  nothing  else  than  for  deceiving  '  the 
eyes  ?  He  also,  when  He  was  about  to  retire  to 
a  mountain,  as  He  was  wont,  for  the  sake  of 
prayer,  directed  His  disciples  to  take  a  small  ship 
and  go  before  Him.  But  they,  setting  out  when 
evening  was  now  coming  on,  began  to  be  dis- 
tressed ^  through  a  contrary  wind.  And  when 
they  were  now  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,^  then,  set- 
ting His  feet  on  the  sea,-*  He  came  up  to  them, 
walking  as  though  on  the  solid  ground, 5  not  as 
the  poets  fable  Orion  walking  on  the  sea,  who, 
while  a  part  of  his  body  was  sunk  in  the  water, 

"  With  his  shoulder  rises  above  the  waves."'' 

And  again,  when  He  had  gone  to  sleep  in  the 
ship,  and  the  wind  had  begun  to  rage,  even  to 
the  extremity  of  danger,  being  aroused  from 
sleep,  He  immediately  ordered  the  wind  to  be 
silent ;  and  the  waves,  which  were  borne  with 
great  violence,  were  still,  and  immediately  at 
His  word  there  followed  a  calm. 

But  perhaps  the  sacred  writings  ^  speak  falsely, 
when  they  teach  that  there  was  such  power  in 
Him,  that  by  His  command  He  compelled  the 
winds  to  obey,  the  seas  to  serve  Him,  diseases 
to  depart,  the  dead  to  be  submissive.  Why 
should  I  say  that  the  Sibyls  before  taught  the 
same  things  in  their  verses?  one  of  whom, 
already  mentioned,  thus  speaks  :  — 

"  He  shall  still  the  winds  by  His  word,  and  calm  the 
sea 
As  it  rages,  treading  with  feet  of  peace  and  in  faith." 

And  again  another,  which  says  :  — 

"  He  shall  walk  on  the  waves,  He  shall  release  men 
from  disease. 

He  shall  raise  the  dead,  and  drive  away  many  pains; 

And  from  the  bread  of  one  wallet  there  shall  be  a  sat- 
isfying of  men." 

Some,  refuted  by  these  testimonies,  are  accus- 
tomed to  have  recourse  to  the  assertion  that 
these  poems  were  not  by  the  Sibyls,  but  made 
up  and  composed  by  our  own  writers.  But  he 
will  assuredly  not  think  this  who  has  read  Cicero,*^ 


'  Ad  circumscribendos  oculos.     Cicero  also  uses  the  word  ' 
cumscriptio  "  to  denote  "  fraud  and  deceit." 
^  Laborare. 
3  Pedibus  mare  ingressus. 

*  Matt.  xiv.  24 

5  In  solido.     So  Virg.,  Georg.,  ii.  231 :  — 

"  Alteque  jubebis 

In  solido  puteum  demitti." 

*  Virg.,  Mn.,  x.  765. 

'Matt,  viii.;   Markiv.;   Luke  viii. 

*  Cicero,  De  Natura  Deorum,  ii. 


and  Varro,  and  other  ancient  writers,  who  make 
mention  of  the  Erythraean  and  the  other  Sibyls, 
from  whose  books  we  bring  forward  these  ex- 
amples ;  and  these  authors  died  before  the  birth 
of  Christ  according  to  the  flesh.  But  I  do  not 
doubt  that  these  poems  were  in  former  times  re- 
garded as  ravings,  since  no  one  then  understood 
them.  For  they  announced  some  marvellous 
wonders,  of  which  neither  the  manner,  nor  the 
time,  nor  the  author  was  signified.  Lastly,  the 
Erythraean  Sibyl  says  that  it  would  come  to  pass 
that  she  would  be  called  mad  and  deceitful. 
But  assuredly 

"  They  will  say  that  the  Sibyl 
Is  mad,  and  deceitful :  but  when  all  things  shall  come 

to  pass, 
Then  ye  will  remember  me;  and  no  one  will  any  longer 
Say  that  I,  the  prophetess  of  the  great  God,  am  mad." 

Therefore  they  were  ^  neglected  for  many  ages  ; 
but  they  received  attention  after  the  nativity  and 
passion  of  Christ  had  revealed  secret  things. 
Thus  it  was  also  with  the  utterances  of  the 
prophets,  which  were  read  by  the  people  of  the 
Jews  for  fifteen  hundred  years  and  more,  but  yet 
were  not  understood  until  after  Christ  had  ex- 
plained '°  them  both  by  His  word  and  by  His 
works.  For  the  prophets  spoke  of  Him  ;  nor 
could  the  things  which  they  said  have  been  in 
any  way  understood,  unless  they  had  been  alto- 
gether fulfilled. 

CHAP.    XVI. OF   THE    PASSION    OF    JESUS    CHRIST  ; 

TH.'^T    IT   WAS    FORETOLD. 

I  come  now  to  the  passion  itself,  which  is 
often  cast  in  our  teeth  as  a  reproach  :  "  that  we 
worship  a  man,  and  one  who  was  visited  and 
tormented  with  remarkable  punishment  :  that  I 
may  show  that  this  very  passion  was  undergone 
by  Him  in  accordance  with  a  great  and  divine 
plan,  and  that  goodness  and  truth  and  wisdom 
are  contained  in  it  alone.  For  if  He  had  been 
most  happy  on  the  earth,  and  had  reigned 
through  all  His  life  in  the  greatest  prosperity,  no 
wise  man  would  either  have  believed  Him  to  be 
a  God,  or  judged  Him  worthy  of  divine  honour  : 
which  is  the  case  with  those  who  are  destitute  of 
true  divinity,  who  not  only  look  up  '^  to  perish- 
able riches,  and  frail  power,  and  the  advantages 
arising  from  the  benefit  of  another,  but  even 
consecrate  them,  and  knowingly  do  service  to 
the  memory  of  tlie  dead,  worshipping  fortune 
when  it  is  now  extinguished,  which  the  wise 
never  regarded  as  an  object  of  worship  even 
when  alive  and  present  with  them.  For  nothing 
among  earthly  things  can  be  venerable  and  wor- 
thy of  heaven  ;  but  it  is  virtue  alone,  and  justice 

9  Jacuerunt.     [Elucidation  II.] 
'°  Interpretatus  est. 

"  The  pagans  upbraided  Christians,  that  they  worshipped  a  man 
who  was  put  to  death  as  a  slave. 

■2  Suspiciunt,  "  view  with  admiration." 


Chap.  XVI.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


117 


alone,  which  can  be  judged  a  true,  and  heavenly, 
and  perpetual  good,  because  it  is  neither  given 
to  any  one,  nor  taken  away.  And  since  Christ 
came  upon  earth,  supplied  with  virtue  and  right- 
eousness, yea  rather,  since  He  Himself  is  virtue, 
and  Himself  righteousness.  He  descended  that 
He  might  teach  it  and  mould  the  character  of 
man.  And  having  performed  this  office  and  em- 
bassy from  God,  on  account  of  this  very  virtue 
which  He  at  once  taught  and  practised.  He  de- 
served, and  was  able,  to  be  believed  a  God  by 
all  nations.  Therefore,  when  a  great  multitude 
from  time  to  time  flocked  to  Him,  either  on 
account  of  the  righteousness  which  He  taught  or 
on  account  of  the  miracles  which  He  worked, 
and  heard  His  precepts,  and  believed  that  He 
was  sent  by  God,  and  that  He  was  the  Son  of 
God,  then  the  rulers  and  priests  of  the  Jews,  ex- 
cited with  anger  because  they  were  rebuked  by 
Him  as  sinners,  and  perverted  by  envy,  because, 
while  the  multitude  flocked  to  Him,  they  saw 
themselves  despised  and  deserted,  and  (that 
which  was  the  crowning  point  of  their  guilt) 
blinded  by  folly  and  error,  and  unmindful  of  the 
instructors  sent  from  heaven,  and  of  the  prophets, 
they  caballed  against  Him,  and  conceived  the 
impious  design  of  putting  Him  to  death,  and 
torturing  Him  :  of  which  the  prophets  had  long 
before  written. 

For  both  David,  in  the  beginning  of  his 
Psalms,  foreseeing  in  spirit  what  a  crime  they 
were  about  to  commit,  says,'  "  Blessed  is  the 
man  who  hath  not  walked  in  the  way  of  the  un- 
godly ;  "  and  Solomon  in  the  book  of  Wisdom 
used  these  words  :  -  "  Let  us  defraud  the  right- 
eous, for  he  is  unpleasant  to  us,  and  upbraideth 
us  with  our  offences  against  the  law.  He  mak- 
eth  his  boast  that  he  has  the  knowledge  of  God  ; 
and  he  calleth  himself  the  Son  of  God.  He  is 
made  to  reprove  ^  our  thoughts  :  it  grieveth  us 
even  to  look  upon  him  :  for  his  life  is  not  like 
the  life  of  others ;  his  ways  are  of  another  fash- 
ion.* We  are  counted  by  him  as  triflers,'  he 
withdraweth  himself  from  our  ways  as  from  filthi- 
ness ;  he  commendeth  greatly  ^  the  latter  end 
of  the  just,  and  boasteth  that  he  has  God  for 
his  Father.  Let  us  see,  therefore,  if  his  words 
be  true  ;  let  us  prove  what  end  ^  he  shall  have  ; 
let  us  examine  him  with  rebukes  and  torments, 
that  we  may  know  his  meekness,'''  and  prove  his 
patience ;  let  us  condemn  him  to  a  shameful 
death.  Such  things  have  they  imagined,  and 
have    gone    astray.      For  their   own    folly  hath 


'  Ps,  i.  T. 
^  Wisd.  ii.  12-22. 

3  In  traductionem  cogitationum  nostranim.     Traductio  is  some- 
times used,  as  here,  to  denote  exposure  to  ignominy. 
■♦  Immutatae  sunt. 
5   Nugaces.     In  the  Greek  it  is  el<;  <(i|35t)Ao>',  as  a  counterfeit. 

*  Pra;fert.     The  (Ireek  has  /Aaica/Ji^ei,  "  deems  happy." 
'  Qua;  venture  sunt  illi. 

*  Keverentiam. 


blinded  them,  and  they  do  not  understand  the 
mysteries  9  of  God."  Does  he  not  describe  that 
impious  design  entered  into  by  the  wicked 
against  God,  so  that  he  clearly  appears  to  have 
been  present  ?  But  from  Solomon,  who  foretold 
these  things,  to  the  time  of  their  accomplish- 
ment, ten  hundred  and  ten  years  intervened. 
We  feign  nothing  ;  we  add  nothing.  They  who 
performed  the  actions  had  these  accounts  ;  they, 
against  whom  these  things  were  spoken,  read 
them.  But  even  now  the  inheritors  of  their 
name  and  guilt  have  these  accounts,  and  in  their 
daily  readings  re-echo  their  own  condemnation 
as  foretold  by  the  voice  of  the  prophets  ;  nor  do 
they  ever  admit  them  into  their  heart,  which  is 
also  itself  a  part  of  their  condemnation.  The 
Jews,  therefore,  being  often  reproved  by  Christ, 
who  uj)braided  them  with  their  sins  and  iniqui- 
ties, and  being  almost  deserted  by  the  people, 
were  stirred  up  to  put  Him  to  death. 

Now  His  humility  emboldened  them  to  this 
deed.  For  when  they  read  with  what  great 
power  and  glory  the  Son  of  God  was  about  to 
descend  from  heaven,  but  on  the  other  hand 
saw  Jesus  humble,  peaceful,  of  low  condition,'" 
without  comeliness,  they  did  not  believe  that  He 
was  the  Son  of  God,  being  ignorant  that  two  ad- 
vents on  His  part  were  foretold  by  the  prophets  : 
the  first,  obscure  in  humility  of  the  flesh  ;  the 
other,  manifest  in  the  power  of  His  majesty. 
Of  the  first  David  thus  speaks  in  the  seventy- 
first  Psalm  :  "  "  He  shall  descend  as  rain  upon  a 
fleece  ;  and  in  His  days  shall  righteousness  spring 
forth,  and  abundance  of  peace,  as  long  as  the 
moon  is  lifted  up."  For  as  rain,  if  it  descends 
upon  a  fleece,  cannot  be  perceived,  because  it 
makes  no  sound  ;  so  he  said  that  Christ  would 
come  to  the  earth  without  exciting  the  notice  '^ 
of  any,  that  He  might  teach  righteousness  and 
peace.  Isaiah  also  thus  spoke  :  '^  "  Lord,  who 
hath  believed  our  report  ?  and  to  whom  is  the 
arm  of  the  Lord  revealed  ?  We  made  proclama- 
tion '■♦  before  Him  as  children,  and  as  a  root  in 
a  thirsty  land  :  He  has  no  form  nor  glory  ;  and 
we  saw  Him,  and  He  had  no  form  nor  comeli- 
ness. But  His  form  was  without  honour,  and 
defective  beyond  the  rest  of  men.  He  is  a  man 
acquainted'^  with  grief,  and  knowing  how  to  en- 
dure infirmity,  because  He  turned  '^  His  face 
away  from  us ;  and  He  was  not  esteemed.     He 


9  Sacramenta  Dei. 

'°  Sordidum. 

"  Ps.  Ixxii.  6,  7,  quoted  from  the  Septuagint. 

'^  Sine  cujusiiuam  suspicione. 

'3  Isa.  liii.  1-6. 

■''  Annuiitiavimus  coram  ipso  sicut  pueri;  and  so  the  Septuagint, 
ai'riyyei\aiiev  h'dvTtov  avTOv  lu?  irmSiot'.  It  is  most  difficult  to  .IC- 
count  for  this  remarkable  translation.  The  meaning  of  the  passage 
is  plain,  that  the  Messiah  would  spring  from  an  obscure  source.  [Elu- 
cidmion  III.] 

'5   Homo  in  plaga  positus.    The  Septuagint,  ai-Spton-os  cV  ttAi^i;  iov. 

'*  Aversus  est.  So  also  the  Septuagint,  rmea-TpaiTTai.  to  npoa^MWOv 
ai'ToO.  Some  have  supposed  that  there  is  a  reference  to  lepers,  who 
were  compelled  to  cover  their  faces. 


ii8 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  IV. 


carries  our  sins,  and  He  endures  pain  for  us  : 
and  we  thought  that  He  Himself '  was  in  pain, 
and  grief,  and  vexation.  But  He  was  wounded 
for  our  transgressions,  He  was  bruised  ^  for  our 
offences  ;  the  chastisement  ^  of  our  peace  was 
upon  Him,  by  His  bruises  •*  we  are  healed.  All 
we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray,  and  God  hath 
delivered  Him  up  for  our  sins."  And  in  the 
same  manner  the  Sibyl  spoke :  "  Though  an 
object  of  pity,  dishonoured,  without  form.  He 
will  give  hope  to  those  who  are  objects  of  pity." 
On  account  of  this  humility  they  did  not  recog- 
nise their  God,  and  entered  into  the  detestable 
design  of  depriving  Him  of  life,  who  had  come 
to  give  them  life. 

CHAP.     XVII.  OF     THE     SUPERSTITIONS      OF     THE 

JEWS,    AND   THEIR    HATRED    AGAINST    JESUS. 

But  they  alleged  other  causes  for  their  anger 
and  envy,  which  they  bore  shut  up  5  within  in  their 
hearts  —  namely,  that  He  destroyed  the  obliga- 
tion ^  of  the  law  given  by  Moses ;  that  is,  that 
He  did  not  rest  ^  on  the  Sabbath,  but  laboured 
for  the  good  ^  of  men  ;  that  He  abolished  cir- 
cumcision ;  that  He  took  away  the  necessity  of 
abstaining  from  the  flesh  of  swine  ;  ^  —  in  which 
things  the  mysteries  of  the  Jewish  religion  con- 
sist. On  this  account,  therefore,  the  rest  of  the 
people,  who  had  not  yet  withdrawn  '°  to  Christ, 
were  incited  by  the  priests  to  regard  Him  as  im- 
pious, because  He  destroyed  the  obligation  of 
the  law  of  God,  though  He  did  this  not  by  His 
own  judgment,  but  according  to  the  will  of  God,, 
and  after  the  predictions  of  the  prophets.  For 
Micah  announced  that  He  would  give  a  new  law, 
in  these  terms  :  "  "The  law  shall  go  forth  of  Zion, 
and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem.  And 
He  shall  judge  among  many  people,  and  rebuke 
strong  nations."  '^  For  the  former  law,  which 
was  given  by  Moses,  was  not  given  on  Mount 
Zion,  but  on  Mount  Horeb ;  '3  and  the  Sibyl 
shows  that  it  would  come  to  pass  that  this  law 
would  be  destroyed  by  the  Son  of  God  :  — 


■  i.e.,  for  Himself,  as  though  He  were  bearing  the  punishment  of 
His  own  sins. 

2  Infirmatus  est. 

3  Docirina  pacis  nostrae,  "  the  correction." 

*■  Livore  ejus  nos  sanati  sumus.  The  word  "  livor  "  properly  de- 
notes the  blackness  arising  from  a  bruise. 

5  Intus  inclusam.  .Another  reading  is,  "  Intus  inclus^  malitia," 
with  malice  shut  up  within. 

6  Solveret,  "  He  loosened  or  relaxed." 

7  Non  vacaret. 

8  (Jperans  in  salutem  liominum,  "  by  healing  diseases  and  doing 
good." 

9  There  is  no  mention  of  this  in  the  Gospels. 

1°  Seccsseraf.  "  withdrawn  themselves  from  the  teaching  of  the 
scrHes  and  Pharisees,  and  betaken  themselves  to  Christ." 

"  Mic.  iv.  2,  3. 

'=  Some  read,  "  evincet  et  deliget  validas  nationes;  "  but  the  read- 
ing "  deliget "  seems  to  have  arisen  from  a  corrupt  reading  of  the 
Septuagint,  —  e/cAef^n,  "  he  shall  choose,"  having  been  substituted  for 
cftAevJfi,  "  he  shall  rebuke." 

'3  The  scene  of  the  giving  of  the  law  is  sometimes  spoken  of  as 
Horeb,  as  Ex.  iii.,  and  sometimes  as  Sinai,  as  Ex.  xix.  The  difficulty 
of  discriminating  the  two  is  very  great.  See  Stanley's  Sinai  and 
Palestine  [pp.  29,  32,  'ib-yj,  40-42,  etc.     Robinson,  vol.  i.  177,  551. j 


"But  when  all  these  things  which  1  told  you  shall  be 
accomplished,  then  all  the  law  is  fulfilled  with 
respect  to  Him." 

But  even  Moses  himself,  by  whom  the  law  was 
given  which  they  so  tenaciously  maintain,  though 
they  have  fallen  away  from  God,  and  have  not 
acknowledged  God,  had  foretold  that  it  would 
come  to  pass  that  a  very  great  prophet  would  be 
sent  by  God,  who  should  be  above  the  law,  and 
be  a  bearer  of  the  will  of  God  to  men.  In  Deu- 
teronomy he  thus  left  it  written  :  ''t  "  And  the 
Lord  said  unto  me,  I  will  raise  them  up  a 
Prophet  from  among  their  brethren,  like  unto 
thee  ;  and  I  will  put  my  word  in  His  mouth,  and 
He  shall  speak  unto  them  all  that  I  shall  com- 
mand Him.  And  whosoever  will  not  hearken 
to  those  things  which  that  Prophet  shall  speak 
in  my  name,  I  will  require  's  it  of  him."  The 
Lord  evidently  announced  by  the  law-giver  him- 
self that  He  was  about  to  send  His  own  Son  — 
that  is,  a  law  alive,  and  present  '^  in  person,  and 
destroy  that  old  law  given  by  a  mortal, '^  that  by 
Him  who  was  eternal  He  might  ratify  afresh  a 
law  which  was  eternal. 

In  like  manner,  Isaiah  '^  thus  prophesied  con- 
cerning the  abolition  of  circumcision  :  "  Thus 
saith  the  Lord  to  the  men  of  Judah  who  dwell 
at  Jerusalem,  Break  up  your  fallow  ground,  and 
sow  not  among  thorns.  Circumcise  yourselves 
to  the  Lord  your  God,  and  take  away  the  fore- 
skins of  your  heart,  lest  my  fury  come  forth  like 
fire,  and  burn  that  none  can  quench  it."  Also 
Moses  himself  says  :  "?  "  In  the  last  days  the 
Lord  shall  circumcise  thine  heart  to  love  the 
Lord  thy  God."  Also  Jesus  ^°  the  son  of  Nun, 
his  succe.ssor,  said  :  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto 
Jesus,  Make  thee  knives  of  flint  very  sharp,  and 
sit  and  circumcise  the  children  of  Israel  the 
second  time."  He  said  that  this  second  cir- 
cumcision would  be  not  of  the  flesh,  as  the  first 
was,  which  the  Jews  practise  even  now,  but  of 
the  heart  and  spirit,  which  was  delivered  by 
Christ,  who  was  the  true  Jesus.  For  the  prophet 
does  not  say,  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto  me," 
but  "  unto  Jesus,"  that  he  might  show  that  God 
was  not  speaking  of  him,  but  of  Christ,  to 
whom  God  was  then  speaking.  For  that  Jesus 
represented 21  Christ:  for  when  he  was  at  first 
called  Auses,^^  Moses,  foreseeing  the  future,  or- 
dered that  he  should  be  called  Jesus  ;  that  since 
he  had  been  chosen  as  the  leader  of  the  warfare 


'■I  Deut.  xviii.  17-19. 

■5  Ego  vindicabo  in  eum. 

'^  Vivani  prajsentemque  legem. 

''  Another  reading  is,  "  per  Moysen,"  by  Mcses. 

'^  The  quotation  is  not  from  Isaiah,  but  from  Jer.  iv.  3,  4. 

'9  Deut.  XXX.  6. 

-°  i.e.,  Joshua.     See  Josh.  v.  2. 

2'  "  Figuram  gerebat,"  typified,  or  set  forth  as  in  a  figure. 

^*  i.e.,  Osee,  Oshea,  or  Hoshea,  as  Joshua  was  first  called.  See 
Num.  xiii.  8.  [But  note  Num.  xiii.  iC.  The  change  was  significant. 
See  Pearson  On  the  Creed,  art.  li.  125-12S.  Thus,  "Jehovah- 
Saviour  "  =  Jesus,  and  the  change  was  prophetic  of  "  the  Name  which 
is  above  every  name."    Compare  Gen.  xxxii.  29  and  Phil.  ii.  9,  10.] 


Chap  XVI 1 1.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


119 


against  Amalek,  who  was  the  enemy  of  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel,  he  might  both  subdue  the  ad- 
versary by  the  emblem  '  of  the  name,  and  lead 
the  people  into  the  land  of  promise.  And  for 
this  reason  he  was  also  successor  to  ■  Moses,  to 
show  that  the  new  law  given  by  Christ  Jesus  was 
about  to  succeed  to  the  old  law  which  was  given 
by  Moses.  For  that  circumcision  of  the  flesh 
is  plainly  irrational ;  since,  if  God  had  so  willed 
it.  He  might  so  have  formed  man  from  the  be- 
ginning, that  he  should  be  without  a  foreskin. 
But  it  was  a  figure  of  this  second  circumcision, 
signifying  that  the  breast  is  to  be  laid  bare  ;  that 
is,  that  we  ought  to  live  with  an  open  and  simple 
heart,  since  that  part  of  the  body  which  is  cir- 
cumcised has  a  kind  of  resemblance  to  the  heart, 
and  is  to  be  treated  with  reverence.  On  this 
account  God  ordered  that  it  should  be  laid  bare, 
that  by  this  argument  He  might  admonish  us 
not  to  have  our  breast  hidden  -  in  obscurity ; 
that  is,  not  to  veil  any  shameful  deed  within  the 
secrets  of  conscience.  This  is  the  circumcision 
of  the  heart  of  which  the  prophets  speak,  which 
God  transferred  from  the  mortal  flesh  to  the 
soul,  which  alone  is  about  to  endure.  For, 
being  desirous  of  promoting  our  life  and  salva- 
tion in  accordance  with  His  own  goodness,  in 
tliat  circumcision  He  hath  set  before  us  repent- 
ance, that  if  we  lay  open  our  hearts,  —  that  is, 
if  we  confess  our  sins  and  make  satisfaction  to 
God, — we  shall  obtain  pardon,  which  is  denied 
to  those  who  are  obstinate  and  conceal  their 
faults,  by  Him  who  regards  not  the  outward  ap- 
pearance, as  man  does,  but  the  innermost  secrets 
of  the  heart.3 

The  forbidding  of  the  flesh  of  swine  also  has 
the  same  intention  ;  for  when  God  commanded 
them  to  abstain  from  this.  He  willed  that  this 
should  be  especially  understood,  that  they  should 
abstain  from  sins  and  impurities.  For  this  ani- 
mal is  filthy  and  unclean,'*  and  never  looks  up  to 
heaven, 5  but  prostrates  itself  to  the  earth  with 
its  whole  body  and  face  :  it  is  always  the  slave 
of  its  appetite  and  food  ;  nor  during  its  life  can 
it  afford  any  other  service,  as  the  other  animals 
do,  which  either  afford  a  vehicle  for  riding,'^  or 
aid  in  the  cultivation  of  the  fields,  or  draw 
waggons  by  their  neck,  or  carry  burthens  on 
their  back,  or  furnish  a  covering  with  their  skins, ^ 
or  abound  with  a  supply  of  milk,  or  keep  watch 

'  Per  figuram  nominis.  The  name  Jesus  or  Joshua  signifies  a 
deliverer  or  saviour.  [Nay,  more,  Jehovah-Salvator,  thus:  Hoshea 
+  Jah  =  Jchoshua  =  Joshua  =  Jesus.] 

2  Invohitum.  Thus  Seneca:  "  Non  est  tibi  frons  ficta,  nee  in 
alienam  vohiptatem  sermo  compositus,  nee  cor  involutum." 

3  I  Sam.  xvi.  7:  "The  Lord  seeth  not  as  man  sueth;  for  man 
lookcth  on  the  outward  appearance,  but  the  l-ord  looketh  on  the 
heart." 

•*  Lutulentum  (besmeared  with  mud)  "  ct  immundum."  See  2 
Pet.  ii.  22. 

5  ("The  swine  gorges  his  acorns,  and  never  looks  up  to  the  tree 
from  which  they  fall,"  as  a  parable  of  nature  for  swinish  men.  | 

*  Sedendi  vehiculum.  "  Sedeor"  is  sometimes  used  in  this  sense 
for  riding. 

'  Exuviis,  used  in  the  same  sense  as  "  pellibus." 


for  guarding  our  houses.  Therefore  He  forbade 
them  to  use  the  flesh  of  the  pig  for  food,  that  is, 
not  to  imitate  the  life  of  swine,  which  are  nour- 
ished only  for  death  ;  lest,  by  devoting  them- 
selves to  their  appetite  and  pleasures,  they  should 
be  useless  for  working  righteousness,  and  should 
be  visited  with  death.  Also  that  they  should  not 
immerse  themselves  in  foul  lusts,  as  the  sow, 
which  wallows  in  the  mire  ;  ^  or  that  they  do  not 
serve  earthly  images,  and  thus  defile  themselves 
with  mud  :  for  they  do  bedaub  themselves  with 
mud  who  worship  gods,  that  is,  who  worship 
mud  and  earth.  Thus  all  the  precepts  of  the 
Jewish  law  have  for  their  object  the  setting  forth 
of  righteousness,  since  they  are  given  in  a  mys- 
terious ^  manner,  that  under  the  figure  of  carnal 
things  those  which  are  spiritual  might  be  known. 

CHAP.    XVIII,  —  OF   THE    LORD'S  PASSION,  AND  THAT 
IT   WAS    FORETOLD. 

When,  therefore,  Christ  fulfilled  these  things 
which  God  would  have  done,  and  which  He 
foretold  many  ages  before  by  His  prophets,  in- 
cited by  these  tilings,  and  ignorant  of  the  sacred 
Scriptures,  they  conspired  together  to  condemn 
their  God.  And  though  He  knew  that  this 
would  come  to  pass,  and  repeatedly  '°  said  that 
He  must  suffer  and  be  put  to  death  for  the  sal- 
vation of  many,  nevertheless  He  withdrew  Him- 
self with  His  disciples,  not  that  He  might  avoid 
that  which  it  was  necessary  for  Him  to  undergo 
and  endure,  but  that  He  might  show  what  ought 
to  take  place  in  every  persecution,  that  no  one 
should  appear  to  have  fallen  into  it  through  his 
own  fault :  and  He  announced  that  it  would 
come  to  pass  that  He  should  be  betrayed  by 
one  of  them.  And  thus  Judas,  induced  by  a 
bribe,  delivered  up  to  the  Jews  the  Son  of  God. 
But  they  took  and  brought  Him  before  Pontius 
Pilate,  who  at  that  time  was  administering  the 
province  of  Syria  as  governor,"  and  demanded 
that  He  should  be  crucified,  though  they  laid 
nothing  else  to  His  charge  except  that  He  said 
that  He  was  the  Son  of  God,  the  King  of  the 
Jews  ;  also  His  own  saying,'^  "Destroy  this  tem- 
ple, which  was  forty-six  years  in  building,  and  in 
three  days  I  will  raise  it  up  again  without  liands," 

8  Ingurgitat  cceno,  "  plunges  into  the  mire."  ["  Sus  lota  in  volu- 
tabro  luti."     2  Pet.  ii.  22,  I'lilgate  ] 

9  Per  figuram.  [This  Tyfolcgy  has  never  yet  been  fully  or  satis- 
factorily treated.  Yet  the  volumes  of  Dr.  Fairbairn  (  Typology  0/ 
Scripture,  Clarks,  Edin.)  ought  to  be  known  to  every  Bible  student.] 

■°  Subinde,  "  from  time  to  time." 

"  Lcgatus.  This  title  was  given,  in  the  time  of  the  Roman  em- 
perors, to  the  governors  .sent  by  them  into  the  provinces.  Pontius 
Pilate  was  procurator  of  Judrea,  which  was  not  a  separate  province, 
but  a  dependency  of  the  province  of  Syria,  which  was  at  this  lime 
governed  by  Silanus. 

■2  John  ii.  19,  20.  The  forty-six  years  spoken  of  were  not  occu- 
pied with  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple,  which  was  completed  in  nine 
years,  but  with  the  additional  works  which  Herod  the  Great  and  his 
successors  were  continually  carrying  on  for  the  adorning  and  beauti- 
fying of  the  temple.  See  Prideaux.  [I  regret  the  loose  references 
of  the  translator,  and  yet  more  that  the  inexorable  demands  of  the 
press  give  me  time  to  supply  only  the  more  important  ones.  See 
Comections,  book  ix.  vol.  ii.  p.  394-] 


I20 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[P.OOK    IV. 


—  signifying  that  His  passion  would  shortly  take 
place,  and  that  He,  having  been  put  to  death  by 
the  Jews,  would  rise  again  on  the  third  day. 
For  He  Himself  was  the  true  temple  of  God. 
They  inveighed  against  these  expressions  of  His, 
as  ill-omened  and  impious.  And  when  Pilate 
had  heard  these  things,  and  He  said  nothing  in 
His  own  defence,  he  gave  sentence  that  there 
appeared  nothing  deserving  of  condemnation  in 
Him.  But  those  most  unjust  accusers,  together 
with  the  people  whom  the)'  had  stirred  up,  be- 
gan to  cry  out,  and  with  loud  voices  to  demand 
His  crucifixion. 

Then  Pontius  '  was  overpowered  both  by  their 
outcries,  and  by  the  instigation  of  Herod  the 
tetrarch,^  who  feared  lest  he  should  be  deposed 
from  his  sovereignty.  He  did  not,  however, 
himself  pass  sentence,  but  delivered  Him  up  to 
the  Jews,  that  they  themselves  might  judge  Him 
according  to  their  law.^  Therefore  they  led 
Him  away  when  He  had  been  scourged  with 
rods,  and  before  they  crucified  Hmi  they  mocked 
Him ;  for  they  put  upon  Him  a  scarlet  ■♦  robe, 
and  a  crown  of  thorns,  and  saluted  Him  as 
King,  and  gave  Him  gall  for  food,  and  min- 
gled for  Him  vinegar  to  drink.  After  these 
things  they  spat  upon  His  face,  and  struck  Him 
with  the  palms  of  their  hands  ;  and  when  the 
executioners  5  themselves  contended  about  His 
garments,  they  cast  lots  among  themselves  for 
His  tunic  and  mantle.^  And  while  all  these 
things  were  doing,  He  uttered  no  voice  from 
His  mouth,  as  though  He  were  dumb.  Then 
they  lifted  Him  up  in  the  midst  between  two 
malefactors,  who  had  been  condemned  for  rob- 
bery, and  fixed  Him  to  the  cross.  What  can  I 
here  deplore  in  so  great  a  crime?  or  in  what 
words  can  I  lament  such  great  wickedness.? 
For  we  are  not  relating  the  crucifixion  of  Ga- 
vius,7  which  Marcus  Tullius  followed  up  with  all 
the  spirit  and  strength  of  his  eloquence,  pour- 
ing forth   as  it  were    the  fountains   of   all   his 


*  [It  is  probable,  that,  owing  to  the  perpetual  and  universal  reci- 
tation of  the  Creed,  this  unhappy  name  ha-,  been  more  frequently  ut- 
tered and  recalled  to  human  memory  than  that  of  any  other  human 
being.] 

2  Herod  Antipas  the  tetrarch  of  Galilee.  According  to  St.  LuVce 
(xxiii.  15J,  Herod  agreed  with  Pilate  in  declaring  the  innocency  of 
Jesus. 

3  This  statement  requires  some  modification.  Pilate  did  indeed 
say  to  the  Jews,  "  Take  ye  Him,  and  judge  Him  according  to  your 
law;  "  but  they  declared  that  it  was  not  lawful  for  them  to  put  any 
man  to  death.  The  punishment  was  entirely  Roman,  the  mode  of 
death  Roman,  the  executioners  Roman  soldiers  There  were  two 
distinct  trials,  —  one  before  the  Jewish  Sanhedrim  on  a  charge  of  un- 
piety,  the  other  before  the  Roman  governor  on  a  charge  of  treason. 

*  Punicei  colons.  The  colour  was  a  kuid  of  red,  not  purple. 
[It  was  mixed  with  blue,  so  as  to  be  at  once  purple  and  in  some  re- 
flections scarlet.] 

S  The  quaternion  of  Roman  soldiers  who  carried  out  the  execu- 
tion. 

*  De  tunicS  et  pallio.  The  "  tunica"  was  the  inner  garment,  the 
"  pallium"  a  mantle  or  cloak.  Thus  the  proverbial  phrase,  "  tunica 
proprior  pallio."     [Vol.  iv.  p.  13,  Elucidation  1.,  this  series  ] 

7  Gavius  was  crucified  by  Verres.  [/«  yerrem,  act  ii.  cap,  62. 
This  event  providentially  illustrated  the  extreme  wickedness  of  what 
was  done  to  our  Lord,  but  so  quickened  the  Roman  conscience  that 
it  prevented  like  injustice  to  St.  Paul,  although  a  Roman  citizen,  over 
and  over  again.     Acts  xvi.  37,  38,  and  xxii  24,  25.  j 


genius,  proclaiming  that  it  was  an  unworthy 
deed  that  a  Roman  citizen  should  be  crucified 
in  violation  of  all  laws.  And  although  He  was 
innocent,  and  undeserving  of  that  punishment, 
yet  He  was  put  to  death,  and  that,  too,  by  an 
impious  man,  who  was  ignorant  of  justice. 
What  shall  I  say  respecting  the  indignity  of 
this  cross,  on  which  the  Son  of  God  was  sus- 
pended and  nailed?*^  Who  will  be  found  so 
eloquent,  and  supplied  with  so  great  an  abun- 
dance of  deeds  and  words,  what  si)eech  flowing 
with  such  copious  exuberance,''  as  to  lament  in 
a  befitting  manner  that  cross,  which  the  world 
itself,  and  all  the  elements  of  the  world,  be- 
wailed ? 

But  that  these  things  were  thus  about  to  hap- 
pen, was  announced  both  by  the  utterances  of 
the  prophets  and  by  the  predictions  of  the  Sibyls. 
In  Isaiah  it  is  found  thus  written  :  '°  "I  am  not 
rebellious,  nor  do  I  oppose  :  I  gave  my  back  to 
the  scourge,  and  my  cheeks  to  the  hand  :  "  I 
turned  not  away  my  face  from  the  foulness  of 
spitting."  In  like  manner  David,  in  the  thirty- 
fourth  Psalm  :  '^  "  The  abjects  '^  were  gathered 
together  against  me,'-*  and  they  knew  me  not :  '5 
they  were  dispersed,  nor  did  they  feel  remorse ; 
they  tempted  me,  and  greatly  '''  derided  me  ;  and 
they  gnashed  upon  me  with  their  teeth."  The 
Sibyl  also  showed  that  the  same  things  would 
happen  :  — 

"  He  shall  afterwards  come  into  the  hands  of  the  unjust 
and  the  faithless  ;  and  they  shall  inflict  on  God 
blows  with  impure  hands,  and  with  polluted  mouths 
they  shall  send  forth  poisonous  S];)ittle  ;  and  He  shall 
then  absolutely"  give  His  holy  back  to  stripes." 

Likewise  respecting  His  silence,  which  He  per- 
severingly  maintained  even  to  His  death,  Isaiah 
thus  spoke  again  :  '^  "  He  was  led  as  a  sheep  to 
the  slaughter ;  and  as  a  lamb  before  the  shearer 
is  dumb,  so  He  opened  not  His  mouth."  And 
the  above-mentioned  Sibyl  said  :  — 

"And  being  beaten.  He  shall  be  silent,  lest  any  one 
should  know  what  the  Word  is,  or  whence  it  came, 
that  it  may  speak  with  mortals  ;  and  He  shall 
wear  the  crown  of  thorns." 

But  respecting  the  food  and  the  drink  which  they 
offered  to  Him  before  they  fastened  Him  to  the 
cross,  David  thus  speaks  in  the  sixty-eighth 
Psalm  :  '^  "  And  they  gave  me  gall  for  my  meat ; 


8  Sufifixus. 

9  Tants  affluentise  ubertate.  [Compare  Cicero  {ui  supra): 
Crux,  crux  .'  inquam  infelici  et  serumnoso,  qui  nunquam  istam  po- 
testatem  viderat,  comparabatur  ] 

'°  Isa.  1.  5,  6,  quoted  from  the  Septuagint. 

"  i.e.,  of  the  smiiers;  Gr.  ci?  paTri'o-^aTa,  "  blows  with  the  hand." 

'2  Ps.  XXXV.  15,  16.  The  quotation  is  from  the  Septuagint,  and 
differs  widely  from  the  authorized  English  version. 

'3  Flagella,  said  to  be  used  for  men  deserving  the  scourge;  wicked 
men. 

'<  Super  me,  "  over  me." 

'S  Ignoraverunt.     Others  read  "  ignoravi,"  I  knew  it  not. 

'^  Deriserunt  me  derisu.  So  the  Greek,  efe/u.vKTijpicra;'  ;xe  /xvictj]- 
pttr^ov. 

17  aTrAuJ?. 

''  Isa.  liii.  7. 

'9  Ps.  Ixix.  21. 


I 


Chap.  XVIII.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


121 


and  in  my  thirst  they  gave  me  vinegar  to  drink." 
The  Sibyl  foretold  that  this  also  would  hap- 
pen :  — 

"  They  gave  me  gall  for  my  food,  and  for  my  thirst  vine- 
gar; this  inhospitable  table  they  will  show." 

And  another  Sibyl  rebukes  the  land  of  Judaea 
in  these  verses  :  — 

"  For  you,  entertaining  hurtful  thoughts,  did  not  recog- 
nise your  God  sporting'  with  mortal  thoughts; 
but  you  crowned  Him  with  a  crown  of  thorns,  and 
mingled  dreadful  gall." 

Now,  that  it  would  come  to  pass  that  the  Jews 
would  lay  hands  upon  their  God,  and  put  Him 
to  death,  these  testimonies  of  the  prophets  fore- 
told. In  Esdras  it  is  thus  written  :  ^  "  And  Ezra 
said  to  the  people,  This  passover  is  our  Saviour 
and  our  refuge.  Consider  and  let  it  come  into 
your  heart,  that  we  have  to  abase  Him  in  a  fig- 
ure ;  and  after  these  things  we  will  hope  in  Him, 
lest  this  place  be  deserted  for  ever,  saith  the 
Lord  God  of  hosts.  If  you  will  not  believe  Him, 
nor  hear  His  announcement,  ye  shall  be  a  deris- 
ion among  the  nations."  From  which  it  appears 
that  the  Jews  had  no  other  hope,  unless  they 
purified  themselves  from  blood,  and  put  their 
hopes  in  that  very  person  whom  they  denied.^ 
Isaiah  also  points  out  their  deed,  and  says  :  ■♦ 
"  In  His  humiliation  His  judgment  was  taken 
away.  Who  shall  declare  His  generation?  for 
His  life  shall  be  taken  away  from  the  earth ; 
from  the  transgressions  of  my  people  He  was 
led  away  to  death.  And  I  will  give  Him  the 
wicked  for  His  burial,  and  the  rich  for  His  death, 
because  He  did  no  wickedness,  nor  spoke  guile 
with  His  mouth.  Wherefore  He  shall  obtain  5 
many,  and  shall  divide  the  spoils  of  the  strong ; 
because  He  was  delivered  up  to  death,  and  was 
reckoned  among  the  transgressors  ;  and  He  bore 
the  sins  of  many,  and  was  delivered  up  on  ac- 
count of  their  transgressions."  David  also,  in 
the  ninety-third  Psalm  :  ^  "  They  will  hunt  after 
the  soul  of  the  righteous,  and  condemn  the  inno- 
cent blood  ;  and  the  Lord  is  become  my  refuge." 
Also  Jeremiah  :  7  "Lord,  declare  it  unto  me,  and 
I  shall  know.  Then  I  saw  their  devices  ;  I  was 
led  as  an  innocent  ^  lamb  to  the  sacrifice  ;  9  they 
meditated  a  plan  against  me,  saying,  Come,  let 
us  send  wood  into  his  bread, '°  and  let  us  sweep 


1  Tra.ii,ovTa..  Another  reading  is  KTaiovra,  which  would  imply  that 
they  regarded  Christ  as  a  transgressor. 

2  Justin  Martyr  quotes  this  passage  in  his  Dialogue  ivith  Try- 
/Ao,  and  complains  that  it  had  been  expunged  by  the  Jews.  [See 
vol.  i.  p.  234,  and  remarks  of  Bishop  Kaye,  Justin  Martyr,  p.  44, 
on  passages  suppressed  by  the  Jews.] 

3  Negaycrunt.  Another  reading  is  "  necaverunt,"  they  put  to  death. 
*  Isa.  liii.  8-10,  12.  The  quotation  is  made  from  the  Septuagint. 
5  Consequetur.     In  the  Greek,  KArjpovo/xijaei,  "  shall  inherit." 

°  Ps.  xciv.  21,  22. 

J  Jer.  xi.  18,  19,  quoted  from  the  Septuagint. 
Sine  mahtia.     Another  reading  is  "  sine  macula,"  without  spot. 

9  Ad  victimam. 

'°  For  the  various  explanations,  see  Pole's  Synopsis.  Some  sup- 
pose that  there  is  a  reference  to  the  corruption  of  food  by  poisonous 
wood;  others  that  the  meaning  is  a  substitution  of  wood  for  bread. 
Another  explanation  is,  that  the  word  translated  bread  denotes  fruit, 


away  his  life  from  the  earth,  and  his  name  shall 
no  more  be  remembered."  Now  the  wood  "  sig- 
nifies the  cross,  and  the  bread  His  body  ;  for  He 
Himself  is  the  food  and  the  life  of  all  who  believe 
in  the  flesh  which  He  bare,  and  on  the  cross 
upon  which  He  was  suspended. 

Respecting  this,  however,  Moses  himself  more 
plainly  spoke  to  this  effect,  in  Deuteronomy :  "^ 
"  And  Thy  life  shall  hang  '3  before  Thine  eyes  ; 
and  Thou  shalt  fear  day  and  night,  and  shalt 
have  no  assurance  of  Thy  life."  And  the  same 
again  in  Numbers  :  '*  "  God  is  not  in  doubt  as  a 
man,  nor  does  He  suffer  threats  's  as  the  son  of 
man."  Zechariah  also  thus  wrote  :  ""  "  And  they 
shall  look  on  me,  whom  they  pierced."  Also 
David  in  the  twenty-first  Psalm  :  '7  "They  pierced 
my  hands  and  my  feet ;  they  numbered  all  my 
bones  ;  they  themselves  looked  and  stared  upon 
me  ;  they  divided  my  garments  among  them ; 
and  upon  my  vesture  they  did  cast  lots."  It  is 
evident  that  the  prophet  did  not  speak  these 
things  concerning  himself.  For  he  was  a  king, 
and  never  endured  these  sufferings ;  but  the 
Spirit  of  God,  who  was  about  to  suffer  these 
things,  after  fen  hundred  and  fifty  years,  spoke 
by  him.  For  this  is  the  number  of  years  froin 
the  reign  of  David  to  the  crucifixion  of  Christ. 
But  Solomon  also,  his  son,  who  built  Jerusalem, 
prophesied  that  this  very  city  would  perish  in 
revenge  for  the  sacred  cross  :  '^  "  But  if  ye  turn 
away  from  me,  saith  the  Lord,  and  will  not  keep 
my  truth,  I  will  drive  Israel  from  the  land  which 
I  have  given  them  ;  and  this  house  which  I  have 
built  for  them  in  my  name,  I  will  cast  it  out  from 
all :  "5  and  Israel  shall  be  for  perdition^"  and  a  re- 
proach to  the  people ;  and  this  house  shall  be 
desolate,  and  every  one  that  shall  pass  by  it  shall 
be  astonished,  and  shall  say.  Why  hath  God  done 
these  evils  to  this  land  and  to  this  house  ?  And 
they  shall  say.  Because  they  forsook  the  Lord 
their  God,  and  persecuted  their  King  most  be- 
loved by  God,  and  crucified  Him  with  great 
degradation,^'  therefore  hath  God  brought  upon 
them  these  evils." 


as  in  the  English  authorized  version,  "  Let  us  destroy  the  tree,  with 
the  fruit  thereof."  But  see  Pole  on  the  passage.  [Jer  xi.  19.  Here 
is  a  very  insufficient  note,  the  typology  of  Scripture  not  being  duly 
observed.  Compare  Tertullian,  vol.  iii.  p.  166,  especially  at  note  jo, 
which  illustrates  the  uniform  spirit  of  the  Fathers  in  dealing  with 
the  Jews.  And  note  Bishop  Kaye's  remark,  vol.  ii.  p.  206,  note  5,  this 
series.] 

"  This  explanation  appears  altogether  fanciful  and  unwarranted. 

'2  Deut.  xxviii.  66. 

'3  So  the  Septuagint.  The  English  authorized  version  appears 
accurately  to  express  the  idea  intended  to  be  conveyed:  "Thy  life 
shall  hang  in  doubt  before  Thee  " 

'■•  The  idea  is  that  God  is  not  in  doubt,  as  a  man,  as  to  His  con-' 
duct,  nor  is  He  liable  to  change  His  mind,  or  to  be  influenced  byl 
threats  or  in  any  other  way. 

'5   Minas  patitur. 

'*"  Zech.  xii.  10. 

"  Ps.  xxii.  16-18.     [Compare  vol.  i.  p.  176,  note  4,  this  series.] 

■^  I  Kings  ix.  6-9,  with  some  additions  and  omissions;  and  i 
Chron.  vii.  19-22. 

■9  Ex  omnibus.  The  English  authorized  version  has,  "  out  of  my 
sight." 

-"  In  perditionem  et  improperium. 

-'  This  is  not  taken  from  the  passages  cited,  nor  from  the  Old 
Testament. 


122 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  IV. 


CHAP.  XIX. OF  THE  DEATH,  BURIAL,  AND  RESUR- 
RECTION OF  JESUS  ;  AND  THE  PREDICTIONS  OF 
THESE    EVENTS. 

What  more  can  now  be  said  respecting  the 
crime  of  the  Jews,  than  that  they  were  then 
Winded  and  seized  with  incurable  madness,  who 
read  these  things  daily,  and  yet  neither  under- 
stood them,  nor  were  able  to  be  on  their  guard 
so  as  not  to  do  them?  Therefore,  being  lifted 
up  and  nailed  to  the  cross,  He  cried  to  the  Lord 
with  a  loud  voice,  and  of  His  own  accord  gave 
up  His  spirit.  And  at  the  same  hour  there  was 
an  earthquake  ;  and  the  veil  of  the  temple,  which 
separated  the  two  tabernacles,  was  rent  into  two 
parts ;  and  the  sun  suddenly  withdrew  its  light, 
and  there  was  darkness  from  the  sixth '  even  to 
the  ninth  hour.  Of  which  event  the  prophet 
Amos  testifies  :^  "And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in 
that  day,  saith  the  Lord,  that  the  sun  shall  go 
down  at  noon,  and  the  daylight  shall  be  dark- 
ened ;  and  I  will  turn  your  feasts  into  mourning, 
and  your  songs  into  lamentation."  Also  Jere- 
miah :  3  "She  who  brings  forth  is  affrighted,  and 
vexed  in  spirit ;  her  sun  is  gone  down  while  it 
was  yet  mid-day ;  she  hath  been  ashamed  and 
confounded ;  ■*  and  the  residue  of  them  will  I 
give  to  the  sword  in  the  sight  of  their  enemies." 
And  the  Sibyl :  — 

"  And  the  veil  of  the  temple  shall  be  rent,  and  at  mid- 
day there  shall  be  dark  vast  night  for  three  hours." 

When  these  things  were  done,  even  by  the 
heavenly  prodigies,  they  were  not  able  to  under- 
stand their  crime. 

But  since  He  had  foretold  that  on  the  third 
day  He  should  rise  again  from  the  dead,  fearing 
lest,  the  body  having  been  stolen  by  the  disciples, 
and  removed,  all  should  believe  that  He  had 
risen,  and  there  should  be  a  much  greater  dis- 
turbance among  the  people,  they  took  Him  down 
from  the  cross,  and  having  shut  Him  up  in  a 
tomb,  they  securely  surrounded  it  with  a  guard 
of  soldiers.  But  on  the  third  day,  before  light, 
there  was  an  earthquake,  and  the  sepulchre  was 
suddenly  opened  ;  and  the  guard,  who  were 
astonished  and  stupefied  with  fear,  seeing  noth- 
ing, He  came  forth  uninjured  and  alive  from  the 
sepulchre,  and  went  into  Galilee  to  seek  His  dis- 
ciples :  but  nothing  was  found  in  the  sepulchre 
except  the  grave-clothes  in  which  they  had  en- 
closed and  wrapt  His  body.  Now,  that  He 
would  not  remain  in  hell, 5  but  rise  again  on  the 
third  day,  had  been  foretold  by  the  prophets. 
David  says,  in  the  fifteenth  Psalm  :  ^  "  Thou  wilt 
not  leave   my  soul  in  hell ;  neither  wilt  Thou 


'  i.e,  from  noon.     [Elucidation  IV.] 

*  Amos  viii.  9,  10. 
3  Jer.  XV.  9. 

*  Confusa  est  et  maledicta. 

5  i.e.,  Hades,  the  place  of  departed  spirits. 

6  Ps.  xvi,  10. 


suffer  Thine  holy  one  to  see  corruption."  Also 
in  the  third  Psalm  :  7  "  I  laid  me  down  to  sleep, 
and  took  my  rest,  and  rose  again,  for  the  Lord 
sustained  me."  Hosea  also,  the  first  of  the 
twelve  prophets,  testified  of  His  resurrection  :  ^ 
."This  my  Son  is  wise,  therefore  He  will  not  re- 
main in  the  anguish  of  His  sons :  and  I  will 
redeem  Him  from  the  power  "^  of  the  grave. 
Where  is  thy  judgment,  O  death?  or  where  is 
thy  sting?  "  The  same  also  in  another  place  : '° 
"  After  two  days.  He  will  revive  us  in  the  third 
day."  And  therefore  the  Sibyl  said,  that  after 
three  days'  sleep  he  would  put  an  end  to  death  :  — 

"  And  after  sleeping  three  days.  He  shall  put  an  end  to 
the  fate  of  death;  and  then,  releasing  Himself 
from  the  dead,  He  shall  come  to  light,  first  show- 
ing to  the  called  ones  the  beginning  of  the  resur- 
rection." 

For  He  gained  life  for  us  by  overcoming  death. 
No  hope,  therefore,  of  gaining  immortality  is 
given  to  man,  unless  he  shall  believe  on  Him, 
and  shall  take  up  that  cross  to  be  borne  and 
endured. 

CHAP.    XX. OF    THE    DEPARTURE    OF     JESUS    INTO 

GALILEE  AFTER  HIS  RESURRECTION  ;    AND  OF  THE 
TWO   TEST.'^MENl'S,  THE    OLD    AND   THE    NEW. 

Therefore  He  went  into  Galilee,  for  He  was 
unwilling  to  show  Himself  to  the  Jews,  lest  He 
should  lead  them  to  repentance,  and  restore 
them  from  their  impiety  to  a  sound  mind."  And 
f/iere  He  opened  to  His  disciples  again  assem- 
bled the  writings  of  Holy  Scripture,  that  is,  the 
secrets  of  the  prophets ;  which  before  His  suf- 
fering could  by  no  means  be  understood,  for  they 
told  of  Him  and  of  His  passion.  Therefore 
Moses,  and  the  prophets  also  themselves,  call  the 
law  which  was  given  to  the  Jews  a  testament :  for 
unless  the  testator  shall  have  died,  a  testament 
cannot  be  confirmed ;  nor  can  that  which  is 
written  in  it  be  known,  because  it  is  closed  and 
sealed.  And  thus,  unless  Christ  had  undergone 
death,  the  testament  could  not  have  been  opened  ; 
that  is,  the  mystery  of  God  could  not  have  been 
unveiled  '^  and  understood. 

But  all  Scripture  is  divided  into  two  Testa- 
ments. That  which  preceded  the  advent  and 
passion  of  Christ  —  that  is,  the  law  and  the 
prophets  —  is  called  the  Old  ;  but  those  things 
which  were  written  after  His  resurrection  are 
named  the  New  Testament.  The  Jews  make 
use  of  the  Old,  we  of  the  New  :  but  yet  they  are 
not  discordant,  for  the  New  is  the  fulfilling  of 
the  Old,  and  in  both  there  is  the  same  testator, 
even  Christ,  who,  having  suffered  death  for  us, 


7  Ps.  iii.  5. 

'  Hos.  xiii   13,  14. 

9  De  manu  inferorum. 
'°  Hos.  vi.  2. 

"  TA  very  feeble  exposition  of  Ltike  xix.  42,  44.] 
'•^  Revelari,  to  be  laid  bare,  uncovered,  brought  to  light. 


Chap.  XXI.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


123 


made  us  heirs  of  His  everlasting  kingdom,  the 
people  of  the  Jews  being  deprived  and  disin- 
herited.' As  the  prophet  Jeremiah  testifies  when 
he  speaks  such  things :  ^  "  Behold,  the  days 
come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will  make  a  new 
testament  ^  to  the  house  of  Israel  and  the  house 
of  Judah,  not  according  to  the  testament  which 
I  made  to  their  fathers,  in  the  day  that  I  took 
them  by  the  hand  to  bring  them  out  of  the  land 
of  Egypt ;  for  they  continued  not  in  my  testa- 
ment, and  I  disregarded '*  them,  saith  the  Lord." 
Also  in  another  place  he  says  in  like  manner  :  5 
"  I  have  forsaken  my  house,  I  have  given  up  mine 
heritage  into  the  hand  of  its  enemies.  Mine 
heritage  is  become  unto  me  as  a  lion  in  the 
forest ;  it  hath  cried  out  against  me,  therefore 
have  I  hated  it."  Since  the  inheritance  is  His 
heavenly  kingdom,  it  is  evident  that  He  does 
not  say  that  He  hates  the  inheritance  itself,  but 
the  heirs,  who  have  been  ungrateful  towards 
Him,  and  impious.  Mine  heritage,  he  says,  is 
become  unto  me  as  a  lion  ;  that  is,  I  am  become 
a  prey  and  a  devouring  to  my  heirs,  who  have 
slain  me  as  the  flock.  It  hath  cried  out  against 
me ;  that  is,  they  have  pronounced  against  me 
the  sentence  of  death  and  the  cross.  For  that 
which  He  said  above,  that  He  would  make  ^  a 
new  testament  to  the  house  of  Judah,  shows 
that  the  old  testament  which  was  given  by  Moses 
was  not  perfect ;  ^  but  that  that  which  was  to  be 
given  by  Christ  would  be  complete.  But  it  is 
plain  that  the  house  of  Judah  does  not  signify 
the  Jews,  whom  He  casts  off,  but  us,  who  have 
been  called  by  Him  out  of  the  Gentiles,  and 
have  by  adoption  succeeded  to  their  place,  and 
are  called  sons^  of  the  Jews,  which  the  Sibyl 
declares  when  she  says  :  — 

"  The  divine  race  of  the  blessed,  heavenly  Jews." 

But  what  that  race  was  about  to  be,  Isaiah  teaches, 
in  whose  book  the  Most  High  Father  addresses 
His  Son  :  9  "  I  the  Lord  God  have  called  Thee 
in  righteousness,  and  will  hold  Thine  hand,  and 
will  keep  Thee  : '"  and  I  have  given  Thee  for  a 
covenant  of  my  race,"  for  a  light  of  the  Gentiles  ; 


'  Abdicato  et  exhaeredato.  The  two  expressions  are  joined  to- 
gether, to  give  strength.  "  Abdicati  "  were  sons  deprived  of  a  share 
in  their  father's  possessions  during  his  hfe;  "  exhseredati,"  disin- 
herited, those  who  have  forfeited  the  right  of  succession  after  their 
father's  death. 

-  Jer.  xxxi.  31,  32. 

3  Or  rather  "  covenant,"  Siaflijicr),  for  this  signification  is  much 
more  in  accordance  with  the  general  meaning  of  the  passage. 

*  Neglexi;   Gr.  rjfieArjo-a. 

S  Jer.  xii.  7,  8. 

'  Consummaturum,  "  would  complete,"  "  make  perfect,"  as  in  the 
next  clause. 

'  See  Heb.  viii.  13,  "  In  that  He  saith,  a  new  covenant,  He  hath 
made  the  first  old." 

8  St.  John's  testimony  is  more  distinct,  i.  12:  "But  as  maiw  as 
received  Him,  to  them  gave  He  power  to  become  the  sons  of  God, 
even  to  them  that  believe  on  His  name." 

9  Isa.  xlii.  6,  7 

'°  Confirmabo  te,  "  will  strengthen  Thee." 

"  In  testamentum  generis  mei.  The  word  here  rendered  "  cove- 
nant" is  the  same  (testamentum)  as  that  translated  m  other  places 
"  testament,"  which  does  not  supply  the  sense  here  required.  The 
attempt  to  give  the  meaning  "  testament "  in  all  places  causes  much 
confubion,  as  in  this  passage. 


to  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind,  to  bring  out  the 
prisoners  from  the  prison,  and  them  that  sit  in 
darkness  out  of  the  prison-house."  When, 
therefore,  we  who  were  in  time  past  as  it  were 
blind,  and  as  it  were  shut  up  in  the  prison  of 
folly,  were  sitting  in  darkness,  ignorant  of  God 
and  of  the  truth,  we  have  been  enlightened  by 
Him,  who  adopted  us  by  His  testament ;  and 
having  freed  us  from  cruel  chains,  and  brought 
us  out  to  the  light  of  wisdom.  He  admitted  us  to 
the  inheritance  of  His  heavenly  kingdom. 

CHAP.    XXI. OF    THE     ASCENSION    OF    JESUS,    AND 

THE   FORETELLING  OF    IT  ;    AND  OF  THE  PREACH- 
ING   AND    ACTIONS    OF   THE    DISCIPLES. 

But  when  He  had  made  arrangements  with 
His  disciples  for  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  and 
His  name,  a  cloud  suddenly  surrounded  Him, 
and  carried  Him  up  into  heaven,  on  the  fortieth 
day  after  His  passion,  as  Daniel  had  shown  that 
it  would  be,  saying  :  '^  "  And,  behold,  one  like 
the  Son  of  man  came  with  the  clouds  of  heaven, 
and  came  to  the  Ancient  of  days."  But  the 
disciples,  being  dispersed  through  the  provinces, 
everywhere  laid  the  foundations  of  the  Church, 
themselves  also  in  the  name  of  their  divine  '^ 
Master  doing  many  and  almost  incredible  mira- 
cles ;  for  at  His  departure  He  had  endowed 
them  with  power  and  strength,  by  which  the 
system  '■*  of  their  new  announcement  might  be 
founded  and  confirmed.  But  He  also  opened 
to  them  all  things  which  were  about  to  happen, 
which  Peter  and  Paul  preached  at  Rome  ;  and 
this  preaching  being  written  for  the  sake  of 
remembrance, '5  became  permanent,  in  which  they 
both  declared  other  wonderful  things,  and  also 
said  that  it  was  about  to  come  to  pass,  that  after 
a  short  time  God  would  send  against  them  a 
king  who  would  subdue  '^  the  Jews,  and  level 
their  cities  to  the  ground,  and  besiege  the  people 
themselves,  worn  out  with  hunger  and  thirst. 
Then  it  should  come  to  pass  that  they  should  feed 
on  the  bodies  of  their  own  children,  and  consume 
one  another.  Lastly,  that  they  should  be  taken 
captive,  and  come  into  the  hands  of  their  enemies, 
and  should  see  their  wives  most  cruelly  harassed 
before  their  eyes*  their  virgins  ravished  and  pol- 
luted, their  sons  torn  in  pieces,  their  little  ones 
dashed  to  the  ground  ;  and  lastly,  everything  laid 
waste  with  fire  and  sword,  the  captives  banished 
for  ever  from  their  own  lands,  because  they  had 
exulted  over  the  well-beloved  and  most  approved 
Son  of  God.  And  so,  after  their  decease,  when 
Nero  had  put  them  to  death,  Vespasian  destroyed 
the  name  and  nation  of  the  Jews,  and  did  all 


'2  Dan.  vii.  13. 
"  Magistri  Dei. 

'■•  i.e.,  the  new  doctrine  which  they  announced. 
'5  In  memoriam  scripts.     This  is  said  to  have  been  the  title  of  a 
spurious  book  now  lost. 

""  Expugnaret.     The  word  properly  signifies  to  take  by  storm. 


124 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  IV. 


things  which  they  had  foretold  as  about  to  come 
to  pass. 

CHAP.    XXII.  —  ARGUMENTS    OF    UNBELIEVERS 
AGAINST   THE    INCARNATION    OF   JESUS. 

I  have  now  confirmed,  as  I  imagine,  the  things 
which  are  thought  false  and  incredible  by  those 
who  are  not  instructed  in  the  true  knowledge  of 
heavenly  learning.  But,  however,  that  we  may 
refute  those  also  who  are  too  wise,  not  without 
injury  to  themselves,  and  who  detract  from  the 
credit  due  to  divine  things,  let  us  disprove  their 
error,  that  they  may  at  length  perceive  that  the 
fact  ought  to  have  been  as  we  show  that  it  ac- 
tually was.  And  although  with  good  judges 
either  testimonies  are  of  sufficient  weight  with- 
out arguments,  or  arguments  without  testimo- 
nies, we,  however,  are  not  content  with  the  one 
or  the  other,  since  we  are  supplied  with  both, 
that  we  may  not  leave  room  for  any  one  of  de- 
praved ingenuity  either  to  misunderstand  or  to 
dispute  on  the  opposite  side.  They  say  that  it 
was  impossible  for  anything  to  be  withdrawn  ' 
from  an  immortal  nature.  They  say,  in  short, 
that  it  was  unworthy  of  God  to  be  willing  to 
become  man,  and  to  burthen  Himself  with  the 
infirmity  of  flesh  ;  to  become  subject  of  His  own 
accord  to  sufferings,  to  pain,  and  death :  as 
though  it  had  not  been  easy  for  Him  to  show 
Himself  to  men  without  ^  the  weakness  incident 
to  a  body,  and  to  teach  them  righteousness  (if 
He  so  wished)  with  greater  authority,  as  of  one 
who  acknowledged  ^  Himself  to  be  God.  For  in 
that  case  all  would  have  obeyed  the  heavenly 
precepts,  if  the  influence  and  power  of  God 
enjoining  them  had  been  united  with  them. 
Why,  then  (they  say),  did  He  not  come  as  God 
to  teach  men?  Why  did  He  render  Himself  so 
humble  and  weak,  that  it  was  possible  for  Him 
both  to  be  despised  by  men  and  to  be  visited 
with  punishment?  why  did  He  suffer  violence 
fi-om  those  who  are  weak  and  mortal  ?  why  did 
He  not  repel  by  strength,  or  avoid  by  His  divine 
knowledge,'*  the  hands  of  men  ?  why  did  He  not 
at  least  in  His  very  death  reveal  His  majesty?  but 
He  was  led  as  one  without  strength  to  trial,  was 
condemned  as  one  who  was  guilty,  was  put  to 
death  as  one  who  was  mortal.  I  will  carefully 
refute  these  things,  nor  will  I  permit  any  one  to 
be  in  error.  For  these  things  were  done  by  a 
great  and  wonderful  plan ;  and  he  who  shall 
understand  this,  will  not  only  cease  to  wonder 
that  God  was  tortured  by  men,  but  also  will 
easily  see  that  it  could  not  have  been  believed 


*  Ut  naturae  immortali  quidquam  decederet. 

2  Citra. 

3  Professi  Dei.  The  expression  denotes  one  who  shows  himself 
in  his  real  character,  without  any  veiling  or  concealment.  There  is 
another  reading  —  "professi  Deum.'' 

4  Divinilate. 


that  he  was  God  if  those  very  things  which  he 
censures  had  not  been  done. 


CHAP.    XXIII. OF    GIVING    PRECEPTS,    AND    ACTING. 

If  any  one  gives  to  men  precepts  for  living, 
and  moulds  the  characters  of  others,  I  ask 
whether  he  is  bound  himself  to  practise  the 
things  which  he  enjoins,  or  is  not  bound.  If 
he  shall  not  do  so,  his  precepts  are  annulled. 
For  if  the  things  which  are  enjoined  are  good, 
if  they  place  the  life  of  men  in  the  best  condi- 
tion, the  instructor  ought  not  to  separate  him- 
self from  the  number  and  assemblage  of  men 
among  whom  he  acts  ;  and  he  ought  himself  to 
live  in  the  same  manner  in  which  he  teaches 
that  men  ought  to  live,  lest,  by  living  in  another 
way,  he  himself  should  disparage  5  his  own  pre- 
cepts, and  make  his  instruction  of  less  value,  if 
in  reality  he  should  relax  the  obligations  of  that 
which  he  endeavours  to  establish  by  his  words. 
For  every  one,  when  he  hears  another  giving 
precepts,  is  unwilling  that  the  necessity  of  obey- 
ing should  be  imposed  upon  him,  as  though  the 
right  of  liberty  were  taken  from  him.  Therefore 
he  answers  his  teacher  in  this  manner  :  I  am  not 
able  to  do  the  things  which  you  command,  for 
they  are  impossible.  For  you  forbid  me  to  be 
angry,  you  forbid  me  to  covet,  you  forbid  me  to 
be  excited  by  desire,  you  forbid  me  to  fear  pain 
or  death  ;  but  this  is  so  contrary  to  nature,  that 
all  animals  are  subject  to  these  affections.  Or 
if  you  are  so  entirely  of  opinion  that  it  is  pos- 
sible to  resist  nature,  do  you  yourself  practise 
the  things  which  you  enjoin,  that  I  may  know 
that  they  are  possible  ?  But  since  you  yourself 
do  not  practise  them,  what  arrogance  is  it,  to 
wish  to  impose  upon  a  free  man  laws  which  you 
yourself  do  not  obey  !  You  who  teach,  first 
learn ;  and  before  you  correct  the  character  of 
others,  correct  your  own.  Who  could  deny  the 
justice  of  this  answer?  Nay  !  a  teacher  of  this 
kind  will  fall  into  contempt,  and  will  in  his  turn 
be  mocked,  because  he  also  will  appear  to  mock 
others. 

What,  therefore,  will  that  instructor  do,  if 
these  things  shall  be  objected  to  him?  how  will 
he  deprive  the  self-willed^  of  an  excuse,  unless  he 
teach  them  by  deeds  before  their  eyes  ^  that  he 
teaches  things  which  are  possible  ?  Whence  it 
comes  to  pass,  that  no  one  obeys  the  precepts 
of  the  philosophers.**  For  men  prefer  examples 
rather  than  words,  because  it  is  easy  to  speak, 
but  difficult  to  accomplish.9  Would  to  heaven 
that  there  were  as  many  who  acted  well  as  there 
are  who  speak  well !     But  they  who  give  pre- 


5  Ipse  prseceptis  suis  fidem  detrahat. 
*  Contumacibus. 

7  Pra;sentibus  factis. 

8  [See  Augustine,  quoted  in  elucidation,  vol.  vi.  p.  541.] 

9  Praestare. 


Chap.  XXIV.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


125 


cepts,  without  carrying  them  out  into  action,  are 
distrusted ; '  and  if  they  shall  be  men,  will  be 
despised  as  inconsistent :  -  if  it  shall  be  God, 
He  will  be  met  with  the  excuse  of  the  frailty 
of  man's  nature.  It  remains  that  words  should 
be  confirmed  by  deeds,  which  the  philosophers 
are  unable  to  do.  Therefore,  since  the  instruc- 
tors themselves  are  overcome  by  the  affections 
which  they  say  that  it  is  our  duty  to  overcome, 
they  are  able  to  train  no  one  to  virtue,  which 
they  falsely  proclaim ;  ^  and  for  this  cause  they 
imagine  that  no  perfect  wise  man  has  as  yet 
existed,  that  is,  in  whom  the  greatest  virtue  and 
perfect  justice  were  in  harmony  with  the  great- 
est learning  and  knowledge.  And  this  indeed 
was  true.  For  no  one  since  the  creation  of  the 
world  has  been  such,  except  Christ,  who  both 
delivered  wisdom  by  His  word,  and  confirmed 
His  teaching  by  presenting  virtue  to  the  eyes  of 
men.* 

CHAP.  XXrV. THE  OVERTHROWING    OF   THE    ARGU- 
MENTS  ABOVE   URGED    BY    WAY    OF    OBJECTION. 

Come,  let  us  now  consider  whether  a  teacher 
sent  from  heaven  can  fail  to  be  perfect.  I  do 
not  as  yet  speak  of  Him  whom  they  deny  to 
have  come  from  God.  Let  us  suppose  that 
some  one  were  to  be  sent  from  heaven  to  in- 
struct the  life  of  men  in  the  first  principles  of 
virtue,  and  to  form  them  to  righteousness.  No 
one  can  doubt  but  that  this  teacher,  who  is  sent 
from  heaven,  would  be  as  perfect  in  the  knowl- 
edge of  all  things  as  in  virtue,  lest  there  should 
be  no  difference  between  a  heavenly  and  an 
earthly  teacher.  For  in  the  case  of  a  man  his 
instruction  can  by  no  means  be  from  within  and 
of  himself.5  For  the  mind,  shut  in  by  earthly 
organs,  and  hindered  by  a  corrupt'^  body,  of 
itself  can  neither  comprehend  nor  receive  the 
truth,  unless  it  is  taught  from  another  source.'' 
And  if  it  had  this  power  in  the  greatest  degree, 
yet  it  would  be  unable  to  attain  to  the  highest 
virtue,  and  to  resist  all  vices,  the  materials  of 
which  are  contained  in  our  bodily^  organs. 
Hence  it  comes  to  pass,  that  an  earthly  teacher 
cannot  be  perfect.  But  a  teacher  from  heaven, 
to  whom  His  divine  nature  gives  knowledge,  and 
His  immortality  gives  virtue,  must  of  necessity 
in  His  teaching  also,  as  in  other  things,  be  per- 
fect and  complete.  But  this  cannot  by  any 
means  happen,  unless  He  should  take  to  Himself 


'  Abest  ab  iis  fides. 

^  Leves. 

3  [What  neither  Platonists  nor  Censors,  in  their  judgments,  could 
effect  by  tlieir  sophia,  the  crucified  Jesus  has  done  by  His  Gospei. 
The  impotence  of  philosophers  as  compared  with  the  Carpenter's 
Son,  to  change  the  morals  of  nations,  cannot  be  gainsaid.  See 
Young's  Christ  0/  History. \ 

*  Praesenti  virtute. 
5  Propria. 

*  Tabe  corporis. 

'  Thus  our  Lord  tells  us  that  flesh  and  blood  cannot  reveal  to  us 
mysteries. 

'  Visceribus. 


a  mortal  body.  And  the  reason  why  it  cannot 
happen  is  manifest.  For  if  He  should  come  to 
men  as  God,  not  to  mention  that  mortal  eyes 
cannot  look  upon  and  endure  the  glory  of  His 
majesty  in  His  own  person,  assuredly  God  will 
not  be  able  to  teach  virtue  ;  for,  inasmuch  as 
He  is  without  a  body,  He  will  not  practise  the 
things  which  He  will  teach,  and  through  this 
His  teaching  will  not  be  perfect.  Otherwise,  if 
it  is  the  greatest  virtue  patiendy  to  endure  pain 
for  the  sake  of  righteousness  and  duty,  if  it  is 
virtue  not  to  fear  death  itself  when  threatened, 
and  when  inflicted  to  undergo  it  with  fortitude  ; 
it  follows  that  the  perfect  teacher  ought  both  to 
teach  these  things  by  precept,  and  to  confirm 
them  by  practice.  For  he  who  gives  precepts 
for  the  life,  ought  to  remove  every  method  9  of 
excuse,  that  he  may  impose  upon  men  the  ne- 
cessity of  obedience,  not  by  any  constraint,  but. 
by  a  sense  of  shame,  and  yet  may  leave  them 
liberty,  that  a  reward  may  be  appointed  for  those 
who  obey,  because  it  was  in  their  power  not  to 
obey  if  they  so  wished ;  and  a  punishment  for 
those  who  do  not  obey,  because  it  was  in  their 
power  to  obey  if  they  so  wished.  How  then  can 
excuse  be  removed,  unless  the  teacher  should 
practise  what  he  teaches,  and  as  it  were  go  be- 
fore '°  and  hold  out  his  hand  to  one  who  is  about 
to  follow?  But  how  can  one  practise  what  he 
teaches,  unless  he  is  like  him  whom  he  teaches  ? 
For  if  he  be  subject  to  no  passion,  a  man  may 
thus  answer  him  who  is  the  teacher :  It  is  my 
wish  not  to  sin,  but  I  am  overpowered  ;  for  I  am 
clothed  with  frail  and  weak  flesh  :  it  is  this  which 
covets,  which  is  angry,  which  fears  pain  and 
death.  And  thus  I  am  led  on  against  my  will ;  " 
and  I  sin,  not  because  it  is  my  wish,  but  because 
I  am  compelled.  I  myself  perceive  that  I  sin  ; 
but  the  necessity  imposed  by  my  frailty,  which 
I  am  unable  to  resist,  impels  me.  A\'hat  will 
that  teacher  of  righteousness  say  in  reply  to  these 
things?  How  will  he  refute  and  convict  a  man 
who  shall  allege  the  frailty  of  the  flesh  as  an 
excuse  for  his  faults,  unless  he  himself  also  shall 
be  clothed  with  flesh,  so  that  he  may  show  that 
even  the  flesh  is  capable  of  virtue  ?  For  obsti- 
nacy cannot  be  refuted  except  by  example.  For 
the  things  which  you  teach  cannot  have  any 
weight  unless  you  shall  be  the  first  to  practise 
them  ;  because  the  nature  of  men  is  inclined  to 
faults,  and  wishes  to  sin  not  only  with  indulgence, 
but  also  with  a  reasonable  plea.'^     It  is  befitting 


9  Omnium  excusationum  vias.  [Here  is  the  defect  of  Cicero's 
philosophy.  See  William  '^'Ah^xloxo.a,  Practical  Christianity,  ■^. 
25,  ed.  London,  1815.] 

■°  Praevius. 

"  Thus  St.  Paul  complains,  Rom.  vii.  15:  "  ^VTlat  I  would,  that 
do  I  not;  but  what  I  hate,  that  do  I:  "  andver.21,  "  I  find  then  a  law, 
that  when  I  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with  mc."  But  (viii.  3) 
he  says,  "'  What  the  law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was  weak  through  the 
flesh,  God,  sending  His  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  con- 
demned sin  in  the  flesh." 

'*  Cum  ratione. 


126 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  IV. 


that  a  master  and  teacher  of  virtue  should  most 
closely  resemble  man,  that  by  overpowering  sin 
he  may  teach  man  that  sin  may  be  overpowered 
by  him.  But  if  he  is  immortal,  he  can  by  no 
means  propose  an  example  to  man.  For  there 
will  stand  forth  some  one  persevering  in  his 
opinion,  and  will  say  :  You  indeed  do  not  sin, 
because  you  are  free  from  this  body ;  you  do 
not  covet,  because  nothing  is  needed  by  an  im- 
mortal ;  but  I  have  need  of  many  things  for  the 
support  of  this  life.  You  do  not  fear  death,  be- 
cause it  can  have  no  power  against  you.  You 
despise  pain,  because  you  can  suffer  no  violence. 
But  I,  a  mortal,  fear  both,  because  they  bring 
upon  me  the  severest  tortures,  which  the  weak- 
ness of  the  flesh  cannot  endure.  A  teacher  of 
virtue  therefore  ought  to  have  taken  away  this 
excuse  from  men,  that  no  one  may  ascribe  it  to 
necessity  that  he  sins,  rather  than  to  his  own 
fault.  Therefore,  that  a  teacher  may  be  perfect, 
no  objection  ought  to  be  brought  forward  by 
him  who  is  to  be  taught,  so  that  if  he  should 
happen  to  say.  You  enjoin  impossibilides ;  the 
teacher  may  answer.  See,  I  myself  do  them.  But 
I  am  clothed  with  flesh,  and  it  is  the  property  of 
flesh  to  sin.'  I  too  bear  the  same  flesh,  and  yet 
sin  does  not  bear  rule  in  me.  It  is  difficult  for 
me  to  despise  riches,  because  otherwise  I  am 
unable  to  live  in  this  body.  See,  I  too  have  a 
body,  and  yet  I  contend  against  every  desire. 
I  am  not  able  to  bear  pain  or  death  for  right- 
eousness, because  I  am  frail.  See,  pain  and 
death  have  power  over  me  also  ;  and  I  overcome 
those  very  things  which  you  fear,  that  I  may 
make  you  victorious  over  pain  and  death.  I  go 
before  you  througli  those  things  which  you  allege 
that  it  is  impossible  to  endure  :  if  you  are  not 
able  to  follow  me  giving  directions,  follow  me 
going  before  you.  In  this  way  all  excuse  is 
taken  away,  and  you  must  confess  that  man  is 
unjust  through  his  own  fauU,  since  he  does  not 
follow  a  teacher  of  virtue,  who  is  at  the  same 
time  a  guide.  You  see,  therefore,  how  much 
more  perfect  is  a  teacher  who  is  mortal,  because 
he  is  able  to  be  a  guide  to  one  who  is  mortal, 
than  one  who  is  immortal,  for  he  is  unable  to 
teach  patient  endurance  who  is  not  subject  to 
passions.  Nor,  however,  does  this  extend  so  far 
that  I  prefer  man  to  God  ;  but  to  show  that  man 
cannot  be  a  perfect  teacher  unless  he  is  also 
God,  that  he  may  by  his  heavenly  authority  im- 
pose upon  men  the  necessity  of  obedience  ;  nor 
God,  unless  he  is  clothed  with  a  mortal  body, 
that  by  carrying  out  his  precepts  to  their  com- 
pletion ^  in  actions,  he  may  bind  others  by  the 
necessity  of  obedience.     It  plainly  therefore  ap- 


'  This  is  urged  as  an  excuse  by  him  to  whom  the  precept  is  ad- 
dressed. In  this  and  the  following  sentences  there  is  a  dialogue  be- 
tween the  teacher  and  the  taught. 

'  Praecepta  sua  iactis  adimplendo. 


pears,  that  he  who  is  a  guide  of  life  and  teacher 
of  righteousness  must  have  a  body,  and  that  his 
teaching  cannot  otherwise  be  full  and  perfect, 
unless  it  has  a  root  and  foundation,  and  remains 
firm  and  fixed  among  men  ;  and  that  he  himself 
must  undergo  weakness  of  flesh  and  body,  and 
display  in  himself  ^  the  virtue  of  which  he  is  a 
teacher,  that  he  may  teach  it  at  the  same  time 
both  by  words  and  deeds.  Also,  he  must  be 
subject  to  death  and  all  sufferings,  since  the 
duties  of  virtue  are  occupied  with  the  enduring 
of  suffering,  and  the  undergoing  death  ;  all  which, 
as  I  have  said,  a  perfect  teacher  ought  to  endure, 
that  he  may  teach  the  possibility  of  their  being 
endured. 

CHAP.    XXV. OF    THE    ADVENT    OF     JESUS    IN   THE 

FLESH    AND    SPIRIT,    THAT    HE    MIGHT    BE    MEDI- 
ATOR   BETWEEN    GOD    AND   MAN. 

Let  men  therefore  learn  and  understand  why 
the  Most  High  God,  when  He  sent  His  ambas- 
sador and  messenger  to  instruct  mortals  with  the 
precepts  of  His  righteousness,  willed  that  He 
should  be  clothed  with  mortal  flesh,  and  be 
afflicted  with  torture,  and  be  sentenced  to  death. 
For  since  there  was  no  righteousness  on  earth, 
He  sent  a  teacher,  as  it  were  a  living  law,  to 
found  a  new  name  and  temple,-*  that  by  His 
words  and  example  He  might  spread  through- 
out the  earth  a  true  and  holy  worship.  But, 
however,  that  it  might  be  certain  that  He  was 
sent  by  God,  it  was  befitting  that  He  should  not 
be  born  as  man  is  born,  composed  of  a  mortal 
on  both  sides ;  s  but  that  it  might  appear  that 
He  was  heavenly  even  in  tlie  form  of  man,  He 
was  born  without  the  office  of  a  father.  For 
He  had  a  spiritual  Father,  God  ;  and  as  God 
was  the  Father  of  His  spirit  without  a  mother, 
so  a  virgin  was  the  mother  of  His  body  without 
a  father.  He  was  therefore  both  God  and  man, 
being  placed  in  the  middle  between  God  and 
man.  From  which  the  Greeks  call  Him  Mesi- 
tes,^  that  He  might  be  able  to  lead  man  to  God 
—  that  is,  to  immortality:  for  if  He  had  been 
God  only  (as  we  have  before  said).  He  would 
not  have  been  able  to  afford  to  man  examples 
of  goodness ;  if  He  had  been  man  only,  He 
would  not  have  been  able  to  compel  men  to 
righteousness,  unless  there  had  been  added  an 
authority  and  virtue  greater  than  that  of  man. 

For,   since    man   is   composed  of   flesh   and 


3  V^irtutem  in  se  recipere. 

■<  Thus,  Heb.  viii.  2,  Christ  is  spoken  of  as  "  a  minister  of  the 
sanctuarj',  and  the  true  tabernacle." 

5  Having  a  human  father  and  mother. 

6  /ufcriTi)?,  a  mediator,  one  who  stands  between  two  parlies  to 
bring  them  together.  Thus  i  Tim.  ii.  5,  "  There  is  one  God,  and  one 
mediator  (ifoiTijs)  between  God  and  men,  the  man  Christ  Jesus." 
In  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  Christ  is  spoken  of  as  the  "  mediator 
of  the  new  covenant."  And  Gal.  iii  20,  "  A  mediator  is  not  of  one:  " 
the  very  idea  of  a  mediator  imphes  that  he  stands  between  two  par- 
ties as  a  reconciler. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


127 


spirit,  and  the  spirit  must  earn  '  immortality  by 
works  of  righteousness,  the  flesh,  since  it  is 
earthly,  and  therefore  mortal,  draws  with  itself 
the  spirit  linked  to  it,  and  leads  it  from  immor- 
tality to  death.  Therefore  the  spirit,  apart  from 
the  flesh,  could  by  no  means  be  a  guide  to  im- 
mortality for  man,  since  the  flesh  hinders  the 
spirit  from  following  God.  For  it  is  frail,  and 
liable  to  sin  ;  but  sin  is  the  food  and  nourish- 
ment- of  death.  For  this  cause,  therefore,  a 
mediator  came — that  is,  God  in  the  flesh  — 
that  the  flesh  might  be  able  to  follow  Him,  and 
that  He  might  rescue  man  from  death,  which 
has  dominion  over  the  flesh.  Therefore  He 
clothed  Himself  with  flesh,  that  the  desires  of 
the  flesh  being  subdued.  He  might  teach  that  to 
sin  was  not  the  result  of  necessity,  but  of  man's 
purpose  and  will.  For  we  have  one  great  and 
principal  struggle  to  maintain  with  the  flesh,  the 
boundless  desires  of  which  press  upon  the  soul, 
nor  allow  it  to  retain  dominion,  but  make  it  the 
slave  of  pleasures  and  sweet  allurements,  and 
visit  it  with  everlasting  death.  And  that  we 
might  be  able  to  overcome  these,  God  has 
opened  and  displayed  to  us  the  way  of  overcom- 
ing the  flesh.  And  this  perfect  and  absolutely 
complete  ^  virtue  bestows  on  those  who  conquer, 
the  crown  and  reward  of  immortality. 

CHAP.  XXVr. OF  THE  CROSS,  AND  OTHER  TOR- 
TURES OF  JESUS,  AND  OF  THE  FIGURE  OF  THE 
LAMB  UNDER  THE  LAW. 

I  have  spoken  of  humiliation,  and  frailty,  and 
suffering  —  why  God  thought  fit  to  undergo 
them.  Now  an  account  must  be  taken  of  the 
cross  itself,  and  its  meaning  must  be  related. 
What  the  Most  High  Father  arranged  from  the 
beginning,  and  how  He  ordained  all  things 
which  were  accomplished,  not  only  the  foretell- 
ing by  the  prophets,  which  preceded  and  was 
proved  true  ■*  in  Christ,  but  also  the  manner  of 
His  suffering  itself  teaches.  For  whatever  suffer- 
ings He  underwent  were  not  without  meaning  ;  5 
but  they  had  a  figurative  meaning  ^  and  great  sig- 
nificance, as  had  also  those  divine  works  which 
He  performed,  the  strength  and  power  of  which 
had  some  weight  indeed  for  the  present,  but  also 
declared  something  for  the  future.  Heavenly 
influence  opened  the  eyes  of  the  blind,  and  gave 
light  to  those  who  did  not  see  ;  and  by  this  deed 
He  signified  that  it  would  come  to  pass  that, 
turning  to  the  nations  which  were  ignorant  of 
God,  He  might  enlighten  the  breasts  of  the  fool- 
ish with  the  light  of  wisdom,  and  open  the  eyes 


'  Emereri,  "  to  earn  or  obtain."  The  word  is  specially  applied  to 
soldiers  who  have  served  their  time,  and  are  entitled  to  their  dis- 
charge. 

^  Pabulum. 

^  Omnibus  numeris  absoluta. 

*•  i.e. ,  was  shown  by  the  event  to  be  true,  not  doubtful  or  deceptive. 

5  Inania,  "  empty. 

*>  Figuram.  -^ 


of  their  understanding  to  the  contemplation  of 
the  truth.  For  they  are  truly  blind  who,  not 
seeing  heavenly  things,  and  surrounded  with  the 
darkness  of  ignorance,  worship  earthly  and  frail 
things.  He  opened  the  ears  of  the  deaf.  It  is 
plain  that  this  divine  power  did  not  limit  its 
exercise  to  this  point ;  ^  but  He  declared  that  it 
would  shortly  come  to  pass,  that  they  who  were 
destitute  of  the  truth  would  both  hear  and  under- 
stand the  divine  words  of  God.  For  you  may 
truly  call  those  deaf  who  do  not  hear  the  things 
which  are  heavenly  and  true,  and  worthy  of 
being  performed.  He  loosed  the  tongues  of  the 
dumb,  so  that  they  spake  plainly.^  A  power 
worthy  of  admiration,*?  even  when  it  was  in 
operation  :  but  there  was  contained  in  this  dis- 
play ■°  of  power  another  meaning,  which  showed 
that  it  would  shortly  come  to  pass  that  those 
who  were  lately  ignorant  of  heavenly  things, 
having  received  the  instruction  of  wisdom,  might 
speak  respecting  God  and  the  truth.  For  he 
who  is  ignorant  of  the  divine  nature,  he  truly  is 
speechless  and  dumb,  although  he  is  the  most 
eloquent  of  all  men.  For  when  the  tongue  has 
begun  to  speak  truth  —  that  is,  to  set  forth  the 
excellency  and  majesty  of  the  one  God  —  then 
only  does  it  discharge  the  office  of  its  nature  ; 
but  as  long  as  it  speaks  false  things  it  is  not 
rightly  employed  :  "  and  therefore  he  must  neces- 
sarily be  speechless  who  cannot  utter  divine 
things.  He  also  renewed  the  feet  of  the  lame 
to  the  office  of  walking, — a  strength  of  divine 
work  worthy  of  praise  ;  but  the  figure  implied 
this,  that  the  errors  of  a  worldly  and  wandering 
life  being  restrained,  the  path  of  truth  was 
opened  by  which  men  might  walk  to  attain  the 
favour  of  God.  For  He  is  truly  to  be  consid- 
ered lame,  who,  being  enwrapped  in  the  gloom 
and  darkness  of  folly,  and  ignorant  in  what 
direction  to  go,  with  feet  liable  to  stumble  and 
fall,  walks  in  the  way  of  death. 

Likewise  He  cleansed  the  stains  and  blem- 
ishes of  defiled  bodies,  —  no  slight  exercise  of 
immortal  power ;  but  this  strength  prefigured 
that  by  the  instruction  of  righteousness  His 
doctrine  was  about  to  purify  those  defiled  by 
the  stains  of  sms  and  the  blemishes  of  vices. 
For  they  ought  truly  to  be  accounted  as  leprous 
and  unclean,'^  whom  either  boundless  lusts  com- 
pel to  crimes,  or  insatiable  pleasures  to  disgrace- 
ful deeds,  and  affect  with  an  everlasting  stain 
those  who  are  branded  with  the  marks  of  dis- 


7  Hactenus  operata  est. 

8  In  cloquium  solvit 

9  See  Malt.  i.\.  33,  "  The  dumb  spake,  and  the  multitudes  mar- 
velled: "  Mark  vii.  37.  "  They  were  beyond  measure  astonislied,  say- 
ing, He  hnth  done  all  things  well:  He  maketh  both  the  deaf  to  hear 
and  the  dumb  to  speak." 

'°  Inerat  huic  virtuti. 

"  In  usu  suo  non  est. 

■2  Eleph.nntiaci,  tho.se  afflicted  with  "  elephanti.isis,"  a  kind  of  lep- 
rosy, covering  the  skin  with  incrustations  resembling  the  hide  of  aa 
elephant. 


128 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  IV. 


honourable  actions.  He  raised  the  bodies  of 
the  dead  as  they  lay  prostrate  ;  and  calling  them 
aloud  by  their  names,  He  brouglit  them  back 
from  death.  \Miat  is  more  suitable  to  God, 
what  more  worthy  of  the  wonder  of  all  ages, 
than  to  have  recalled  '  the  life  which  has  run  its 
course,  to  have  added  times  to  the  completed 
times  of  men,  to  have  revealed  the  secrets  of 
death?  But  this  unspeakable  power  was  the 
image  of  a  greater  energy,  which  showed  that 
His  teaching  was  about  to  have  such  might,  that 
the  nations  throughout  the  world,  which  were 
estranged  from  God  and  subject  to  death,  being 
animated  by  the  knowledge  of  the  true  light, 
might  arrive  at  the  rewards  of  immortality.  For 
you  may  rightly  deem  those  to  be  dead,  who, 
not  knowing  God  the  giver  of  life,  and  depress- 
ing their  souls  from  heaven  to  earth,  run  into 
the  snares  of  eternal  death.  The  actions,  there- 
fore, which  He  then  performed  for  the  present, 
were  representations  of  future  things  ;  the  things 
which  He  displayed  in  injured  and  diseased  bod- 
ies were  figures  ^  of  spiritual  things,  that  at 
present  He  might  display  to  us  the  works  of  an 
energy  which  was  not  of  earth,  and  for  the  future 
might  show  the  power  of  His  heavenly  majesty.^ 

Therefore,  as  His  works  had  a  signification 
also  of  greater  power,  so  also  His  passion  did 
not  go  before  us  as  simple,  or  superfluous,  or  by 
chance.  But  as  those  things  which  He  did  sig- 
nified the  great  efficacy  and  power  of  His  teach- 
ing, so  those  things  which  He  suffered  announced 
that  wisdom  would  be  held  in  hatred.  For  the 
vinegar  which  they  gave  Him  to  drink,  and  the 
gall  which  they  gave  Him  to  eat,  held  forth 
hardships  and  severities  *  in  this  life  to  the  fol- 
lowers of  truth.  And  although  His  passion, 
which  was  harsh  and  severe  in  itself,  gave  to  us 
a  sample  of  the  future  torments  which  virtue 
itself  proposes  to  those  who  linger  in  this  world, 
yet  drink  and  food  of  this  kind,  coming  into  the 
mouth  of  our  teacher,  afforded  us  an  example 
of  pressures,  and  labours,  and  miseries.  All 
which  things  must  be  undergone  and  suffered  by 
those  who  follow  the  truth ;  since  the  truth  is 
bitter,  and  detested  by  all  who,  being  destitute 
of  virtue,  give  up  their  Hfe  to  deadly  pleasures. 
For  the  placing  of  a  crown  of  thorns  upon  His 
head,  declared  that  it  would  come  to  pass  that 
He  would  gather  to  Himself  a  holy  people  from 
those  who  were  guilty.  For  people  standing 
around  in  a  circle  are  called  a  corona>     But  we, 


*  Resignasse,  "  to  have  unsealed  or  opened." 
^  Figuram  gerebant. 

3  [It  is  undoubtedly  true  that  all  our  Lord's  miracles  are  also 
parables.     Such  also  is  the  entire  history  of  the  Hebrews.] 

*  Acerbitates  et  amariiudines. 

S  The  word  "corona"  denotes  a  crown,"  and  also,  as  here,  a 
"  ring  "  of  persons  standing  around.  The  play  on  the  word  cannot 
be  kept  up  in  English.  [Thus  "  corona  tibi  et  judices  defuerunt." 
Cicero,  Nat.  Dear.,  ii.  i.  So  Ignatius,  T-eiavof  ToO  npecTlivTipiov 
—  coroua  presbyterii,  vol  i.  p.  64,  this  series.] 


who  before  that  we  knew  God  were  unjust,  were 
thorns  —  that  is,  evil  and  guilty,  not  knowing 
what  was  good  ;  and  estranged  from  the  concep- 
tion and  the  works  of  righteousness,  polluted 
all  things  with  wickedness  and  lust.  Being 
taken,  therefore,  from  briars  and  thorns,  we  sur- 
round the  sacred  head  of  God  ;  for,  being  called 
by  Himself,  and  spread  around  Him,  we  stand 
beside  God,  who  is  our  Master  and  Teacher, 
and  crown  Him  King  of  the  world,  and  Lord 
of  all  the  living. 

But  with  reference  to  the  cross,  it  has  great 
force  and  meaning,  which  I  will  now  endeavour 
to  show.  For  God  (as  I  have  before  explained), 
when  He  had  determined  to  set  man  free,  sent 
as  His  ambassador  to  the  earth  a  teacher  of  vir- 
tue, who  might  both  by  salutary  precepts  train 
men  to  innocence,  and  by  works  and  deeds 
before  their  eyes  ^  might  open  the  way  of  right- 
eousness, by  walking  in  which,  and  following 
his  teacher,  man  might  attain  to  eternal  life. 
He  therefore  assumed  a  body,  and  was  clothed 
in  a  garment  of  flesh,  that  He  might  hold  out 
to  man,  for  whose  instruction  He  had  come,  ex- 
amples of  virtue  and  incitements  to  its  practice. 
But  when  He  had  afforded  an  example  of  right- 
eousness in  all  the  duties  of  life,  in  order  that 
He  might  teach  man  also  the  jjatient  endurance 
of  pain  and  contempt  of  death,  by  which  vir- 
tue is  rendered  perfect  and  complete,  He  came 
into  the  hands  of  an  impious  nation,  when,  by 
the  knowledge  of  the  future  which  He  had.  He 
might  have  avoided  them,  and  by  the  same 
power  by  which  He  did  wonderful  works  He 
might  have  repelled  them.  Therefore  He  en- 
dured tortures,  and  stripes,  and  thorns.  At  last 
He  did  not  refuse  even  to  undergo  death,  that 
under  His  guidance  man  might  triumph  over 
death,  subdued  and  bound  in  chains  with  all  its 
terrors.  But  the  reason  why  the  Most  High 
Father  chose  that  kind  of  death  in  preference 
to  others,  with  which  He  should  permit  Him  to 
be  visited,  is  this.  For  some  one  may  perchance 
say :  Why,  if  He  was  God,  and  chose  to  die, 
did  He  not  at  least  suffer  by  some  honourable 
kind  of  death?  why  was  it  by  the  cross  espe- 
cially? why  by  an  infamous  kind  of  punishment, 
which  may  appear  unworthy  even  of  a  man  if 
he  is  free, 7  although  guilty?  First  of  all,  be- 
cause He,  who  had  come  in  humility  that  He 
might  bring  assistance  to  the  humble  and  men 
of  low  degree,  and  might  hold  out  to  all  the 
hope  of  safety,  was  to  suffer  by  that  kind  of 
punishment  by  which  the  humble  and  low  usu- 
ally suffer,  that  there  might  be  no  one  at  all  who 
might  not  be  able  to  imitate  Him.  In  the  next 
place,  it  was  in  order  that  His  body  might  be 


6  Prsesentibus. 

'  The  cross  was  the  usual  punishment  of  slaves. 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


129 


kept   unmutilated/   since    He    must   rise   again 
from  the  dead  on  the  third  day. 

Nor  ought  any  one  to  be  ignorant  of  this,  that 
He  Himself,  speaking  before  of  His  passion,  also 
made  it  known  that  He  had  the  power,  when 
He  willed  it,  of  laying  down  His  life  and  of 
taking  it  again.  Therefore,  because  He  had  laid 
down  His  life  while  fastened  to  the  cross,  His 
executioners  did  not  think  it  necessary  to  break 
His  bones  (as  was  their  prevailing  custom),  but 
they  only  pierced  His  side.  Thus  His  unbroken 
body  was  taken  down  from  the  cross,  and  care- 
fully enclosed  in  a  tomb.  Now  all  these  things 
were  done  lest  His  body,  being  injured  and 
broken,  should  be  rendered  unsuitable  -  for  rising 
again.  That  also  was  a  principal  cause  why  God 
chose  the  cross,  because  it  was  necessary  that 
He  should  be  Hfted  up  on  it,  and  the  passion  of 
God  become  known  to  all  nations.  For  since 
he  who  is  suspended  upon  a  cross  is  both  con- 
spicuous to  all  and  higher  than  others,  the  cross 
was  especially  chosen,  which  might  signify  that 
He  would  be  so  conspicuous,  and  so  raised  on 
high,  that  all  nations  from  the  whole  world  should 
meet  together  at  once  to  know  and  worship  Him. 
Lastly,  no  nation  is  so  uncivilized,  no  region  so 
remote,  to  which  either  His  passion  or  the  height 
of  His  majesty  would  be  unknown.  Therefore 
in  His  suffering  He  stretched  forth  His  hands 
and  measured  out  the  world,  that  even  then  He 
might  show  that  a  great  multitude,  collected 
together  out  of  all  languages  and  tribes,  from 
the  rising  of  the  sun  even  to  his  setting,  was 
about  to  come  under  His  wings,  and  to  receive 
on  their  foreheads  that  great  and  lofty  sign.^ 
And  the  Jews  even  now  exhibit  a  figure  of  this 
transaction  when  they  mark  their  thresholds 
with  the  blood  of  a  lamb.  For  when  God  was 
about  to  smite  the  Egyptians,  to  secure  the  He- 
brews from  that  infliction  He  had  enjoined  them 
to  slay  a  white  •♦  lamb  without  spot,  and  to  place 
on  their  thresholds  a  mark  from  its  blood.  And 
thus,  when  the  first-born  of  the  Egyptians  had 
perished  in  one  night,  the  Hebrews  alone  were 
saved  by  the  sign  of  the  blood  :  not  that  the 
blood  of  a  sheep  had  such  efficacy  in  itself  as 
to  be  the  safety  of  men,  but  it  was  an  image  of 
things  to  come.     For  Christ  was  the  white  lamb 


'  Integrum. 

^  A  weak  and  senseless  reason.  The  true  cause  is  given  by  St. 
John  xix.  36:  "  These  things  were  done  that  the  scripture  should  be 
fulfilled,  A  bone  of  Him  shall  not  be  broken."  [The  previous  cjues- 
tion,  however,  remains:  Why  was  the  Paschal  lamb  to  be  of  unbroken 
bones,  and  why  the  special  providence  that  fulfilled  the  type? 
Doubtless  He  who  raised  up  His  body  could  have  restored  it.  had  the 
bones  also  been  broken;  but  the  preciousness  of  Christ's  body  was 
thus  indicated,  as  in  the  new  tomb,  the  fine  linen  and  spices,  and  the 
ministry  of"  the  rich  in  his  death,  because  He  had  done  no  violence," 
etc.  —  Isa.  liii.  9.] 

3  The  sign  of  the  cross  used  in  baptism. 

^  The  account,  Ex.  xii.,  makes  no  mention  of  colour.  "  Without 
spot"  is  equivalent  to  "  without  blemish."  [Hut  the  whiteness  is 
unplied.  "  Without  spot  "excludes"  the  ring-streaked  and  speckled," 
and  a  black  lamb  a  fortiori.  —  i  Pet.  i.  iq.  "  Without  spot  "  settles 
the  case.     Isa.  i.  18  proves  that  the  normal  wool  is  white. J 


without  spot ;  that  is.  He  was  innocent,  and  just, 
and  holy,  who,  being  slain  by  the  same  Jews,  is 
the  salvation  of  all  who  have  written  on  their 
foreheads  the  sign  of  blood  —  that  is,  of  the 
cross,  on  which  He  shed  His  blood.  For  the 
forehead  is  the  top  of  the  threshold  in  man,  and 
the  wood  sprinkled  with  blood  is  the  emblem  s 
of  the  cross.  Lastly,  the  slaying  of  the  lamb  by 
those  very  persons  who  perform  it  is  called  the 
paschal  feast,  from  the  word  "  paschein,"  ^  be- 
cause it  is  a  figure  of  the  passion,  which  God, 
foreknowing  the  future,  delivered  by  Moses  to 
be  celebrated  by  His  people.  But  at  that  time 
the  figure  was  efficacious  at  the  present  for 
averting  the  danger,  that  it  may  appear  what 
great  efficacy  the  truth  itself  is  about  to  have  for 
the  protection  of  God's  people  in  the  extreme 
necessity  of  the  whole  world.  But  in  what  manner 
or  in  what  region  all  will  be  safe  who  have  marked 
on  the  highest  part  of  their  body  this  sign  of  the 
true  and  divine  blood, ^  I  will  show  in  the  last 
book. 

CHAP.  XXVII.  —  OF  THE  WONDERS  EFFECTED  BY  THE 
POWER    OF   THE   CROSS,  AND    OF   DEMONS. 

At  present  it  is  sufficient  to  show  what  great 
efficacy  the  power  of  this  sign  has.  How  great 
a  terror  this  sign  is  to  the  demons,  he  will  know 
who  shall  see  how,  when  adjured  by  Christ,  they 
flee  from  the  bodies  which  they  have  besieged. 
For  as  He  Himself,  when  He  was  living  among 
men,  put  to  flight  all  the  demons  by  His  word, 
and  restored  to  their  former  senses  the  minds  of 
men  which  had  been  excited  and  maddened  by 
their  dreadful  attacks ;  so  now  His  followers,  in 
the  name  of  their  Master,  and  by  the  sign  of  His 
passion,  banish  the  same  polluted  spirits  from 
men.  And  it  is  not  difficult  to  prove  this.  For 
when  they  sacrifice  to  their  gods,  if  any  one  bear- 
ing a  marked  forehead  stands  by,  the  sacrifices 
are  by  no  means  favourable.^ 

"Nor  can  the  diviner,  when  consulted,  give  answers."' 

And  this  has  often  been  the  cause  of  punishment 
to  wicked  kings.  For  when  some  of  their  at- 
tendants who  were  of  our  religion '°  were  stantling 
by  their  masters  as  they  sacrificed,  having  the 
sign  placed  on  their  foreheads,  they  caused  the 
gods  of  their  masters  to  flee,  that  they  might  not 
be  able  to  observe  "  future  events  in  the  entrails 
of  the  victims.  And  when  the  soothsayers  un- 
derstood  this,  at  the  instigation  of   the  same 


5  Significatio. 

6  airo  Tou  jratrxeiv,  "from  suffering."  The  word  "  pascha  "  is 
not  derived  from  Greek,  as  Lactantius  supposes,  but  from  the  Hebrew 
"  pasach,"  to  pass  over. 

7  I  See  book  vii.,  and  the  Epitome,  cap.  li.,  in/rai\ 

8  Litant,  a  word  peculiar  to  the  soothsayers,  used  when  the  sacri- 
fices are  auspicious. 

9  Virg.,  Georg.,  iii.  491. 
'°'Nostri,  i.e.,  Christians. 

"  Depingere;  to  make  observations  on  the  entrails  of  the  victims, 
so  as  to  foretell  future  events. 


I30 


THE    DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  IV. 


demons  to  whom  they  had  sacrificed,'  complain- 
ing that  profane  men  were  present  at  the  sacri- 
fices, they  drove  their  princes  to  madness,  so 
that  they  attacked  the  temple  of  the  god,  and 
contaminated  themselves  by  true  sacrilege,  which 
was  expiated  by  the  severest  punishments  on  the 
part  of  their  persecutors.  Nor,  however,  are 
blind  men  able  to  understand  even  from  this, 
either  that  this  is  the  true  religion,  which  con- 
tains such  great  power  for  overcoming,  or  that 
that  is  false,  which  is  not  able  to  hold  its  ground 
or  to  come  to  an  engagement. 

But  they  say  that  the  gods  do  this,  not  through 
fear,  but  through  hatred  ;  as  though  it  were  pos- 
sible for  any  one  to  hate  another,  unless  it  be  him 
who  injures,  or  has  the  power  of  injuring.  Yea, 
truly,  it  would  be  consistent  with  their  majesty 
to  visit  those  whom  they  hated  with  immediate 
punishment,^  rather  than  to  flee  from  them.  But 
since  they  can  neither  approach  those  in  whom 
they  shall  see  the  heavenly  mark,  nor  injure  those 
whom  the  immortal  sign^  as  an  impregnable  wall 
protects,  they  harass  them  by  men,  and  perse- 
cute them  by  the  hands  of  others  :  and  if  they 
acknowledge  the  existence  of  these  demons,  we 
have  overcome  ;  for  this  must  necessarily  be  the 
true  religion,  which  both  understands  the  nature 
of  demons,  and  understands  their  subtlety,  and 
compels  them,  vanquished  and  subdued,  to  yield 
to  itself.  If  they  deny  it,  they  will  be  refuted  by 
the  testimonies  of  poets  and  philosophers.  But 
if  they  do  not  deny  the  existence  and  malignity 
of  demons,  what  remains  except  that  they  affirm 
that  there  is  a  difference  between  gods  and 
demons?^  Let  them  therefore  explain  to  us  the 
difference  between  the  two  kinds,  that  we  may 
know  what  is  to  be  worshipped  and  what  to 
be  held  in  execration;  whether  they  have  any 
mutual  agreement,  or  are  really  opposed  to  one 
another.  If  they  are  united  by  some  necessity, 
how  shall  we  distinguish  them?  or  how  shall  we 
unite  the  honour  and  worship  of  each  kind?  If, 
on  the  other  hand,  they  are  enemies,  how  is  it 
that  the  demons  do  not  fear  the  gods,  or  that 
the  gods  cannot  put  to  flight  the  demons  ?  Be- 
hold, some  one  excited  by  the  impulse  of  the 
demon  is  out  of  his  senses,  raves,  is  mad  :  let 
us  lead  him  into  the  temple  of  the  excellent  and 
mighty  Jupiter ;  or  since  Jupiter  knows  not  how 
to  cure  men,  into  the  fane  of  ^^isculapius  or 
Apollo.     Let  the  priest  of  either,  in  the  name 


'  ProsecrSrant.  Others  read  "  prosec3rant,"  a  sacrificial  word, 
properly  denoting  the  setting  apart  sonfie  portion  of  the  victim  for 
offering  to  the  gods. 

2  PrsEsentibus  poenis,  "  on  the  spot." 

3  i.e.,  the  sign  of  the  cross,  with  which  the  early  Christians  fre- 
qtiently  marked  themselves  [So  long  as  Christians  were  mocked 
and  despised  as  followers  of  a  crucified  one,  there  was  a  silent  testi- 
mony and  bold  confession  in  this  act  which  must  be  wholly  separated 
from  the  mere  superstition  of  degenerate  Christians.  It  used  to  mean 
just  what  the  Apostle  says.  Gal.  vi.  14.  In  this  .sense  it  is  retained 
among  Anglicans.] 

*  [See  vol.  iii.  pp.  37,  176,  180,  and  iv.  189-190.] 


of  his  god,  command  the  wicked  spirit  to  come 
out  of  the  man  :  that  can  in  no  way  come  to 
pass.  What,  then,  is  the  i:)ower  of  the  gods,  if 
the  demons  are  not  subject  to  their  control  ?  But, 
in  truth,  the  same  demons,  when  adjured  by  the 
name  of  the  true  God,  immediately  flee.  What 
reason  is  there  why  they  should  fear  Christ,  but 
not  fear  Jupiter,  unless  that  they  whom  the 
multitude  esteem  to  be  gods  are  also  demons? 
Lastly,  if  there  should  be  placed  in  the  midst 
one  who  is  evidently  suffering  from  an  attack  of 
a  demon,  and  the  priest  of  the  Delphian  Apollo, 
they  will  in  the  same  manner  dread  the  name 
of  God  ;  and  Apollo  will  as  quickly  depart  from 
his  priest  as  the  spirit  of  the  demon  from  the 
man ;  and  his  god  being  adjured  and  put  to 
flight,  the  priest  will  be  for  ever  silent.^  There- 
fore the  demons,  whom  they  acknowledge  to  be 
objects  of  execration,  are  the  same  as  the  gods 
to  whom  they  offer  supplications. 

If  they  imagine  that  we  are  unworthy  of  belief, 
let  them  believe  Homer,  who  associated  the 
supreme  Jupiter^  with  the  demons;  and  also 
other  poets  and  philosophers,  who  speak  of  the 
same  beings  at  one  time  as  demons,  and  at  another 
time  as  gods,  —  of  which  names  one  is  true,  and 
the  other  false.  For  those  most  wicked  spirits, 
when  they  are  adjured,  then  confess  that  they 
are  demons ;  when  they  are  worshipped,  then 
falsely  say  that  they  are  gods  ;  in  order  that  they 
may  lead  men  into  errors/  and  call  them  away 
from  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God,  by  which 
alone  eternal  death  can  be  escaped.  They  are 
the  same  who,  for  the  sake  of  overthrowing  man, 
have  founded  various  systems  of  worship  for 
themselves  through  different  regions,^ — under 
false  and  assumed  names,  however,  that  they 
might  deceive.  For  because  they  were  unable 
by  themselves  to  aspire  to  divinity,  they  took  to 
themselves  the  names  of  powerful  kings,  under 
whose  titles  they  might  claim  for  themselves 
divine  honours ;  which  error  may  be  dispelled, 
and  brought  to  the  light  of  truth.  For  if  any 
one  desires  to  inquire  further  into  the  matter, 
let  him  assemble  those  who  are  skilled  in  calling 
forth  spirits  from  the  dead.  Let  them  call  forth  9 
Jupiter,  Neptune,  Vulcan,  Mercury,  Apollo,  and 
Saturnus  the  father  of  all.  All  will  answer  from 
the  lower  regions ;  and  being  questioned  they 
will  speak,  and  confess  respecting  themselves  and 


5  [The  cessation  of  oracles  is  attested  by  Plutarch.  See  also 
Tertullian,  vol.  iii.  p.  38,  this  series,  and  Minucius,  vol  iv.  p.  iqo. 
Demonology  needs  further  exposition,  for  .Scripture  is  express  in  its 
confirmation  of  patristic  views  of  the  subject  ] 

6  There  is  probably  a  reference  to  Iliad,  i.  221,  where  Athene  is 
represented  as  going  to  Olympus:  — 

Suiixar'  e?  aiyidxoio  Atos  /neTo.  Saifiova^  aWovi. 

1  Ut  errores  hominibus  immittant. 

'  Per  diversa  regionum.  There  is  another  reading,  "  perversa 
religione  "  —  by  perverted  religion. 

9  The  reference  is  to  necromancy,  or  calling  up  the  spirits  of  the 
dead  by  magic  rites. 


Chap.  XXVIII.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


131 


God.  After  these  things  let  them  call  up  Christ ; 
He  will  not  be  present,  He  will  not  appear,  for 
He  was  not  more  than  two  days  in  the  lower 
regions.  What  proof  can  be  brought  fon\'ard 
more  certain  than  this?  I  have  no  doubt  that 
Trismegistus  arrived  at  the  truth  by  some  proof 
of  this  kind,  who  spoke  many  things  '  respecting 
God  the  Son  which  are  contained  in  the  divine 
secrets. 

CHAP.    XXVIII.  —  OF     HOPE     AND     TRUE     RELIGION, 
.-^ND   OF  SUPERSTITION. 

And  since  these  things  are  so,  as  we  have 
shown,  it  is  plain  that  no  other  hope  of  life  is  set 
before  man,  except  that,  laying  aside  vanities 
and  wretched  error,  he  should  know  God,==  and 
serve  God ;  except  he  renounce  this  temporary 
life,  and  train  himself  by  the  principles  of  right- 
eousness for  the  cultivation  of  true  religion. 
For  we  are  created  on  this  condition,  that  we 
pay  just  and  due  obedience  to  God  who  created 
us,  that  we  should  know  and  follow  Him  alone. 
We  are  bound  and  tied  to  God  by  this  chain  of 
piety ;^  from  which  religion  itself  received  its 
name,  not,  as  Cicero  explained  it,  from  carefully 
gathering, ■*  for  in  his  second  book  respecting  the 
nature  of  the  gods  he  thus  speaks :  "  For  not 
only  philosophers,  but  our  ancestors  also,  sepa- 
rated superstition  from  religion.  For  they  who 
spent  whole  days  in  prayers  and  sacrifices,  that 
their  children  might  survive  5  them,  were  called 
superstitious.  But  they  who  handled  again,  and 
as  it  were  carefully  gathered  all  things  which  re- 
lated to  the  worship  of  the  gods,  were  called 
religious  from  carefully  gathering,^  as  some  were 
called  elegant  from  choosing  out,  and  diligent 
from  carefully  selecting,  and  intelligent  from  un- 
derstanding. For  in  all  these  words  there  is  the 
same  meaning  of  gathering  which  there  is  in 
the  word  religious  :  thus  it  has  come  to  pass, 
that  in  the  names  superstitious  and  religious,  the 
one  relates  to  a  fault,  the  other  belongs  to  praise." 
How  senseless  this  interpretation  is,  we  may 
know  from  the  matter  itself.  For  if  both  religion 
and  superstition  are  engaged  in  the  worship  of 
the  same  gods,  there  is  little  or  rather  no  differ- 
ence between  them.     For  what  cause  will  he 


'  There  is  another  reading:  "  qui  de  Deo  patre  omnia,  et  de  filio 
locutus  est  mtilta;  "  but  this  is  manifestly  erroneous. 

2  So  our  Lord,  John  xvii.  3:  "  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might 
know  Thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  Thou  hast 
sent." 

3  ["  Hoc  vinculo  pietatis  obstricti  Deo  et  religati  sumus."  He 
returns  to  this  in  the  same  chapter,  infra  '\ 

*  A  religendo.     There  is  little  doubt  that  the  true  derivation  of 
religio"  \i,{xa\n  rcligcre,  not  from  religare.     According  to  this, 
the  primary  meaning  is,  "  the  dwelling  upon  a  subject,  and  continu- 
ally recurring  to  it." 

5  Superstiies,  et  superstitiosi. 
[Here  the  famous  passage  should  be  given  with  accurate  refer- 
ence to  it.s  place,  as  much  of  its  force  vanishes  in  translation.  Cicero's 
etymology  is  thus  given:  "  Qui  autem  omnia  qu;K  ad  cultum  deorum 
periinerent,  diligentes  retractarent  ei  tamquam  rclegcr,-ni  sunt  dicti 
religiosi.  ex  relegendo,  ut  elegantes  ex  eligeudo,  tamquam  a  ciili- 
getido  diligentes,  ex  intelligcndo  intelUgenics." —  Dc  Nat.  Dear., 
Jib.  ii.  cap.  28.J 


allege  why  he  should  think  that  to  pray  once  for 
the  health  of  sons  is  the  part  of  a  religious  man, 
but  to  do  the  same  ten  times  is  the  part  of 
a  superstitious  man?  For  if  it  is  an  excellent 
thing  to  pray  once,  how  much  more  so  to  do  it 
more  frequently  !  If  it  is  well  to  do  it  at  the 
first  hour,  then  it  is  well  to  do  it  throughout  the 
day.  If  one  victim  renders  the  deity  propitious, 
it  is  plain  that  many  victims  must  render  him 
more  propitious,  because  multiplied  services 
oblige  7  rather  than  offend.  For  those  servants 
do  not  appear  to  us  hateful  who  are  assiduous  and 
constant  in  their  attendance,  but  more  beloved. 
Why,  therefore,  should  he  be  in  fault,  and  re- 
ceive a  name  which  implies  censure,^  who  either 
loves  his  children  more,  or  sufficiently  honours 
the  gods ;  and  he,  on  the  contrary,  be  praised, 
who  loves  them  less?  And  this  argument  has 
weight  also  from  the  contrary.  For  if  it  is  wrongs 
to  pray  and  sacrifice  during  whole  days,  therefore 
it  is  wrong  to  do  so  once.  If  it  is  faulty  frequently 
to  wish  for  the  preservation  of  our  children, 
therefore  he  also  is  superstitious  who  conceives 
that  wish  even  rarely.  Or  why  should  the  name 
of  a  fault  be  derived  from  that,  than  which 
nothing  can  be  wished  more  honourable,  nothing 
more  just?  For  as  to  his  saying,  that  they  who 
diligently  take  in  hand  again  the  things  relating 
to  the  worship  of  the  gods  are  called  religious 
from  their  carefully  gathering ;  how  is  it,  then, 
that  they  who  do  this  often  in  a  day  lose  the 
name  of  religious  men,  when  it  is  plain  from 
their  very  assiduity  that  they  more  diligently 
gather  those  things  by  which  the  gods  are  wor- 
shipped ? 

What,  then,  is  it  ?  Truly  religion  is  the  culti- 
vation of  the  truth,  but  superstition  of  that  which 
is  false.  And  it  makes  the  entire  difference 
what  you  worship,  not  how  you  worship,  or  what 
prayer  you  offer. '°  But  because  the  worshippers 
of  the  gods  imagine  themselves  to  be  religious, 
though  they  are  superstitious,  they  are  neither 
able  to  distinguish  religion  from  superstition, 
nor  to  express  the  meaning  of  the  names.  We 
have  said  that  the  name  of  religion  is  derived 
from  the  bond  of  piety,"  because  God  has  tied 
man  to  Himself,  and  bound  him  by  piety ;  '-  for 
we  must  serve  Him  as  a  master,  and  be  obe- 
dient to  Him  as  a  father.     And  therefore  Lucre- 


">  Demerentur,  "  they  lay  under  an  obligation." 
*  Criniinis  est. 

9  Vitiosum. 

'°  [This  seems  very  loose  language  when  compared  with  Matt.  vi. 
9  and  I  Cor.  xi.  i,  2.  The  whole  epistle  shows  the  how  and  the 
what  to  be  important  in  worship,  and  that  the  Apostle  had  prescribed 
certain  laws  about  these] 

"   [See  note  4,  siipra.'\ 

'-  [Lactantius  has  generally  been  sustained  by  Christian  criticism 
in  the  censures  thus  passed  upon  Cicero,  and  in  making  the  word 
religio  out  of  religare.  His  own  words  are  desirable  here,  to  be 
compared  with  those  which  he  endeavours  to  refute  (  note  4,  supra) : 
"  Diximus  nomen  religionis  a  vinculo  pietatis  esse  dediictum,  quod 
hominem  sibi  Deus  religarit"  etc.;  i.e.,  it  binds  again  what  was 
loosed.] 


I  ^2 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  IV. 


tius '  better  explained  this  name,  who  says  that 
He  loosens  the  knots  of  superstitions.^  But 
they  are  called  superstitious,  not  who  wish  their 
children  to  survive  them,  for  we  all  wish  this ; 
but  either  those  who  reverence  the  surviving 
memory  of  the  dead,  or  those  who,  surviving 
their  parents,  reverenced  their  images  at  their 
houses  as  household  gods.  For  those  who  as- 
sumed to  themselves  new  rites,  that  they  might 
honour  the  dead  as  gods,  whom  they  supposed 
to  be  taken  from  men  and  received  into  heaven, 
they  called  superstitious.  But  those  who  wor- 
shipped the  public  and  ancient  gods^  they  named 
religious.     From  which  Virgil  says  :  •♦  — 

"Superstition  vain,  and  ignorant  of  ancient  gods." 

But  since  we  find  that  the  ancient  gods  also  were 
consecrated  in  the  same  manner  after  their 
death,  therefore  they  are  superstitious  who  wor- 
ship many  and  false  gods.  We,  on  the  other 
hand,  are  religious,  who  make  our  supplications 
to  the  one  true  God. 

CHAP.    XXIX. OF   THE    CHRISTIAN    RELIGION,    AND 

OF   THE   UNION    OF   JESUS    WITH   THE    FATHER. 

Some  one  may  perhaps  ask  how,  when  we  say 
that  we  worship  one  God  only,  we  nevertheless 
assert  that  there  are  two,  God  the  Father  and 
God  the  Son  :  which  assertion  has  driven  many 
into  the  greatest  error.  For  when  the  things 
which  we  say  seem  to  them  probable,  they  con- 
sider that  we  fail  in  this  one  point  alone,  that  we 
confess  that  there  is  another  God,  and  that 
He  is  mortal.  We  have  already  spoken  of  His 
mortality :  now  let  us  teach  concerning  His 
unity.  When  we  speak  of  God  the  Father  and 
God  the  Son,  we  do  not  speak  of  them  as  dif- 
ferent, nor  do  we  separate  each  :  because  the 
Father  cannot  exist  without  the  Son,  nor  can 
the  Son  be  separated  from  the  Father,  since  the 
name  of  Father  5  cannot  be  given  without  the 
Son,  nor  can  the  Son  be  begotten  without 
the  Father.  Since,  therefore,  the  Father  makes 
the  Son,  and  the  Son  the  Father,  they  both  have 
one  mind,  one  spirit,  one  substance  ;  but  the 
former^  is  as  it  were  an  overflowing  fountain, 
the  latter 7  as  a  stream  flowing  forth  from  it: 
the  former  as  the  sun,  the  latter  as  it  were  a  ray^ 
extended  from  the  sun.  And  since  He  is  both 
faithful  to  the  Most  High  Father,  and  beloved 
by  Him,  He  is  not  separated  from  Him  ;  just  as 
the  stream  is  not  separated  from  the  fountain. 


'  Lucret.,  i.  931. 

*  Religionum. 

3  i.e.,  those  worshipped  in  public  temples,  and  with  public  sac- 
rifices, as  opposed  to  the  household  gods  of  a  family,  and  ancient  as 
opposed  to  those  newly  received  as  gods. 

*  Virg..  ALneid,  viii.  187. 

S  [i.e,  the  Everlasting  Father  implies  the  Everlasting  Son.] 

*  llle,  i.e.,  the  Father. 

7  Hie,  i  e.,  the  Son. 

8  Thus,  Heb.  i.  3,  the  Son  is  described  as  the  effulgence  of  the 
Father's  glory:  uTravyav^a  t^s  oof jjs  avioii. 


nor  the  ray  from  the  sun  :  for  the  water  of  the 
fountain  is  in  the  stream,  and  the  light  of  the 
sun  is  in  the  ray  :  just  as  the  voice  cannot  be 
separated  from  the  mouth,  nor  the  strength  or 
hand  from  the  body.  When,  therefore.  He  is 
also  spoken  of  by  the  prophets  as  the  hand,  and 
strength,  and  word  of  God,  there  is  plainly  no 
separation  ;  for  the  tongue,  which  is  the  minister 
of  speech,  and  the  hand,  in  which  the  strength 
is  situated,  are  inseparable  portions  of  the  body. 
We  may  use  an  example  more  closely  con- 
nected with  us.  When  any  one  has  a  son  whom 
he  especially  loves,  who  is  still  in  the  house, 
and  in  the  power  9  of  his  father,  although  he 
concede  to  him  the  name  and  power  of  a  mas- 
ter, yet  by  the  civil  law  the  house  is  one,  and 
one  person  is  called  master.  So  this  world  '°  is 
the  one  house  of  God  ;  and  the  Son  and  the 
Father,  who  unanimously  inhabit  the  world,  ixt 
one  God,  for  the  one  is  as  two,  and  the  two  are 
as  one.  Nor  is  that  wonderful,  since  the  Son  is 
in  the  Father,  for  the  Father  loves  the  Son,  and 
the  Father  is  in  the  Son ;  for  He  faithfully  obeys 
the  will  of  the  Father,  nor  does  He  ever  do  nor 
has  done  anything  except  what  the  Father  either 
willed  or  commanded.  Lastly,  that  the  Father 
and  the  Son  are  but  one  God,  Isaiah  showed  in 
that  passage  which  we  have  brought  forward 
before,"  when  he  said  :  '^  "  They  shall  fall  down 
unto  Thee,  and  make  supplication  unto  Thee, 
since  God  is  in  Thee,  and  there  is  no  other  God 
besides  Thee."  And  he  also  speaks  to  the  same 
purport  in  another  place  :  '^  "Thus  saith  God  the 
King  of  Israel,  and  His  Redeemer,  the  ever- 
lasting God  ;  I  am  the  first,  and  I  am  the  last ; 
and  beside  me  there  is  no  God."  When  he 
had  set  forth  two  persons,  one  of  God  the 
King,  that  is,  Christ,  and  the  other  of  God  the 
Father,  who  after  His  passion  raised  Him  from 
the  dead,  as  we  have  said  '-•  that  the  prophet 
Hosea  showed, 's  who  said,  "  I  will  redeem  Him 
from  the  power  of  the  grave  :  "  nevertheless, 
with  reference  to  each  person,  he  introduced 
the  words,  "  and  beside  me  there  is  no  God," 
when  he  might  have  said  "  beside  us ;  "  but  it 
was  not  right  that  a  separation  of  so  close  a  rela- 
tionship should  be  made  by  the  use  of  the  plural 
number.  For  there  is  one  God  alone,  free,  most 
high,  without  any  origin ;  for  He  Himself  is  the 
origin  of  all  things,  and  in  Him  at  once  both 
the  Son  and  all  things  are  contained.  Where- 
fore, since  the  mind  and  will  of  the  one  is  in 
the  other,  or  rather,  since  there  is  one  in  both, 


9  In  nianu  patris.  Among  the  Romans  the  father  had  the  power 
of  life  and  death  over  his  children. 

'°  [Mundus  una  Dei  domus.  World  here  =  universe.  See  vol.  ii. 
p.  136,  note  2,  this  series.] 

»  Ch.  xiii. 

'-  Isa.  xlv.  14. 

'3  Isa.  xliv.  6. 

'■I  Ch.  xix. 

'5  Hos.  xiii.  14, 


Chap.  XXX.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


133 


both  are  justly  called  one  God  ;  for  whatever  is 
in  the  Father  '  flows  on  to  the  Son,  and  whatever 
is  in  the  Son  descends  from  the  Father.  There- 
fore that  highest  and  matchless  God  cannot  be 
worshipped  except  through  the  Son.  He  who 
thinks  that  he  worships  the  Father  only,  as  he 
does  not  worship  the  Son,  so  he  does  not  wor- 
ship even  the  Father.  But  he  who  receives  the 
Son,  and  bears  His  name,  he  truly  together  with 
the  Son  worships  the  Father  also,  since  the  Son 
is  the  ambassador,  and  messenger,  and  priest 
of  the  Most  High  Father.  He  is  the  door  of  the 
greatest  temple,  He  the  way  of  light,  He  the  guide 
to  salvation.  He  the  gate  of  life. 

CHAP.  XXX. OF  AVOIDING  HERESIES  AND  SUPER- 
STITIONS, AND  WHAT  IS  THE  ONLY  TRUE  CATH- 
OLIC   CHURCH. 

But  since  many  heresies  have  existed,  and  the 
people  of  God  have  been  rent  into  divisions  at 
the  instigation  of  demons,  the  truth  must  be 
briefly  marked  out  by  us,  and  placed  in  its  own 
peculiar  dwelling-place,  that  if  any  one  shall  de- 
sire to  draw  the  water  of  life,  he  may  not  be 
borne  to  broken  cisterns  ^  which  hold  no  water, 
but  may  know  the  abundant  fountain  of  God, 
watered  by  which  he  may  enjoy  perpetual  light. 
Before  all  things,  it  is  befitting  that  we  should 
know  both  that  He  Himself  and  His  ambassa- 
dors foretold  that  there  must  be  numerous  sects 
and  heresies,''  which  would  break  the  unity  +  of 
the  sacred  body ;  and  that  they  admonished  us 
to  be  on  our  guard  with  the  greatest  prudence, 
lest  we  should  at  any  time  fall  into  the  snares 
and  deceits  of  that  adversary  of  ours,  with  whom 
God  has  willed  that  we  should  contend.  Then 
that  He  gave  us  sure  commands,  which  we  ought 
always  to  treasure  in  our  minds  ;  for  many,  for- 
getting them,  and  abandoning  the  heavenly  road, 
have  made  for  themselves  devious  paths  amidst 
windings  and  precipices,  by  which  they  might 
lead  away  the  incautious  and  simple  part  of  the 
people  to  the  darkness  of  death  :  I  will  explain 
how  this  happened.  There  were  some  of  our 
religion  whose  faith  was  less  established,  or  who 
were  less  learned  or  less  cautious,  who  rent  the 
unity  and  divided  the  Church.  But  they  whose 
faith  was  unsettled,^  when  they  pretended  that 
they  knew  and  worshipped  God,  aiming  at  the 
increase  of  their  wealth  and  honour,  aspired  to 
the  highest  sacerdotal  power ;  and  when  over- 
come by  others  more  powerful,  preferred  to 
secede  with  their  supporters,  than  to  endure  those 


'  Thus  Christ  Himself  speaks,  John  x.  30,  "  I  and  my  Father 
are  one;  "  and  iii.  35,  "  The  F'ather  loveth  the  Son,  and  hath  given 
all  things  into  His  hand." 

^  So  Jer.  ii.  13. 

3  See  Matt   xviii.  7;   Luke  xvii.  i;   i  Cor.  xi.  19;  2  Pet.  ii.  i. 

*  Concordiam. 

5  Lubrica. 


set  over  them,  over  whom  they  themselves  before 
desired  to  be  set.^ 

But  some,  not  sufficiently  instructed  in  heav- 
enly learning,  when  they  were  unable  to  reply  to 
the  accusers  of  the  truth,  who  objected  that  it 
was  either  impossible  or  inconsistent  that  God 
should  be  shut  up  in  the  womb  of  a  woman,  and 
that  the  Majesty  of  heaven  could  not  be  reduced 
to  such  weakness  as  to  become  an  object  of  con- 
tempt and  derision,  a  reproach  and  mockery  to 
men ;  lastly,  that  He  should  even  endure  tor- 
tures, and  be  affixed  to  the  accursed  cross ;  and 
when  they  could  defend  and  refute  all  these 
things  neither  by  talent  nor  learning,  for  they 
did  not  thoroughly  perceive  their  force  and 
meaning,  they  were  perverted  7  from  the  right 
path,  and  corrupted  the  sacred  writings,  so  that 
they  composed  for  themselves  a  new  doctrine 
without  any  root  and  stability.  But  some,  en- 
ticed by  the  prediction  of  false  prophets,  con- 
cerning whom  both  the  true  prophets  and  he 
himself  had  foretold,  fell  away  from  the  knowl- 
edge of  God,  and  left  the  true  tradition.  But 
all  of  these,  ensnared  by  frauds  of  demons,  which 
they  ought  to  have  foreseen  and  guarded  against, 
by  their  carelessness  lost  the  name  and  worship 
of  God.  For  when  they  are  called  Phrygians,* 
or  Novatians,9  or  Valentinians,'°  or  Marcionites," 
or  Anthropians,'^  or  Arians,'^  or  by  any  other 
name,  they  have  ceased  to  be  Christians,  who 
have  lost  the  name  of  Christ,  and  assumed 
human  and  external  names.  Therefore  it  is  the 
Catliolic  Church  alone  which  retains  true  wor- 
ship. 

This  is  the  fountain  of  truth,  this  is  the  abode 
of  the  faith,  this  is  the  temi)le  of  God  ;  into  which 
if  any  one  shall  not  enter,  or  from  which  if  any 
shall  go  out,  he  is  estranged  from  the  hope  of 
life  and  eternal  salvation.  No  one  ought  to  flat- 
ter himself  with  persevering  strife.  For  the 
contest  is  respecting  life  and  salvation,  which, 


6  [N.B. — The  Callistians,  Novatians,  etc.;  vol.  v.  Elucidation 
XIV.  p.  i6o;  and  Ibid.,  p.  319,  321-333.] 

7  Depravati  sunt. 

8  The  Phrj-gians  were  the  followers  of  Montanus,  who  was  the 
founder  of  a  sect  in  the  second  century.  He  is  supposed  to  have  been 
a  native  of  Ardaba,  on  the  borders  of  Phrygia,  on  which  account  his 
followers  were  called  the  Phrygian  or  Cataphrygian  heretics.  IMon- 
tanus  gave  himself  out  for  the  Paraclete  or  Comforter  whom  our 
Lord  promised  to  send.  The  most  eminent  of  his  followers  were 
Priscilla  and  Maximilla.  [But  see  vol.  ii.  pp.  4  and  5;  also  vol.  iii. 
and  iv.  this  series,  and  notes  on  Tertullian,  passim,} 

9  The  Novatians  were  the  followers  of  Novatus,  in  the  third  cen- 
tury. They  assumed  to  themselves  the  title  of  Cathari,  or  the  pure. 
They  refused  to  re-admit  to  their  communion  those  who  had  once 
fallen  aw.ay,  and  allowed  noplace  for  repentance. 

'°  The  Valentinians  were  the  followers  of  Valentinus,  an  Eg>-ptian 
who  founded  a  sect  in  the  second  century.  His  system  somewhat 
resembled  the  Gnostics.  He  taught  that  Christ  had  a  heavenly  or 
spiritual  body,  and  assumed  nothing  from  the  Virgin  Mary. 

"  The  Marcionites  were  the  followers  of  Marcion,  a  heretic  of  the 
second  century,  who  held  the  Oriental  belief  of  two  independent, 
eternal,  co-existing  principles,  one  of  good,  the  other  of  evil.  He 
applied  this  doctrine  to  Christianity.  His  chief  opponent  was  Ter- 
tullian. 

J2  The  Anthropians  held  that  Jesus  Christ  was  nothini;  but  man 
(arflpu.Tro?).  .  ... 

'3  This  word  is  omitted  by  some  editors,  as  Lactantius  wrote  before 
the  Arian  heresy  had  gained  strength.     [Sec  vol.  vi.  p.  291.] 


134 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  IV. 


unless  it  is  carefully  and  diligently  kept  in  view, 
will  be  lost  and  extinguished.  But,  however, 
because  all  the  separate  assemblies  of  heretics 
call  themselves  Christians  in  preference  to  others, 
and  think  that  theirs  is  the  Catholic  Church,  it 
must  be  known  that  the  true  Catholic  Church  is 
that  in  which  there  is  confession  and  repent- 
ance,' which  treats  in  a  wholesome  manner  the 
sins  and  wounds  to  which  the  weakness  of  the 
flesh  is  liable.     I   have  related  these  things  in 


'  This  is  directed  against  the  Novatians.     See  preceding  note  on 
the  Novatians,  [and  vol.  v.,  this  series, passim].  « 


the  meanwhile  for  the  sake  of  admonition,  that  no 
one  who  desires  to  avoid  error  may  be  entangled 
in  a  greater  error,  while  he  is  ignorant  of  the 
secret  ^  of  the  truth.  Afterwards,  in  a  particular 
and  separate  work,  we  will  more  fully  and  copi- 
ously'  contend  against  all  divisions  of  falsehoods. 
It  follows  that,  since  we  have  spoken  sufficiently 
on  the  subject  of  true  religion  and  wisdom,  we 
discuss  the  subject  of  justice  in  the  next  book. 


2  Penetrale,  "  the  interior  of  a  house  or  temple." 

3  Uberius.     Others  read  "  verius,"  more  truly ;  but  the  reading 
of  the  text  is  preferable. 


GENERAL   NOTES   BY  THE   AMERICAN    EDITOR. 


(On  cap.  29.) 

Here  we  should  look  for  something  also  concerning  the  Holy  Spirit.  But  our  author's  princi- 
ple is  doubtless  a  reflection  of  the  prevailing  sentiment  of  the  Church  at  this  period,  which  was 
perhaps  a  violent  exaggeration  of  our  Lord's  example  (Mark  iv.  ^;^).  And  see  something  of  this 
on  p.  140,  note  6,  infra  ;  also  Matt.  vii.  6. 


II. 

(On  cap.  30.) 

The  simplicity  with  which  our  author  gives  a  note  of  the  Catholic  Church,  in  accordance  with 
African  canons  and  the  teaching  of  Cyprian,  is  very  noteworthy.  It  never  occurred  to  him  that 
communion  with  any  one  particular  See  was  the  note.  Hippolytus  alone  would  have  reminded 
him  that  the  worst  heretics  had  been  in  communion  with  both  Zephyrinus  and  Callistus  in  his 
days  (see  vol.  v.  pp.  156  and  160 ;  also  Ibid.,  125,  130),  and  that  orthodoxy  had  been  persecuted 
by  these  bishops  of  Rome. 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 
BOOK    V. 


OF    JUSTICE. 


CHAP.  I. OF  THE  NON-CONDEMNATION  OF  ACCUSED 

PERSONS  WITHOUT  A  HEARING  OF  THEIR  CAUSE  ; 
FROM  WHAT  CAUSE  PHILOSOPHERS  DESPISED  THE 
SACRED  WRITINGS  ;  OF  THE  FIRST  ADVOCATES  OF 
THE  CHRISTIAN  RELIGION. 

I  ENTERTAIN  no  doubt,  O  mighty  Emperor 
Constantine,'—  since  they  are  impatient  through 
excessive  superstition,  —  that  if  any  one  of  those 
who  are  fooUshly  religious  should  take  in  hand 
this  work  of  ours,  in  which  that  matchless  Creator 
of  all  things  and  Ruler  of  this  boundless  world 
is  asserted,  he  would  even  assail  it  with  abusive 
language,  and  perhaps,  having  scarcely  read  the 
beginning,  would  dash  it  to  the  ground,  cast  it 
from  him,  curse  it,  and  think  himself  contaminated 
and  bound  by  inexpiable  guilt  if  he  should  pa- 
tiently read  or  hear  these  things.     We  demand, 
however,  from  this  man,  if  it  is  possible,  by  the 
right  of  human  nature,^  that  he  should  not  con- 
demn before  that  he  knows  the  whole   matter. 
For  if  the  right  of  defending  themselves  is  given 
to  sacrilegious  persons,  and  to  traitors  and  sor- 
cerers, and  if  it  is  lawful  for  no  one  to  be  con- 
demned beforehand,  his  cause  being  as  yet  untried, 
we  do  not  appear  to  as^  unjustly,  that  if  there 
shall  be  any  one  who  shall  have  fallen  upon  this 
subject,  if  he  shall  read  it,  he  read  it  throughout ; 
if  he  shall  hear  it,  that  he  put  off  the  forming 
of  an  opinion  until  the  end.     But  I  know  the 
obstinacy  of  men  ;  we  shall  never  succeed  in  ob- 
taining this.     For  they  fear  lest  they  should  be 
overcome  by  us,  and  be  compelled  at  length  to 
yield,  truth  itself  crying  out.      They  interrupt, 
therefore,  and  make  hindrances,  that  they  may 
not  hear  ;  and  close  their  eyes,  that  they  may 
not  see  the   light  which  we  present  to  them. 
Wherefore  they  themselves   plainly  show  their 
distrust  in  their  own  abandoned  system,  since 


>  These  words  are  omitted  in  some  editions.  The  chapter  is  a 
kind  of  preface  to  the  whole  book,  in  which  he  comphuns  that  punish- 
ment has  been  inflicted  on  the  Christians  without  due  inquiry  into 
their  cause.     ['Rc\\^mns  =  superstitious.     See  p.  131,  i7'/ra.J 

2  Jure  humanitatis. 


they  neither  venture  to  investigate,  nor  to  engage 
with  us,  because  they  know  that  they  are  easily 
overpowered.  And  therefore,  discussion  being 
taken  away, 

"  Wisdom  is  driven  from  among  them,  they  have  recourse 
to  violence," 

as  Ennius  says;  and  because  they  eagerly  en- 
deavour to  condemn  as  guilty  those  whom  they 
plainly  know  to  be  innocent,  they  are  unwilling 
to  be  agreed  respecting  innocence  itself;  as 
though,  in  truth,  it  were  a  greater  injustice  to 
have  condemned  innocence,  when  proved  to  be 
such,  than  unheard.  But,  as  I  said,  they  are 
afraid  lest,  if  they  should  hear,  they  should  be 
unable  to  condemn. 

And  therefore  they  torture,  put  to  death,  and 
banish  the  worshippers  of  the  Most  High  God, 
that  is,  the  righteous;  nor  are  they,  who  so 
vehemently  hate,  themselves  able  to  assign  the 
causes  of  their  hatred.  Because  they  are  them- 
selves in  error,  they  are  angry  with  those  who 
follow  the  path  of  truth ;  and  when  they  are 
able  to  correct  themselves,  they  greatly  increase  s 
their  errors  by  cruel  deeds,  they  are  stained 
with  the  blood  of  the  innocent,  and  they  tear 
away  with  violence  souls  dedicated  to  God  from 
the  lacerated  bodies.  Such  are  the  men  with 
whom  we  now  endeavour  to  engage  and  to  dis- 
pute :  these  are  the  men  whom  we  would  lead 
away  from  a  foolish  persuasion  to  the  truth, 
men  who  would  more  readily  drink  blood  than 
imbibe  the  words  of  the  righteous.  What  then  ? 
Will  our  labour  be  in  vain  ?  By  no  means.  For 
if  we  shall  not  be  able  to  deliver  these  from 
death,  to  which  they  are  hastening  with  the 
greatest  speed  ;  if  we  cannot  recall  them  from 
that  devious  path  to  life  and  light,  since  they 
themselves  oppose  their  own  safety;  yet  we 
shall  strengthen  those  who  belong  to  us,  whose 
opinion  is  not  settled,  and  founded  and  fixed 


3  Coacervant,  "  they  heap  up." 


»35 


136 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  V. 


with  solid  roots.  For  many  of  them  waver,  and 
especially  those  who  have  any  acquaintance  with 
literature.  For  in  this  respect  philosophers,  and 
orators,  and  poets  are  pernicious,  because  they 
are  easily  able  to  ensnare  unwary  souls  by  the 
sweetness  of  their  discourse,  and  of  their  poems 
flowing  with  delightful  modulation.  These  are 
sweets  ■  which  conceal  poison.  And  on  this  ac- 
count I  wished  to  connect  wisdom  with  religion, 
that  that  vain  system  may  not  at  all  injure  the 
studious ;  so  that  now  the  knowledge  of  litera- 
ture may  not  only  be  of  no  injury  to  religion 
and  righteousness,  but  may  even  be  of  the  great- 
est profit,  if  he  who  has  learned  it  should  be 
more  instructed  in  virtues  and  wiser  in  truth. 

Moreover,  even  though  it  should  be  profita- 
ble to  no  other,  it  certainly  will  be  so  to  us  :  the 
conscience  will  delight  itself,  and  the  mind  will 
rejoice  that  it  is  engaged  in  the  light  of  truth, 
which  is  the  food  of  the  soul,  being  overspread 
with  an  incredible  kind  of  pleasantness.  But 
we  must  not  despair.     Perchance 

"  We  sing  not  to  the  deaf."  ^ 

For  neither  are  affairs  in  so  bad  a  condition  that 
there  are  no  sound  minds  to  which  the  truth 
may  be  pleasing,  and  which  may  both  see  and 
follow  the  right  course  when  it  is  pointed  out  to 
them.  Only  let  the  cup  be  anointed  ^  with  the 
heavenly  honey  of  wisdom,  that  the  bitter  reme- 
dies may  be  drunk  by  them  unawares,  without 
any  annoyance,  whilst  the  first  sweetness  of 
taste  by  its  allurement  conceals,  under  the  cover  * 
of  pleasantness,  the  bitterness  of  the  harsh  fla- 
vour. For  this  is  especially  the  cause  why,  with 
the  wise  and  the  learned,  and  the  princes  of  this 
world,  the  sacred  Scriptures  are  without  credit, 
because  the  prophets  spoke  in  common  and  sim- 
ple language,  as  though  they  spoke  to  the  people. 
And  therefore  they  are  despised  by  those  who 
are  willing  to  hear  or  read  nothing  except  that 
which  is  polished  and  eloquent ;  nor  is  anything 
able  to  remain  fixed  in  their  minds,  except  that 
which  charms  their  ears  by  a  more  soothing 
sound.  But  those  things  which  appear  humble  s 
are  considered  anile,  foolish,  and  common.  So 
entirely  do  they  regard  nothing  as  true,  except 
that  which  is  pleasant  to  the  ear;  nothing  as 
credible,  except  that  which  can  excite  ^  pleas- 
ure :  no  one  estimates  7  a  subject  by  its  truth, 
but  by  its  embellishment.  Therefore  they  do 
not  believe  the  sacred  writings,  because  they  are 

1  Mella. 

2  Virgi],  Buco/.,  X.  8. 

3  There  is  a  reference  here  to  a  well-known  passage  of  Liicreliiis, 
i.  935:  "  As  physicians,  when  they  purpose  to  give  naii<;eoiis  worm- 
wood to  children,  first  smear  the  rim  round  the  bowl  with  ihe  sweet 
yellow  juice  of  honey,  that  the  unthinking  age  of  children  may  be 
fooled  as  far  as  the  lips,  but  though  beguiled,  not  be  betrayed." 

*  '"ub  praetextu. 
5  Sordida. 

*  Incutere.     So  Lucretius,  i.  19,  "  incutiens  amorem." 
'  Ponderat. 


without  any  pretence;^  but  they  do  not  even 
believe  those  who  explain  them,  because  they 
also  are  either  altogether  ignorant,  or  at  any  rate 
possessed  of  little  learning.  For  it  very  rarely 
happens  that  they  are  wholly  eloquent ;  and  the 
cause  of  this  is  evident.  For  eloquence  is  sub- 
servient to  the  world,  it  desires  to  display  itself 
to  the  people,  and  to  please  in  things  which  are 
evil ;  since  it  often  endeavours  to  overpower  the 
truth,  that  it  may  show  its  power;  it  seeks 
wealth,  desires  honours ;  in  short,  it  demands 
the  highest  degree  of  dignity.  Therefore  it 
despises  these  subjects  as  low ;  it  avoids  secret 
things  as  contrary  to  itself,  inasmuch  as  it  re- 
joices in  publicity,  and  longs  for  the  multitude 
and  celebrity.  Hence  it  comes  to  pass  that  wis- 
dom and  truth  need  suitable  heralds.  And  if 
by  chance  any  of  the  learned  have  betaken 
themselves  to  it,  they  have  not  been  sutificient 
for  its  defence. 

Of  those  who  are  known  to  me,  Minucius 
Felix  was  of  no  ignoble  rank  among  pleaders. 
His  book,  which  bears  the  title  of  Octavius,  de- 
clares how  suitable  a  maintainer  of  the  truth  he 
might  have  been,  if  he  had  given  himself  alto- 
gether to  that  pursuit.9  Septimius  Tertullianus 
also  was  skilled  in  literature  of  every  kind  ;  but 
in  eloquence  he  had  little  readiness,  and  was 
not  sufficiently  polished,  and  very  obscure.  Not 
even  therefore  did  he  find  sufficient  renown. 
Cyprianus,  therefore,  was  above  all  others  '°  dis- 
tinguished and  renowned,  since  he  had  sought 
great  glory  to  himself  from  the  profession  of  the 
art  of  oratory,  and  he  wrote  very  many  things 
worthy  of  admiration  in  their  particular  class. 
For  he  was  of  a  turn  of  mind  which  was  ready, 
copious,  agreeable,  and  (that  which  is  the  great- 
est excellence  of  style)  plain  and  open ;  so  that 
you  cannot  determine  whether  he  was  more  em- 
bellished in  speech,  or  more  ready  in  explana- 
tion, or  more  powerful  in  persuasion.  And  yet 
he  is  unable  to  please  those  who  are  ignorant  of 
the  mystery  except  by*his  words ;  inasmuch  as 
the  things  which  he  spoke  are  mystical,  and  pre- 
pared with  this  object,  that  they  may  be  heard 
by  the  faithful  only  :  in  short,  he  is  accustomed 
to  be  derided  by  the  learned  men  of  this  age,  to 
whom  his  writings  have  happened  to  be  known. 
I  have  heard  of  a  certain  man  who  was  skilful 
indeed,  who  by  the  change  of  a  single  letter 
called  him  Coprianus,"  as  though  he  were  one 
who  had  applied  to  old  women's  fables  a  mind 
which  was  elegant  and  fitted  for  better  things. 
But  if  this  happened  to  him  whose  eloquence  is 


^  Sine  fuco. 

9  [Vol.  iv.  173  Note  our  author's  reference  to  the  founders  of 
I-atin  Christianity,  all  North-Africans,  like  Arnobius  and  himself.  See 
vol.  iv.  pp.  169,  170.J 

"5  Unus. 

"  The  word  (toiroi'a?  is  applied  to  sycophants  and  low  buffoons 
and  jesters,  who,  for  the  sake  of  excitmg  laughter,  made  boastful  and 
extravagant  promises. 


Chap.  II.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


^2>7 


not  unpleasant,  what  then  must  we  suppose  hap- 
pens to  those  whose  discourse  is  meagre  and 
displeasing,  who  could  have  had  neither  the 
power  of  persuasion,  nor  subtlety  in  arguing,  nor 
any  severity  at  all  for  refuting  ? 

CHAP.    II. TO   WHAT    AN    EXTENT   THE    CHRISTIAN 

TRUTH    HAS    BEEN    ASSAILED    BY    RASH    MEN. 

Therefore,  because  there  have  been  wanting 
among  us  suitable  and  skilful  teachers,  who 
might  vigorously  and  sharply  refute  public  er- 
rors, and  who  might  defend  the  whole  cause  of 
truth  with  elegance  and  copiousness,  this  very 
want  incited  some  to  venture  to  write  against 
the  truth,  which  was  unknown  to  them.  I  pass 
by  those  who  in  former  times  in  vain  assailed 
it.  When  I  was  teaching  rhetorical  learning  in 
Bithynia,  having  been  called  thither,  and  it  had 
happened  that  at  the  same  time  the  temple  of 
God  was  overthrown,  there  were  living  at  the 
same  place  two  men  who  insulted  the  truth  as  it 
lay  prostrate  and  overtlirown,  I  know  not  whether 
with  greater  arrogance  or  harslmess  :  the  one  of 
whom  professed  himself  the  high  priest  of  phi- 
losophy ; '  but  he  was  so  addicted  to  vice,  that, 
though  a  teacher  of  abstinence,  he  was  not  less 
inflamed  with  avarice  than  with  lusts  ;  so  extrava- 
gant in  his  manner  of  living,  that  though  in  his 
school  he  was  the  maintainer  of  virtue,  the  praiser 
of  parsimony  and  poverty,  he  dined  less  sumptu- 
ously in  a  palace  than  at  his  own  house.  Never- 
theless he  sheltered  ^  his  vices  by  his  hair  ^  and 
his  cloak,  and  (that  which  is  the  greatest  screen  ■•) 
by  his  riches  ;  and  that  he  might  increase  these, 
he  used  to  penetrate  with  wonderful  effort  5  to 
the  friendships  of  the  judges ;  and  he  suddenly 
attached  them  to  himself  by  the  authority  of  a 
fictitious  name,  not  only  that  he  might  make  a 
traffic  of  their  decisions,  but  also  that  he  might 
by  this  influence  hinder  his  neighbours,  whom 
he  was  driving  from  their  homes  and  lands,  from 
the  recovery  of  their  property.  This  man,  in 
truth,  who  overthrew  his  own  arguments  by  his 
character,  or  censured  his  own  character  by  his 
arguments,  a  weighty  censor  and  most  keen  ac- 
cuser against  himself,  at  the  very  same  time  in 
which  a  righteous  people  were  impiously  assailed, 
vomited  forth  three  books  against  the  Christian 
religion  and  name ;  professing,  above  all  things, 
that  it  was  the  office  of  a  philosopher  to  remedy 
the  errors  of  men,  and  to  recall  them  to  the  true 


'  [Let  us  call  him  Barbatus  ;  for  one  so  graphically  described 
by  our  author  deserves  a  name  worthy  of  his  sole  claim  to  be  a  phi- 
losopher.] 

^  Protcgebat. 

3  It  was  the  custom  of  the  philosophers  to  wear  a  beard ;  to  which 
practice  Horace  alludes,  Serin.,  ii.  3,  "  Sapientem  pascere  barham," 
to  nourish  a  philosophic  beard.  [The  readers  of  this  series  no  longer 
require  this  information:  but  it  may  be  convenient  to  recur  to  vol.  ii. 
note  9,  p.  321 ;  also,  perhaps,  to  Clement's  terrible  defence  of  beards. 
Ibid.,  pp.  276-277.] 

*  Velamentum. 

S  Ambitu.     The  word  denotes  the  unlawful  striving  for  a  post. 


way,  that  is,  to  the  worship  of  the  gods,  by  whose 
power  and  majesty,  as  he  said,  the  world  is  gov- 
erned ;  and  not  to  permit  that  inexperienced 
men  should  be  enticed  by  the  frauds  of  any,  lest 
their  simplicity  should  be  a  prey  and  sustenance 
to  crafty  men. 

Therefore  he  said  that  he  had  undertaken  this 
office,  worthy  of  philosophy,  that  he  might  hold 
out  to  those  who  do  not  see  the  light  of  wisdom, 
not  only  that  they  may  return  to  a  healthy  state 
of  mind,  having  undertaken  the  worship  of  the 
gods,  but  also  that,  having  laid  aside  their  perti- 
nacious obstinacy,  they  may  avoid  tortures  of 
the  body,  nor  wish  in  vain  to  endure  cruel  lacera- 
tions of  their  limbs.  But  that  it  might  be  evi- 
dent on  what  account  he  had  laboriously  worked 
out  that  task,  he  broke  out  profusely  into  praises 
of  the  princes,  whose  piety  and  foresight,  as  he 
himself  indeed  said,  had  been  distinguished  both 
in  other  matters,  and  especially  in  defending  the 
religious  rites  of  the  gods ;  that  he  had,  in  short, 
consulted  the  interests  of  men,  in  order  that, 
impious  and  foolish  superstition  having  been 
restrained,  all  nTen  might  have  leisure  for  lawful 
sacred  rites,  and  might  experience  the  gods  pro- 
pitious to  them.  But  when  he  wished  to  weaken 
the  grounds  of  that  religion  against  which  he 
was  pleading,  he  appeared  senseless,  vain,  and 
ridiculous  ;  because  that  weighty  adviser  of  the 
advantage  of  others  was  ignorant  not  only  what 
to  oppose,  but  even  what  to  speak.  For  if  any 
of  our  religion  were  present,  although  they  were 
silent  on  account  of  the  time,  nevertheless  in 
their  mind  they  derided  him ;  since  they  saw  a 
man  professing  that  he  would  enlighten  others, 
when  he  himself  was  blind  ;  that  he  would  recall 
others  from  error,  when  he  himself  was  ignorant 
where  to  plant  his  feet ;  that  he  would  instruct 
others  to  the  truth,  of  which  he  himself  had 
never  seen  even  a  spark  at  any  time  ;  inasmuch 
as  he  who  was  a  professor  of  wisdom,  endeavoured 
to  overthrow  wisdom.  All,  however,  censured 
this,  that  he  undertook  this  work  at  that  time  in 
particular,  in  which  odious  cruelty  raged.  O 
philosopher,  a  flatterer,  and  a  time-server  !  But 
this  man  was  despised,  as  his  vanity  deserved ; 
for  he  did  not  gain  the  popularity  which  he 
hoped  for,  and  the  glory  which  he  eagerly  sought 
for  was  changed  into  censure  and  blame.^ 

Another  7  wrote  the  same  subject  with  more 
bitterness,  who  was  then  of  the  number  of  the 
judges,  and  who  was  especially  the  adviser  of 
enacting  persecution  ;  and  not  contented  with 
this  crime,  he  also  pursued  with  writings  those 
whom  he  had  persecuted.     For  he   composed 


^  [On  the  reference  to  these  two  adversaries,  see  Lardner,  Credib., 
iii.  cap.  65,  p.  4yi;   vii.  cap.  39,  p.  471;   also  vii.  207.] 

^  Hierocles  is  referred  to,  who  was  a  great  persecutor  of  the 
Christians  in  the  beginning  of  the  fourth  century.  He  was  ihe  chief 
promoter  of  the  persecution  which  the  Christians  suflered  under 
Dio.lcti.ui.  [Wroic  a  work  {Pkilalethes)  to  show  tlie  contradictions 
of  Scripture.     Acts  xiii.  lo.J 


I3S 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  V. 


two  books,  not  against  the  Christians,  lest  he 
might  appear  to  assail  them  in  a  hostile  manner, 
but  to  the  Christians,  that  he  might  be  thought 
to  consult  for  them  with  humanity  and  kindness. 
And  in  these  writings  he  endeavoured  so  to  prove 
the  falsehood  of  sacred  Scripture,  as  though  it 
were  altogether  contradictory  to  itself;  for  he 
expounded  some  chapters  which  seemed  to  be 
at  variance  with  themselves,  enumerating  so 
many  and  such  secret '  things,  that  he  sometimes 
appears  to  have  been  one  of  the  same  sect. 
But  if  this  was  so,  what  Demosthenes  will  be 
able  to  defend  from  the  charge  of  impiety  him 
who  became  the  betrayer  of  the  religion  to 
which  he  had  given  his  assent,-  and  of  the  faith 
the  name  of  which  he  had  assumed,^  and  of  the 
mystery*  which  he  had  received,  unless  it  hap- 
pened by  chance  that  the  sacred  writings  fell 
into  his  hands?  \Vhat  rashness  was  it,  therefore, 
to  dare  to  destroy  that  which  no  one  explained 
to  him  !  It  was  well  that  he  either  learned 
nothing  or  understood  nothing.  For  contradic- 
tion is  as  far  removed  from  the  sacred  writings 
as  he  was  removed  from  faith  and  truth.  He 
chiefly,  however,  assailed  Paul  and  Peter,  and 
the  other  disciples,  as  disseminators  of  deceit, 
whom  at  the  same  time  he  testified  to  have  been 
unskilled  and  unlearned.  For  he  says  that  some 
of  them  made  gain  by  the  craft  of  fishermen,  as 
though  he  took  it  ill  that  some  Aristophanes  or 
Aristarchus  did  not  devise  that  subject. 

CH.A.P.    III. OF    THE    TRUTH     OF     THE     CHRISTIAN 

DOCTRIXE,    AND    THE    VAXITV    OF     ITS     ADVERSA- 
RIES;   AND   THAT    CHRIST    WAS    NOT   A  MAGICIAN. 

The  desire  of  inventing,5  therefore,  and  crafti- 
ness were  absent  from  these  men,  since  they 
were  unskilful.  Or  what  unlearned  man  could 
invent  things  adapted  to  one  another,  and  co- 
herent, when  the  most  learned  of  the  philoso- 
phers, Plato  and  Aristotle,  and  Epicurus  and 
Zeno,  themselves  spoke  things  at  variance  with 
one  another,  and  contrary?  For  this  is  the 
nature  of  falsehoods,  that  they  cannot  be  cohe- 
rent. But  their  teaching,  because  it  is  true, 
everywhere  agrees,*^  and  is  altogether  consistent 
with  itself;  and  on  this  account  it  effects  per- 
suasion, because  it  is  based  on  a  consistent  plan. 
They  did  not  therefore  devise  that  religion  for 
the  sake  of  gain  and  advantage,  inasmuch  as 
both  by  their  precepts  and  in  reality  they  fol- 
lowed that  course  of  life  which  is  without  pleas- 
ures, and  despised  all  things  which  are  reckoned 
among  good  things,  and   since    they  not   only 

'  Intima,  i.e.,  of  an  esoteric  character,  known  only  to  those  within 
the  school  or  sect.] 

2  Cui  fuerat  assensus.  Other  editions  read  "  acCensus,"  i.e. 
reckoned  among.  '    ' 

^  Induerat. 
*  Sacramenti. 
5  Fingendi. 
'  Undique  quadrat. 


endured  death  for  their  faith,  but  also  both 
knew  and  foretold  that  they  were  about  to  die, 
and  afterwards  that  all  who  followed  their  sys- 
tem would  suffer  cruel  and  impious  things.  But 
he  7  affirmed  that  Christ  Himself  was  put  to 
flight  by  the  Jews,  and  having  collected  a  band 
of  nine  hundred  men,  committed  robberies. 
Who  would  venture  to  oppose  so  great  an  au- 
thority? We  must  certainly  believe  this,  for 
perchance  some  Apollo  announced  it  to  him  in 
his  slumbers.  So  many  robbers  have  at  all  times 
perished,  and  do  perish  daily,  and  you  yourself 
have  certainly  condemned  many  :  which  of  them 
after  his  crucifixion  was  called,  I  will  not  say  a 
God,  but  a  man  ?  But  you  perchance  believed 
it  from  the  circumstance  of  your  having  conse- 
crated the  homicide  Mars  as  a  god,  though  you 
would  not  have  done  this  if  the  Areopagites  had 
crucified  him. 

The  same  man,  when  he  endeavoured  to  over- 
throw his  wonderful  deeds,  and  did  not  however 
deny  them,  wished  to  show  that  Apollonius  ^ 
performed  equal  or  even  greater  deeds.  It  is 
strange  that  he  omitted  to  mention  Apuleius,^ 
of  whom  many  and  wonderful  things  are  accus- 
tomed to  be  related.  Why  therefore,  O  sense- 
less one,  does  no  one  worship  Apollonius  in  the 
place  of  God?  unless  by  chance  you  alone  do 
so,  who  are  worthy  forsooth  of  that  god,  with 
whom  the  true  God  will  punish  you  everlast- 
ingly. If  Christ  is  a  magician  because  He 
performed  wonderful  deeds,  it  is  plain  that 
Apollonius,  who,  according  to  your  description, 
when  Domitian  wished  to  punish  him,  suddenly 
disappeared  on  his  trial,  was  more  skilful  than 
He  who  was  both  arrested  and  crucified.  But 
perhaps  he  wished  from  this  very  thing  to  prove 
the  arrogance  of  Christ,  in  that  He  made  Himself 
God,  that  the  other  may  appear  to  have  been 
more  modest,  who,  though  he  performed  greater 
actions,  as  this  one  thinks,  nevertheless  did  not 
claim  that  for  himself.  I  omit  at  present  to 
compare  the  works  themselves,  because  in  the 
second  and  preceding  book  I  have  spoken  re- 
specting the  fraud  and  tricks  of  the  magic  art. 
I  say  that  there  is  no  one  who  would  not  wish 
that  that  should  especially  befall  him  after  death 
which  even  the  greatest  kings  desire.  For  why 
do  men  prepare  for  themselves  magnificent  sep- 
ulchres? why  statues  and  images?  why  by  some 
illustrious  deeds,  or  even  by  death  undergone  in 
behalf  of  their  countrymen,  do  they  endeavour 


'  Hierocles,  referred  to  in  chapter  2. 

8  Apollonius,  a  celebrated  Pythagorean  philosopher  of  Tyana; 
his  works  and  doctrines  are  recorded  by  Philostratus,  from  whom 
Lactantiiis  appears  to  have  derived  his  account.  The  pagans  com- 
pared his  life  and  actions  with  those  of  Christ.  [See  Origen,  vol.  iv. 
p.  591,  this  series.] 

9  Apuleius,  a  native  of  Madaura,  a  city  on  the  borders  of  the 
province  of  Africa,  he  professed  the  Platonic  philosophy.  He  was 
reputed  a  magician  by  the  Christian  writers.  [Author  of  Tke  Golden 
Ass,  a  most  entertaining  but  often  indecent  satire,  which  may  have 
inspired  Cervantes,  and  concerning  which  see  Warburton,  Div. 
Legat.,  vol.  li.  p.  177  (f/  alibi),  ed.  London,  1811.] 


Chap.  IV.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


139 


to  deserve  the  good  opinions  of  men?  Why, 
in  short,  have  you  yourself  wished  to  raise  a 
monument  of  your  talent,  built  with  this  detesta- 
ble folly,  as  if  with  mud,  except  that  you  hope 
for  immortality  from  the  remembrance  of  your 
name?  It  is  foolish,  therefore,  to  imagine  that 
Apollonius  did  not  desire  that  which  he  would 
plainly  wish  for  if  he  were  able  to  attain  to  it ; 
because  there  is  no  one  who  refuses  immortality, 
and  especially  when  you  say  that  he  was  both 
adored  by  some  as  a  god,  and  that  his  image  was 
set  up  under  the  name  of  Hercules,  the  averter 
of  evil,  and  is  even  now  honoured  by  the 
Ephesians. 

He  could  not  therefore  after  death  be  believed 
to  be  a  god,  because  it  was  evident  that  he  was 
both  a  man  and  a  magician  ;  and  for  this  reason 
he  affecied '  divinity  under  the  title  of  a  name 
belonging  to  another,  for  in  his  own  name  he 
was  unable  to  attain  it,  nor  did  he  venture  to 
make  the  attempt.  But  he  of  whom  we  speak  - 
could  both  be  believed  to  be  a  god,  because  he 
was  not  a  magician,  and  was  believed  to  be  such 
because  he  was  so  in  truth.  I  do  not  say  this, 
he  says,  that  Apollonius  was  not  accounted  a  god, 
because  he  did  not  wish  it,  but  that  it  may  be 
evident  that  we,  who  did  not  at  once  connect  a 
belief  in  his  divinity  with  wonderful  deeds,  are 
wiser  than  you,  who  on  account  of  slight  wonders 
believed  that  he  was  a  god.  It  is  not  wonderful 
if  you,  who  are  far  removed  from  the  wisdom  of 
God,  understand  nothing  at  all  of  those  things 
which  you  have  read,  since  the  Jews,  who  from 
the  beginning  had  frequently  read  the  prophets, 
and  to  whom  the  mystery  3  of  God  had  been 
assigned,  were  nevertheless  ignorant  of  what  they 
read.  Learn,  therefore,  if  you  have  any  sense, 
that  Christ  was  not  beheved  by  us  to  be  God  on 
this  account,  because  He  did  wonderful  things, 
but  because  we  saw  that  all  things  were  done  in 
His  case  which  were  announced  to  us  by  the 
prediction  of  the  prophets.  He  performed  won- 
derful deeds  :  we  might  have  supposed  Him  to 
be  a  magician,  as  you  now  suppose  Him  to  be, 
and  the  Jews  then  supposed  Him,  if  all  the 
prophets  did  not  with  one  accord  •♦  proclaim  that 
Christ  would  do  those  very  things.  Therefore 
we  believe  Him  to  be  God,  not  more  from  His 
wonderful  deeds  and  works,  than  from  that  very 
cross  which  you  as  dogs  lick,  since  that  also  was 
predicted  at  the  same  time.  It  was  not  therefore 
on  His  own  testimony  (for  who  can  be  believed 
when  he  speaks  concerning  himself?),  but  on  the 
testimony  of  the  prophets  who  long  before  fore- 
told all  things  which  He  did  and  suffered,  that 
He  gained  a  belief  m  His  divinity,  which  could 


'  AfTectavit  divinitatem. 

2  Noster. 

3  Sacramentum. 

*  With  one  spirit,  "  uno  spirltu." 


have  happened  neither  to  Apollonius,^  nor  to 
x^puleius,  nor  to  any  of  the  magicians  ;  nor  can 
it  happen  at  any  time.  When,  therefore,  he  had 
poured  forth  such  absurd  ravings*'  of  his  igno- 
rance, when  he  had  eagerly  endeavoured  utterly 
to  destroy  the  truth,  he  dared  to  give  to  his 
books  which  were  impious  and  the  enemies  of 
God  the  title  of  "  truth-loving."  O  blind  breast ! 
O  mind  more  black  than  Cimmerian  darkness, 
as  they  say  !  He  may  perhaps  have  been  a  dis- 
ciple of  Anaxagoras,''  to  whom  snows  were  as 
black  as  ink.  But  it  is  the  same  blindness,  to 
give  the  name  of  falsehood  to  truth,  and  of  truth 
to  falsehood.  Doubtless  the  crafty  man  wished 
to  conceal  the  wolf  under  the  skin  of  a  sheep,^ 
that  he  might  ensnare  the  reader  by  a  deceitful 
title.  Let  it  be  true  ;  grant  that  you  did  this 
from  ignorance,  not  from  malice  :  what  truth, 
however,  have  you  brought  to  us,  except  that, 
being  a  defender  of  the  gods,  you  had  at  last 
betrayed  those  very  gods  ?  For,  having  set  forth 
the  praises  of  the  Supreme  God,  whom  you  con- 
fessed to  be  king,  most  mighty,  the  maker  of  all 
things,  the  fountain  of  honours,  the  parent  of  all, 
the  creator  and  preserver  of  all  living  creatures, 
you  took  away  the  kingdom  from  your  own 
Jupiter ;  and  when  you  had  driven  him  from 
the  supreme  power,  you  reduced  him  to  the  rank 
of  servants.  Thus  your  own  conclusion  9  con- 
victs you  of  folly,  vanity,  and  error.  For  you 
affirm  that  the  gods  exist,  and  yet  you  subject 
and  enslave  them  to  that  God  whose  religion  you 
attempt  to  overturn. 

CHAP.   IV. WHY  THIS   WORK   WAS   PUBLISHED,  AND 

AGAIN    OF   TERTULLIAN    AND    CYPRIAN. 

Since,  therefore,  they  of  whom  I  have  spoken 
had  set  forth  their  sacrilegious  writings  in  my 
presence,  and  to  my  grief,  being  incited  both 
by  the  arrogant  impiety  of  these,  and  by  the 
consciousness  of  truth  itself,  and  (as  I  think)  by 
God,  I  have  undertaken  this  office,  that  with  all 
the  strength  of  my  mind  I  might  refute  the  ac- 
cusers of  righteousness  ;  not  that  I  should  write 
against  these,  who  might  be  crushed  with  a  few 
words,  but  that  I  might  once  for  all  by  one  attack 
overthrow  all  who  everywhere  effect,  or  have 
effected,  the  same  work.  For  I  do  not  doubt 
that  very  many  others,  and  in  many  places,  and 
that  not  only  in  Greek,  but  also  in  Latin  writings, 
have  raised  a  monument  of  their  own  unrighteous- 
ness. And  since  1  was  not  able  to  reply  to  these 
separately,  I  thought  that  this  cause  was  to  be  so 


5  [  But  Apollonius  was  set  up  as  an  Antichrist  by  Philostratus, 
as  Cudvvorth  supposes,  and  so  other  men  of  learning.  But  no  student 
should  overlook  Lardner's  valuable  commentary  on  this  character, 
and  his  quotations  from  Bishop  Parker  of  Oxford,  Credit.,  vol.  vii. 
p.  4S6,  and  also  p.  508,  cap,  zg,  and  appendix.] 

*>  Deliramenta. 

7  See  book  ii.  ch.  23. 

8  Cf.  Matt.  vii.  xs. 

9  Epilogus. 


140 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  V 


pleaded  by  me  that  I  might  overthrow  former 
^\Titers,  together  with  all  their  writings,  and  cut 
off  from  future  writers  the  whole  power  of  writing 
and  of  replying.'  Only  let  them  attend,  and  I 
will  assuredly  effect  that  whosoever  shall  know 
these  things,  must  either  embrace  that  which  he 
before  condemned,  or,  which  is  next  to  it,  cease 
at  length  to  deride  it.  Although  TertuUian  fully 
pleaded  the  same  cause  in  that  treatise  which  is 
entitled  the  Apology,-  yet,  inasmuch  as  it  is  one 
thing  to  answer  accusers,  which  consists  in  de- 
fence or  denial  only,  and  another  thing  to  instruct, 
which  we  do,  in  which  the  substance  of  the  whole 
system  must  be  contained,  I  have  not  shrunk 
from  this  labour,  that  I  might  complete  the  sub- 
ject, which  Cyprian  did  not  fully  carry  out  in 
that  discourse  in  which  he  endeavours  to  refute 
Demetrianus  (as  he  himself  says)  railing  at  and 
clamouring  3  against  the  truth.  Which  subject 
he  did  not  handle  as  he  ought  to  have  done ;  for 
he  ought  to  have  been  refuted  not  by  the  testi- 
monies of  Scripture,  which  he  plainly  considered 
vain,  fictitious,  and  false,  but  by  arguments  and 
reason.  For,  since  he  was  contending  against  a 
man  who  was  ignorant  of  the  truth,  he  ought  for 
a  while  to  have  laid  aside  divine  readings,  and 
to  have  formed  from  the  beginning  this  man  as 
one  who  was  altogether  ignorant,''  and  to  have 
shown  to  him  by  degrees  the  beginnings  of  light, 
that  he  might  not  be  dazzled, s  the  whole  of  its 
brightness  being  presented  to  him.^ 

For  as  an  infant  is  unable,  on  account  of  the 
tenderness  of  its  stomach,  to  receive  the  nour- 
ishment of  solid  and  strong  food,  but  is  sup- 
ported by  liquid  and  soft  milk,  until,  its  strength 
being  confirmed,  it  can  feed  on  stronger  nour- 
ishment ;  so  also  it  was  befitting  that  this  man, 
because  he  was  not  yet  capable  of  receiving  di- 
vine things,  should  be  presented  with  human  tes- 
timonies —  that  is,  of  philosophers  and  historians 
—  in  order  that  he  might  especially  be  refuted 
by  his  own  authorities.  And  since  he  did  not 
do  this,  being  carried  away  by  his  distinguished 
knowledge  of  the  sacred  writings,  so  that  he  was 
content  with  those  things  alone  in  which  faith 
consists,  I  have  undertaken,  with  the  favour  of 
God,  to  do  this,  and  at  the  same  time  to  prepare 
the  way  for  the  imitation  of  others.  And  if, 
through  my  exhortation,  learned  and  eloquent 
men  shall  begin  to  betake  themselves  to  this 
subject,  and  shall  choose  to  display  their  talents 
and  power  of  speaking  in  this  field  of  truth,  no 
one  can  doubt  that  false  religions  will  quickly 

'  [Future  'writers.     This  laying  of  an  anchor  to  windward  is 

characteristic  of  Lactantius.] 

^  [See  elucidations,  vol.  iii.  pp.  56-60,  this  series.] 

s  Oblatrantcm   atque  obstrepentem   veritati.      These  words   are 

taken  from  Cyprian,  vol.  v.  p.  457,  this  series. 

*  Rudem. 

5  Caligaret. 

*  [This  censure  of  Cyprian  fully  exculpates  Minucius,  Arnohius, 
and  others,  superficially  blamed  for  their  few  quotations  from  Holy 
Writ.    Also,  it  explains  our  author's  quotations  from  the  Sibyl,  etc.] 


disappear,  and  philosophy  altogether  fall,  if  all 
shall  be  persuaded  that  this  alone  is  religion  and 
the  only  true  wisdom.  But  I  have  wandered 
from  the  subject  further  than  I  wished. 

CHAP.    V.  THERE   WAS    TRUE   JUSTICE   UNDER    SA- 

TURNUS,    BUT    IT    WAS    BANISHED    BY    JUPITER. 

Now  the  promised  disputation  concerning  jus- 
tice must  be  given ;  which  is  either  by  itself  the 
greatest  virtue,  or  by  itself  the  fountain  of  vir- 
tue, which  not  only  philosophers  sought,  but 
poets  also,  who  were  much  earlier,  and  were  es- 
teemed as  wise  before  the  origin  of  the  name  of 
philosophy.  These  clearly  understood  that  this 
justice  was  absent  from  the  affairs  of  men  ;  and 
they  feigned  that  it,  being  offended  with  the 
vices  of  men,  departed  from  the  earth,  and  with- 
drew to  heaven ;  and  that  they  may  teach  what 
it  is  to  live  justly  (for  they  are  accustomed  to 
give  precepts  by  circumlocutions),  they  repeat 
examples  of  justice  from  the  times  of  Saturnus, 
which  they  call  the  golden  times,  and  they  relate 
in  what  condition  human  life  was  while  it  delayed 
on  the  earth. 7  And  this  is  not  to  be  regarded 
as  a  poetic  fiction,  but  as  the  truth.  For,  while 
Saturnus  reigned,  the  religious  worship  of  the 
gods  not  having  yet  been  instituted,  nor  any  ^ 
race  being  as  yet  set  apart  in  the  belief  of  its 
divinity,  God  was  manifestly  worshipped.  And 
therefore  there  were  neither  dissensions,  nor  en- 
mities, nor  wars. 

"  Not  yet  had  rage  unsheathed  maddened  swords," 

as  Germanicus  Csesar  speaks  in  his  poem  trans- 
lated from  Aratus,9 

"  Nor  had  discord  been  known  among  relatives." 

No,  nor  even  among  strangers  :  but  there  were 
no  swords  at  all  to  be  unsheathed.  For  who, 
when  justice  was  present  and  in  vigour,  would 
think  respecting  his  own  protection,  since  no 
one  plotted  against  him ;  or  respecting  the  de- 
struction of  another,  since  no  one  desired  any- 
thing ? 

"Thev  preferred  to  live  content  with  a  simple  mode  of 
life," 

as  Cicero '°  relates  in  his  poem  ;  and  this  is  pecul- 
iar to  our  religion.  "It  was  not  even  allowed  to 
mark  out  or  to  divide  the  plain  with  a  boundary  : 
men  sought  all  things  in  common ;  "  '■  since  God 


7  [Striking  is  the  language  of  the  PoUio  ("  Redit  et  Virgo,"  etc.), 
in  which  the  true  Virgin  seems  to  be  anlicipated.] 

8  Ulla.  Another  reading  is  "  ilia,"  as  though  there  were  a  refer- 
ence to  the  family  of  Saturnus. 

9  Germanicus  Caisar,  the  grandson  of  Augustus,  translated  in 
verse  a  part  of  the  poems  of  Aratus.     [See  p.  36,  sj(pra.'\ 

'°  Cicero  translated  in  verse  part  of  the  poems  of  Aratus.  [This 
poet  is  quoted  by  St.  Paul,  toO  -^ap  xat  -yei'ot  k(Jix.iv,  Acts  xvii.  28. 
Archdeacon  Farrardoes  not  consider  the  natural  and  impcdantic  spirit 
of  the  Apostle  in  suiting  this  quotation  to  time  and  place;  and,  if  it  was 
a  common-place  proverb,  all  the  more  suggestive  is  the  accuracy  of 
the  reference  to  "  one  of  your  own  poets."] 

'•  Virg.,  Georg.,  i.  126. 


Chap.  VI.] 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


141 


had  given  the  earth  in  common  to  all,  tluit  they 
might  pass  their  life  in  common,  not  that  mad 
and  raging  avarice  might  claim  all  things  for  it- 
self, and  that  that  which  was  produced  for  all 
might  not  be  wanting  to  any.  And  this  saying 
of  the  poet  ought  so  to  be  taken,  not  as  suggest- 
ing the  idea  that  individuals  at  that  time  had 
no  private  property,  but  it  must  be  regarded  as 
a  poetical  figure  ;  that  we  may  understand  that 
men  were  so  liberal,  that  they  did  not  shut  up 
the  fruits  of  the  earth  produced  for  them,  nor 
did  they  in  solitude  brood  over  the  things  stored 
up,  but  admitted  the  poor  to  share  the  fruits  of 
their  labour  :  — 

"  Now  streams  of  milk,  now  streams  of  nectar  flowed."  ' 

And  no  wonder,  since  the  storehouses  of  the 
good  lil)erally  lay  open  to  all.  Nor  did  avarice 
intercept  the  divine  bounty,  and  thus  cause  hun- 
ger and  thirst  in  common ;  but  all  alike  had 
abundance,  since  they  who  had  possessions  gave 
liberally  and  bountifully  to  those  who  had  not. 
But  after  that  Saturnus  had  been  banished  from 
heaven,  and  had  arrived  in  Latium, — 

"  Exiled  from  his  throne 
By  Jove,  his  mightier  heir,"^  — 

since  the  people  either  through  fear  of  the  new 
king,  or  of  their  own  accord,  had  become  cor- 
rupted and  ceased  to  worship  God,  and  had  be- 
gun to  esteem  the  king  in  the  place  of  God,  since 
he  himself,  almost  a  parricide,  was  an  example 
to  others  to  the  injury  of  piety, — 

"The  most  just  Virgin  in  haste  deserted  the  lands;"' 

but  not  as  Cicero  says,'* 

"  And  settled,  in  the  kingdom  of  Jupiter,'  and  in  a  part 
of  the  heaven." 

For  how  could  she  settle  or  tarry  in  the  kingdom 
of  him  who  expelled  his  father  from  his  kingdom, 
harassed  him  with  war,  and  drove  him  as  an  ex- 
ile over  the  whole  world  ? 

"  He  gave  to  the  black  serpents  their  no.xious  poison, 
And  ordered  wolves  to  prowl ;"'' 

that  is,  he  introduced  among  men  hatred,  and 
envy,  and  stratagem  ;  so  that  they  were  poison- 
ous as  serpents,  and  rapacious  as  wolves.  And 
they  truly  do  this  who  persecute  those  who  are 
righteous  and  faithful  towards  God,  and  give  to 
judges  the  power  of  using  violence  against  the 
innocent.  Perhaps  Jupiter  may  have  done  some- 
thing of  this  kind  for  the  overthrow  and  removal 
of  righteousness ;  and  on  this  account  he  is  re- 


'  Ovid,  Metant.,  i.  iii. 

2  Virg  ,  yEii.,  viii.  320. 

3  Germ.  Cats  ,  A  rat.,  136. 

♦  [That  is,  in  his  translation  of  the  poetry  of  Aratus.] 

5  [Et  Jovis  in  regno,  cocliqiie  in  parte  rcsedit.  For  this  fragmen- 
tary verse  we  are  indebted  to  our  author;  other  fragments  are  given 
in  good  editions  of  Cicero.  He  translated  the  Phenomenti  of  Aratus 
in  his  youth.     My  (Paris)  edition  contains  nearly  the  whole.] 

*  virg  ,  Gcorg.,  i.  139. 


lated  to  have  made  serpents  fierce,  and  to  have 
whetted  the  spirit  of  wolves. 

"Then  war's  indomitable  rage, 
And  greedy  lust  of  gain  ;  " '' 

and  not  without  reason.  For  the  worship  of  God 
being  taken  away,  men  lost  the  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil.  Thus  the  common  intercourse 
of  life  perished  from  among  men,  and  the  bond 
of  human  society  was  destroyed.  Then  they 
began  to  contend  with  one  another,  and  to  plot, 
and  to  acquire  for  themselves  glory  from  the 
shedding  of  human  blood. 

CHAP.    VI. AFTER   THE    B.A.NISHMENT    OF    JUSTICE, 

LUST,  UNJUST    LAWS,  DARING,  AVARICE,  AMBITION, 
PRIDE,    IMPIEIT,    AND    OTHER    VICES    REIGNED. 

And  the  source  of  all  these  evils  was  lust ; 
which,  indeed,  burst  forth  from  the  contempt  of 
true  majesty.  For  not  only  did  they  who  had 
a  superfluity  fail  to  bestow  a  share  upon  others, 
but  they  even  seized  the  property  of  others, 
drawing  everything  to  their  private  gain  ;  and  the 
things  which  formerly  even  individuals  laboured 
to  obtain  for  the  common  use  of  men,^  were  now 
conveyed  to  the  houses  of  a  few.  For,  that 
they  might  subdue  others  by  slavery,  they  began 
especially  to  withdraw  and  collect  together  the 
necessaries  of  life,  and  to  keep  them  firmly  shut 
up,  that  they  might  make  the  bounties  of  heaven 
their  own  ;  not  on  account  of  kindness,'-'  a  feehng 
which  had  no  existence  in  them,  but  that  they 
might  sweep  together  all  the  instruments  of  lust 
and  avarice.  They  also,  under  the  name  of  jus- 
tice, passed  most  unequal  and  unjust  laws,  by 
which  they  might  defend  their  plunder  and  ava- 
rice against  the  force  of  the  multitude.  They 
prevailed,  therefore,  as  much  Ijy  authority  as  by 
strength,  or  resources,  or  malice.  And  since 
there  was  in  them  no  trace  of  justice,  the  offices 
of  which  are  humanity,  ecjuity,  pity,  they  now 
began  to  rejoice  in  a  proud  and  swollen  inequal- 
ity, and  made  '°  themselves  higher  than  other 
men,  by  a  retinue  of  attendants,  and  by  the 
sword,  and  by  the  brilliancy  of  their  garments. 
For  this  reason  they  invented  for  themselves 
honours,  and  purple  robes,  and  fasces,  that,  being 
supported  by  the  terror  produced  by  axes  and 
swords,  they  might,  as  it  were  by  the  right  of 
masters,  rule  them,  stricken  with  fear,  and 
alarmed.  Such  was  the  condition  in  which  the 
life  of  man  was  placed  by  that  king  who,  liaving 
defeated  and  put  to  flight  a  parent,  did  not  seize 
his  kingdom,  but  set  up  an  impious  tyranny  by 
violence  and  armed  men,  and   took  away  that 


7  Virg.,  yE».,  viii.  327. 

'  Hominum.  Another  reading  is  "  omnium,"  of  all,  as  opposed 
to  the  few. 

9  Propter  humanitatem. 

'°  Altiores  se  .  .  .  faciebant.  Another  reading  is,  "  altiores  caete- 
ris  .  .  .  fulgebant." 


142 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  V. 


golden  age  of  justice,  and  compelled  men  to 
become  wicked  and  impious,  even  from  this  very 
circumstance,  that  he  turned  them  away  from 
God  to  the  worship  of  himself;  and  the  terror 
of  his  excessive  power  had  extorted  this. 

For  who  woukl  not  fear  him  who  was  girded 
/  about  with  arms,  whom  the  unwonted  gleam  of 
steel  and  swords  surrounded  ?  Or  what  stranger 
would  he  spare  who  had  not  even  spared  his  own 
father?  Whom,  in  truth,  should  he  fear,  who 
had  conquered  in  war,  and  destroyed  by  massa- 
cre the  race  of  the  Titans,  which  was  strong  and 
excelling  in  might  ?  What  wonder  if  the  whole 
multitude,  pressed  by  unusual  fear,  had  given 
themselves  up  to  the  adulation  of  a  single  man  ? 
Him  they  venerated,  to  him  they  paid  the  great- 
est honour.  And  since  it  is  judged  to  be  a  kind 
of  obsequiousness  to  imitate  the  customs  and 
vices  of  a  king,  all  men  laid  aside  piety,  lest,  if 
they  should  live  piously,  they  might  seem  to  up- 
braid the  wickedness  of  the  king.  Thus,  being 
corrupted  by  continual  imitation,  they  abandoned 
divine  right,  and  the  practice  of  living  wickedly 
by  degrees  became  a  habit.  And  now  nothing 
remained  of  the  pious  and  excellent  condition 
of  the  preceding  age  ;  but  justice  being  banished, 
and  drawing  with  her  the  truth,  left  to  men  error, 
ignorance,  and  blindness.  The  poets  therefore 
were  ignorant,  who  sung  that  she  fled  to  heaven, 
to  the  kingdom  of  Jupiter.  For  if  justice  was 
on  the  earth  in  the  age  which  they  call  "  golden," 
it  is  plain  that  she  was  driven  away  by  Jupiter, 
who  changed  the  golden  age.  But  the  change 
of  the  age  and  the  expulsion  of  justice  is  to  be 
deemed  nothing  else,  as  I  have  said,  than  the 
laying  aside  of  divine  rehgion,  which  alone  effects 
that  man  should  esteem  man  dear,  and  should 
know  that  he  is  bound  to  him  by  the  tie  of 
brotherhood,  since  God  is  alike  a  Father  to  all, 
so  as  to  share  the  bounties  of  the  common  God 
and  Father  with  those  who  do  not  possess  them  ; 
to  injure  no  one,  to  oppress  no  one,  not  to  close 
his  door  against  a  stranger,  nor  his  ear  against 
a  suppliant,  but  to  be  bountiful,  beneficent,  and 
liberal,  which  Tullius '  thought  to  be  praises 
suitable  to  a  king.  This  truly  is  justice,  and  this 
is  the  golden  age,  which  was  first  corrupted  when 
Jupiter  reigned,  and  shortly  afterwards,  when  he 
himself  and  all  his  offspring  were  consecrated  as 
gods,  and  the  worship  of  many  deities  under- 
taken, had  been  altogether  taken  away. 

chap.  vii. — of  the  coming  of  jesus,  and  its 
fruit;    and   of  the  virtues  and  vices   of 

THAT  AGE. 

But  God,  as  a  most  indulgent  parent,  when 
the  last  time  approached,  sent  a  messenger  to 
bring  back  that  old  age,  and  justice  which  had 


'  [Compare  Cicero,  De  OJjficiis,  i.  14,  with  Luke  xxii.  25.] 


been  put  to  flight,  that  the  human  race  might 
not  be  agitated  by  very  great  and  perpetual 
errors.  Therefore  the  appearance  of  that  golden 
time  returned,  and  justice  was  restored  to  the 
earth,  but  was  assigned  to  a  few  ;  and  this  justice 
is  nothing  else  than  the  pious  and  religious  wor- 
ship of  the  one  God.  But  perhaps  some  may 
be  inclined  to  ask,  why,  if  this  be  justice,  it  is 
not  given  to  all  mankind,  and  the  whole  multi- 
tude does  not  agree  to  it.  This  is  a  matter  of 
great  disputation,  why  a  difference  was  retained 
by  God  when  He  gave  justice  to  the  earth  ;  and 
this  I  have  shown  in  another  place,  and  when- 
ever a  favourable  opportunity  shall  occur  it  shall 
be  explained.  Now  it  is  sufficient  very  briefly 
to  signify  it :  that  virtue  can  neither  be  discerned, 
unless  it  has  vices  opposed  to  it ;  nor  be  perfect, 
unless  it  is  exercised  by  adversity.^  For  God 
designed  that  there  should  be  this  distinction 
between  good  and  evil  things,  that  we  may  know 
from  that  which  is  evil  the  quality  of  the  good, 
and  also  the  quality  of  the  evil  from  the  good ; 
nor  can  the  nature  of  the  one  be  understood  if 
the  other  is  taken  away.  God  therefore  did  not 
exclude  evil,  that  the  nature  of  virtue  might  be 
evident.  For  how  could  patient  endurance  ^  re- 
tain its  meaning  and  name  if  there  were  nothing 
which  we  were  compelled  to  endure?'*  How 
could  faith  devoted  to  its  God  deserve  praise, 
unless  there  were  some  one  who  wished  to  turn 
us  away  from  God?  For  on  this  account  He 
permitted  the  unjust  to  be  more  powerful,  that 
they  might  be  able  to  compel  to  evil ;  and  on 
this  account  to  be  more  numerous,  that  virtue 
might  be  precious,  because  it  is  rare.  And  this 
very  point  is  admirably  and  briefly  shown  by 
Quintilian  in  "  the  muffled  head."  s  "  For  what 
virtue,"  he  says,  "  would  there  be  in  innocence, 
had  not  its  rarity  furnished  it  with  praises?  But 
because  it  is  provided  by  nature  that  hatred, 
desire,  and  anger  drive  men  blindly  to  that  ob- 
ject to  which  they  have  applied  themselves,  to 
be  free  from  fault  appears  to  be  beyond  the 
power  of  man.  Otherwise,  if  nature  had  given 
to  all  men  equal  affections,  piety  would  be 
nothing." 

How  true  this  is,  the  necessity  of  the  case 
itself  teaches.  For  if  it  is  virtue  to  resist  with 
fortitude  evils  and  vices,  it  is  evident  that,  with- 
out evil  and  vice,  there  is  no  perfected  virtue ; 
and  that  God  might  render  this  complete  and 
perfect,  He  retained  that  which  was  contrary  to 
it,  with  which  it  might  contend.  For,  being 
agitated  by  evils  which  harass  it,  it  gains  stability ; 
and  in  proportion  to  the  frequency  with  which 


"  [To  establish  this,  would  be  to  go  far  in  a  theodicy  to  reconcile 
the  pcrmissinn  of  evil  with  the  divine  goodness.] 

•3  Palientia. 

>■  Pati. 

5  Caput  obvolutum.  This  appears  to  be  the  title  of  a  lost  decla- 
mation of  Quintilian. 


Chap.  IX.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


143 


it  is  urged  onward,  is  the  firmness  with  which  it 
is  strengthened.  This  is  evidently  the  cause 
which  effects  that,  although  justice  is  sent  to 
men,  yet  it  cannot  be  said  that  a  golden  age 
exists  ;  because  God  has  not  taken  away  evil, 
that  He  might  retain  that  diversity  which  alone 
preserves  the  mystery  of  a  divine  religion. 

CHAP.  VIII. OF   JUSTICE   KNOWN  TO  ALL,  BUT   NOT 

EMBRACED  ;  OF  THE  TRUE  TEMPLE  OF  GOD,  AND 
OF  HIS  WORSHIP,  THAT  ALL  VICES  MAY  BE 
SUBDUED. 

They,  therefore,  who  think  that  no  one  is  just, 
have  justice  before  their  eyes,  but  are  unwilling 
to  discern  it.  For  what  reason  is  there  why 
they  should  describe  it  either  in  poems  or  in  all 
their  discourse,  complaining  of  its  absence,  when 
it  is  very  easy  for  them  to  be  good  if  they  wish? 
Why  do  you  depict  to  yourselves  justice  as  worth- 
less,' and  wish  that  she  may  fall  from  heaven,  as 
it  were,  represented  in  some  image  ?  Behold, 
she  is  in  your  sight ;  receive  her,  if  you  are  able, 
and  place  her  in  the  abode  of  your  breast ;  and 
do  not  imagine  that  this  is  difficult,  or  unsuited 
to  the  times.  Be  just  and  good,  and  the  justice 
which  you  seek  will  follow  you  of  her  own  accord. 
Lay  aside  every  evil  thought  from  your  hearts, 
and  that  golden  age  will  at  once  return  to  you, 
which  you  cannot  attain  to  by  any  other  means 
than  by  beginning  to  worship  the  true  God.  But 
you  long  for  justice  on  the  earth,  while  the  wor- 
ship of  false  gods  continues,  which  cannot  pos- 
sibly come  to  pass.  But  it  was  not  possible 
even  at  that  time  when  you  imagine,  because 
those  deities  whom  you  impiously  worship  were 
not  yet  produced,  and  the  worship  of  the  one 
God  must  have  prevailed  throughout  the  earth ; 
of  that  God,  I  say,  who  hates  wickedness  and 
requires  goodness ;  whose  temple  is  not  stones 
or  clay,  but  man  himself,  who  bears  the  image 
of  God.  And  this  temple  is  adorned  not  with 
corruptible  gifts  of  gold  and  jewels,  but  with  the 
lasting  offices  of  virtues.  Learn,  therefore,  if 
any  intelligence  is  left  to  you,  that  men  are  wicked 
and  unjust  because  gods  are  worshipped  ;  and 
that  all  evils  daily  increase  to  the  affairs  of  men 
on  this  account,  because  God  the  Maker  and 
Governor  of  this  world  has  been  neglected  ;  be- 
cause, contrary  to  that  which  is  right,  impious 
superstitions  have  been  taken  up ;  and  lastly, 
because  you  do  not  permit  God  to  be  worshipped 
even  by  a  few. 

But  if  God  only  were  worshipped,  there  would 
not  be  dissensions  and  wars,  since  men  would 
know  that  they  are  the  sons  of  one  God ;  and, 
therefore,  among  those  who  were  connected  by 
the  sacred  and  inviolable  bond  of  divine  relation- 
ship, there  would  be  no  plottings,  inasmuch  as 
they  would  know  what  kind  of  punishments  God 

'  Inanem. 


prepared  for  the  destroyers  of  souls,  who  sees 
through  secret  crimes,  and  even  the  very  thoughts 
themselves.  There  would  be  no  frauds  or  plun- 
derings  if  they  had  learned,  through  the  instruc- 
tion of  God,  to  be  content  with  that  which  was 
their  own,  though  little,  so  that  they  might  prefer 
solid  and  eternal  things  to  those  which  are  frail 
and  perishable.  There  would  be  no  adulteries, 
and  debaucheries,  and  prostitution  of  women,  if 
it  were  known  to  all,  that  whatever  is  sought  be- 
yond the  desire  of  procreation  is  condemned  by 
God.^  Nor  would  necessity  compel  a  woman  to 
dishonour  her  modesty,  to  seek  for  herself  a  most 
disgraceful  mode  of  sustenance  ;  since  the  males 
also  would  restrain  their  lust,  and  the  pious  and 
religious  contributions  of  the  rich  would  succour 
the  destitute.  There  would  not,  therefore,  as  I 
have  said,  be  these  evils  on  the  earth,  if  there 
were  by  common  consent  a  general  observance  ^ 
of  the  law  of  God,  if  those  things  were  done  by 
all  which  our  people  alone  perform.  How  happy 
and  how  golden  would  be  the  condition  of  human 
affairs,  if  throughout  the  world  gentleness,  and 
piety,  and  peace,  and  innocence,  and  equity,  and 
temperance,  and  faith,  took  up  their  abode  !  In 
short,  there  would  be  no  need  of  so  many  and 
varying  laws  to  rule  men,  since  the  law  of  God 
alone  would  be  sufficient  for  perfect  innocence ; 
nor  would  there  be  any  need  of  prisons,  or  the 
swords  of  rulers,  or  the  terror  of  punishments, 
since  the  wholesomeness  of  the  divine  precepts 
infused  into  the  breasts  of  men  would  of  itself 
instruct  them  to  works  of  justice.  But  now  men 
are  wicked  through  ignorance  of  what  is  right 
and  good.  And  this,  indeed,  Cicero  saw ;  for, 
discoursing  on  the  subject  of  the  laws,'*  he  says  : 
"As  the  world,  with  all  its  parts  agreeing  with 
one  another,  coheres  and  dejiends  upon  one  and 
the  same  nature,  so  all  men,  being  naturally  con- 
fused among  themselves,  disagree  through  de- 
pravity ;  nor  do  they  understand  that  they  are 
related  by  blood,  and  that  they  are  all  subject  to 
one  and  the  same  guardianshij) :  for  if  this  were 
kept  in  mind,  assuredly  men  would  live  the  life 
of  gods."  Therefore  the  unjust  and  impious 
worship  of  the  gods  has  introduced  all  the  evils 
by  which  mankind  in  turn  destroy  one  another. 
For  they  could  not  retain  their  piety,  who,  as 
prodigal  and  rebellious  children,  had  renounced 
the  authority  of  God,  the  common  parent  of  all. 

CHAP.  IX. OF  THE   CRIMES    OF   THE  WICKED,  AND 

THE   TORTURES    INFLICTED    ON    THE    CHRISTIANS. 

At  times,  however,  they  perceive  that  they  are 
wicked,  and  praise  the  condition  of  the  former 


2  [This  is  not  consistent  with  the  Church's  allowance  of  matri- 
mony to  women  past  child-bearing,  nor  with  the  language  of  the 
Apostle,  1  Cor.  vii.  2-7.     See  my  note  (2),  vol.  ii.  p.  262.] 

3  Si  ab  omnibus  in  legem  Dei  conjuraretiir.  The  word  "  conjure," 
contrary  to  its  general  use,  is  here  employed  in  a  good  sense. 

■•  [See  ed.  Klotz,  vol.  ii.  p.  403,  Lips.,  1869.] 


144 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  V, 


ages,  and  conjecture  that  justice  is  absent  be- 
cause of  their  characters  and  deserts  ;  for,  though 
she  presents  herself  to  their  eyes,  they  not  only 
fail  to  receive  or  recognise  her,  but  they  even 
violently  hate,  and  persecute,  and  endeavour  to 
banish  her.  Let  us  suppose,  in  the  meantime, 
that  she  whom  we  follow  is  not  justice  :  how  will 
they  receive  her  whom  they  imagine  to  be  the 
true  justice,  if  she  shall  have  come,  when  they 
torture  and  kill  those  Avhom  they  themselves 
confess  to  be  imitators  of  the  just,  because  they 
perform  good  and  just  actions  ;  whereas,  if  they 
should  put  to  death  the  wicked  only,  they  would 
deser\-e  to  be  unvisited  by  justice,  who  had  no 
other  reason  for  leaving  the  earth  than  the  shed- 
ding of  human  blood?  How  much  more  so 
when  they  slay  the  righteous,  and  account  the 
followers  of  justice  themselves  as  enemies,  yea, 
as  more  than  enemies  ;  who,  though  they  eagerly 
seek  their  lives,  and  property,  and  children  by 
sword  and  fire,  yet  are  spared  when  conquered  ; 
and  there  is  a  place  for  clemency  even  amidst 
arms  ;  or  if  they  have  determined  to  carry  their 
cruelty  to  the  utmost,  nothing  more  is  done  tow- 
ards them,  except  that  they  are  put  to  death 
or  led  away  to  slavery  !  But  this  is  unutterable 
which  is  done  towards  those  who  are  ignorant 
of  crime,  and  none  are  regarded  as  more  guilty 
than  those  who  are  of  all  men  innocent.  There- 
fore most  wicked  men  venture  to  make  mention  of 
justice,  men  who  surpass  wild  beasts  in  ferocity, 
who  lay  waste  the  most  gentle  flock  of  God,  — 

"  Like  gaunt  wolves  rushing  from  their  den, 
Whom  lawless  hunger's  sullen  growl 
Drives  forth  into  the  night  to  prowl." ' 

But  these  have  been  maddened  not  by  the 
fury  of  hunger,  but  of  the  heart ;  nor  do  they 
prowl  in  a  black  mist,  but  by  open  plundering ; 
nor  does  the  consciousness  of  their  crimes  ever 
recall  them  from  profaning  the  sacred  and  holy 
name  of  justice  with  that  mouth  which,  like  the 
jaws  of  beasts,  is  wet  with  the  blood  of  the  in- 
nocent. What  must  we  say  is  especially  the 
cause  of  this  excessive  and  persevering  hatred? 

"  Does  truth  produce  hatred,"  ^ 

as  the  poet  says,  as  though  inspired  by  the  Di- 
vine Spirit,  or  are  they  ashamed  to  be  bad  in  the 
presence  of  the  just  and  good  ?  Or  is  it  rather 
from  both  causes  ?  For  the  truth  is  always  hate- 
ful on  this  account,  because  he  who  sins  wishes 
to  have  free  scope  for  sinning,  and  thinks  that 
he  cannot  in  any  other  way  more  securely  enjoy 
the  pleasure  of  his  evil  doings,  than  if  there  is 
no  one  whom  his  faults  may  displease.  There- 
fore they  endeavour  entirely  to  exterminate  and 
take  them  away  as  wtnesses  of  their  crimes  and 
wickedness,    and    think   them    burthensome    to 


I  Virg.,  JEn.,  ii.  353. 
*  Ter.,  Andr.,  i.  i,  41. 


themselves,  as  though  their  life  were  reproved. 
For  why  should  any  be  unseasonably  good,  who, 
when  the  public  morals  are  corrupted,  should 
censure  them  by  living  well?  Why  should  not 
all  be  equally  wicked,  rapacious,  unchaste,  adul- 
terers, perjured,  covetous,  and  fraudulent  ?  Why 
should  they  not  rather  be  taken  out  of  the  way, 
in  whose  presence  they  are  ashamed  to  lead  an 
evil  life,  who,  though  not  by  words,  for  they  are 
silent,  but  by  their  very  course  of  life,  so  unlike 
their  ovvn,  assail  and  strike  the  forehead  of  sin- 
ners ?  For  whoever  disagrees  with  them  appears 
to  reprove  them. 

Nor  is  it  greatly  to  be  wondered  at  if  these 
things  are  done  towards  men,  since  for  the  same 
cause  the  people  who  were  placed  in  hope,^  and 
not  ignorant  of  God,  rose  up  against  God  Him- 
self; and  the  same  necessity  follows  the  right- 
eous which  attacked  the  Author  of  righteousness 
Himself.  Therefore  they  harass  and  torment 
them  with  studied  kinds  of  punishments,  and 
think  it  little  to  kill  those  whom  they  hate,  un- 
less cruelty  also  mocks  their  bodies.  But  if  any 
through  fear  of  pain  or  death,  or  by  their  own 
perfidy,  have  deserted  the  heavenly  oath,'*  and 
have  consented  to  deadly  sacrifices,  these  they 
praise  and  load  s  with  honours,  that  by  their  ex- 
ample they  may  allure  others.  But  upon  those 
who  have  highly  esteemed  their  faith,  and  have 
not  denied  that  they  are  worshippers  of  God, 
they  fall  with  all  the  strength  of  their  butchery, 
as  though  they  thirsted  for  blood  ;  and  they  call 
them  desperate,^  because  they  by  no  means 
spare  their  body ;  as  though  anything  could  be 
more  desperate,  than  to  torture  and  tear  in 
pieces  him  whom  you  know  to  be  innocent. 
Thus  no  sense  of  shame  remains  among  those 
from  whom  all  kind  feeling  is  absent,  and  they 
retort  upon  just  men  reproaches  which  are  befit- 
ting to  themselves.  For  they  call  them  impious, 
being  themselves  forsooth  pious,  and  shrinking 
from  the  shedding  of  human  blood  ;  whereas,  if 
they  would  consider  their  own  acts,  and  the  acts 
of  those  whom  they  condemn  as  impious,  they 
would  now  understand  how  false  they  are,  and 
more  deserving  of  all  those  things  which  they 
either  say  or  do  against  the  good.  For  they  are 
not  of  our  number,  but  of  theirs  who  besiege 
the  roads  in  arms,  practise  piracy  by  sea  ;  or  if  it 
has  not  been  in  their  power  openly  to  assail, 
secretly  mix  poisons ;  who  kill  their  wives  that 
they  may  gain  their  dowries,  or  their  husbands 
that  they  may  marry  adulterers ;  who  either 
strangle  the  sons  born   from  themselves,  or  if 


3  The  Jewish  people.  Thus  St.  Paul  speaks,  Acts  xxvi.  6:  "I 
stand  and  am  judged  for  the  hope  of  the  promise  made  of  God  unto 
our  fathers." 

*  i.e.,  the  Christian  religion. 
5  Mactant. 

*  1  >esperati,  equivalent  to  Tnioa/3oXot,  a  word  borrowed  from  com- 
bats with  wild  beasts,  and  applied  to  Christians  as  being  ready  to 
devote  their  lives  to  the  cause  of  God. 


Chap.  X.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


145 


they  are  too  pious,  expose  them  ;  who  restrain 
their  incestuous  passions  neither  from  a  daugh- 
ter, nor  sister,  nor  mother,  nor  priestess ;  who 
conspire  against  their  own  citizens  and  country ; 
who  do  not  fear  the  sack  ; '  who,  in  fine,  com- 
mit sacrilege,  and  despoil  the  temples  of  the 
gods  whom  they  worship  ;  and,  to  speak  of  things 
which  are  light  and  usually  practised  by  them, 
who  hunt  for  inheritances,  forge  wills,  either  re- 
move or  exclude  the  just  heirs ;  who  prostitute 
their  own  persons  to  lust;  who,  in  short,  un- 
mindful of  what  they  were  born,  contend  with 
women  in  passivity  ;  ^  who,  in  violation  of  all  pro- 
priety,3  pollute  and  dishonour  the  most  sacred 
part  of  their  body ;  who  mutilate  themselves, 
and  that  which  is  more  impious,  in  order  that 
they  may  be  priests  of  religion  ;  who  do  not 
even  spare  their  own  life,  but  sell  their  lives  to 
be  taken  away  in  public ;  who,  if  they  sit  as 
judges,  corrupted  by  a  bribe,  either  destroy  the 
innocent  or  set  free  the  guilty  without  punish- 
ment ;  who  grasp  at  the  heaven  itself  by  sor- 
ceries, as  though  the  earth  would  not  contain 
their  wickedness.  These  crimes,  I  say,  and  more 
than  these,  are  plainly  committed  by  those  who 
are  worshippers  of  the  gods. 

Amidst  these  crimes  of  such  number  and 
magnitude,  what  place  is  there  for  justice  ?  And 
I  have  collected  a  few  only  out  of  many,  not  for 
the  purpose  of  censure,  but  to  show  their  nature. 
Let  those  who  shall  wish  to  know  all  take  in 
hand  the  books  of  Seneca,  who  was  at  the  same 
time  a  most  true  describer  and  a  most  vehement 
accuser  of  the  public  morals  and  vices.  But 
Lucilius  also  briefly  and  concisely  described  that 
dark  life  in  these  verses  :  "  But  now  from  morn 
to  night,  on  festival  and  ordinary  day  alike,  the 
whole  people  and  the  fathers  with  one  accord 
display  themselves  in  ^  the  forum,  and  never  de- 
part from  it.  They  have  all  given  themselves  to 
one  and  the  same  pursuit  and  art,  that  they  may 
be  able  cautiously  to  deceive,  to  fight  treacher- 
ously, to  contend  in  flattery,  each  to  pretend 
that  he  is  a  good  man,  to  he  in  wait,  as  if  all 
were  enemies  to  all."  But  which  of  these  things 
can  be  laid  to  the  charge  of  our  people, 5  with 
whom  the  whole  of  religion  consists  in  living 
without  guilt  and  without  spot?  Since,  there- 
fore, they  see  that  both  they  and  their  people  do 
those  things  which  we  have  said,  but  that  ours 
practise  nothing  else  but  that  which  is  just  and 
good,  they  might,  if  they  had  any  understanding, 
have  perceived  from  this,  both  that  they  who  do 


'  There  is  an  allusion  to  the  punishment  of  parricides,  who  were 
enclosed  in  a  bag  with  a  dog,  a  serpent,  an  ape,  and  a  cock,  and 
thrown  into  the  sea. 

2  Patientia,  in  a  bad  sense.  [The  text  of  the  translator  gives 
"  endurance,"  for  which  I  venture  to  substitute  as  above.] 

■3  Contra  fas  omne. 

*  Indiiforo.  "  Indu"  and  "endo"  are  archaisms,  used  by  Lucre- 
tius and  otiier  writers  in  the  same  sense  as  "  in." 

5  i.e.,  Christians.     [See  vol.  i.  pp.  26,  37.] 


what  is  good  are  pious,  and  that  they  themselves 
who  commit  wicked  actions  are  impious.  For 
it  is  impossible  that  they  who  do  not  err  in  all 
the  actions  of  their  life,  should  err  in  the  main 
point,  that  is,  in  religion,  which  is  the  chief  of  all 
things.  For  impiety,  if  taken  up  in  tliat  which 
is  the  most  important,  would  follow  through  all 
the  rest.  And  therefore  ^  it  is  impossible  that 
they  who  err  in  the  whole  of  their  life  should 
not  be  deceived  also  in  religion ;  inasmuch  as 
piety,  if  it  kept  its  rule  in  the  chief  point,  would 
maintain  its  course  in  others.  Thus  it  happens, 
that  on  either  side  the  character  of  the  main 
subject  may  be  known  from  the  state  of  the 
actions  which  are  carried  on. 

CHAP.    X. OF    FALSE    PIETY,    AND    OF    FALSE    AND 

TRUE    RELIGION. 

It  is  worth  while  to  investigate  their  piety, 
that  from  their  merciful  and  pious  actions  it  may 
be  understood  what  is  the  character  of  those 
things  which  are  done  by  them  contrary  to  the 
laws  of  piety.  And  that  I  may  not  seem  to 
attack  any  one  with  harshness,  I  will  take  a 
character  from  the  poets,  and  one  which  is  the 
greatest  example  of  piety.     In  Maro,  that  king 

"  Than  who 
The  breath  of  being  none  e'er  drew, 
More  brave,  more  pious,  or  more  true,"'  — 

what  proofs  of  justice  did  he  bring  forward  to 
us? 

"  There  walk  with  hands  fast  bound  behind 
I         The  victim  prisoners,  designed 

For  slaughter  o'er  the  flames." ' 

What  can  be  more  merciful  than  this  piety? 
ivhat  more  merciful  than  to  immolate  human 
victims  to  the  dead,  and  to  feed  the  fire  with 
the  blood  of  men  as  with  oil  ?  But  perhaps  this 
may  not  have  been  the  fault  of  the  hero  himself, 
but  of  the  poet,  who  polluted  with  distinguished 
wickedness  "  a  man  distinguished  by  his  piety."  y 
Where  then,  O  poet,  is  that  piety  which  you  so 
frequently  praise  ?     Behold  the  pious  ^neas  :  — 

"  Four  hapless  youths  of  Sulmo's  breed, 
And  four  who  Ufens  call  their  sire, 
He  takes  alive,  condemned  to  bleed 
To  Pallas'  shade  on  Pallas'  pyre."'° 

Why,  therefore,  at  the  very  same  time  when  he 
was  sending  the  men  in  chains  to  slaughter,  did 
he  say, 

"  Fain  would  I  grant  the  living  peace,"  " 
when  he  ordered  that  those  whom  he  had  in  his 
power  alive  should  be  slain  in  the  place  of  cattle  ? 
But  this,  as  I  have  said,  was  not  his  fault  —  for 


6  F.oque  fieri  non  potest.     Others  read  "  seque  fieri,"  etc. 

7  Virg  ,  Mn.,  \.  544. 

8  /^/V/.,xi.  81. 

9  I  hid.,  1.  10. 
•0  Ibid.,  X.  517. 
"  Ibid.,  xi.  III. 


146 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  V. 


he  perhaps  had  not  received  a  Hberal  education 
—  but  yours  ;  for,  though  you  were  learned,  yet 
you  were  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  piety,  and 
you  beheved  that  that  wicked  and  detestable 
action  of  his  was  the  befitting  exercise  of  piety. 
He  is  plainly  called  pious  on  this  account  only, 
because  he  loved  his  father.     Why  should  I  say 

that 

"  The  good  yEneas  owned  their  plea,"  ' 

and  yet  slew  them  ?  For,  though  adjured  by  the 
same  lather,  and 

"  By  young  lulus'  dawning  day,"  ' 

he  did  not  spare  them, 

"  Live  fury  kindling  every  vein  "  ^ 

What  I  can  any  one  imagine  that  there  was  any 
virtue  in  him  who  was  fired  with  madness  as 
stubble,  and,  forgetful  of  the  shade  of  his  father, 
by  whom  he  was  entreated,  was  unable  to  curb 
his  wrath  ?  He  was  therefore  by  no  means  pious 
who  not  only  slew  the  unresisting,  but  even  sup- 
pliants. Here  some  one  will  say  :  What  then, 
or  where,  or  of  what  character  is  piety  ?  Truly 
it  is  among  those  who  are  ignorant  of  wars,  who 
maintain  concord  with  all,  who  are  friendly  even 
to  their  enemies,  who  love  all  men  as  brethren, 
who  know  how  to  restrain  their  anger,  and  to 
soothe  every  passion  of  the  mind  with  calm  gov- 
ernment. How  great  a  mist,  therefore,  how 
great  a  cloud  of  darkness  and  errors,  has  over- 
spread the  breasts  of  men  who,  when  they  think 
themselves  especially  pious,  then  become  espe- 
cially impious?  For  the  more  religiously  they 
honour  those  earthy  images,  so  much  the  more 
wicked  are  they  towards  the  name  of  the  true 
divinity.  And  therefore  they  are  often  harassed 
with  greater  evils  as  the  reward  of  their  impiety  ; 
and  because  they  know  not  the  cause  of  these 
evils,  the  blame  is  altogether  ascribed  to  fortune, 
and  the  philosophy  of  Epicurus  finds  a  place, 
who  thinks  that  nothing  extends  to  the  gods, 
and  that  they  are  neither  influenced  by  favour 
nor  moved  by  anger,  because  they  often  see 
their  dcspisers  happy,  and  their  worshippers  in 
misery.  And  this  happens  on  this  account,  be- 
cause when  they  seem  to  be  religious  and  natu- 
rally good,  they  are  believed  to  deserve  nothing 
of  that  kind  which  they  often  suffer.  However, 
they  console  themselves  by  accusing  fortune ; 
nor  do  they  perceive  that  if  she  had  any  exist- 
ence, she  would  never  injure  her  worshippers. 
Piety  of  this  kind  is  therefore  deservedly  fol- 
lowed by  punishment ;  and  the  deity  offended 
•with  the  wickedness  of  men  who  are  depraved 
in  their  religious  worship,*  punishes  them  with 


'  VIrsr.,  yEn.,  xi.  106. 

2  Ibid.,  X.  524. 

3  Hid.,  xil.  946. 

*  Hominum  prave  rcligiosorura. 


heavy  misfortune  ;  who,  although  they  live  with 
holiness  in  the  greatest  faith  and  innocence,  yet 
because  they  worship  gods  whose  impious  and 
profane  rites  are  an  abomination  to  the  true 
God,  are  estranged  from  justice  and  the  name 
of  true  piety.  Nor  is  it  difficult  to  show  why 
the  worshippers  of  the  gods  cannot  be  good  and 
just.  For  how  shall  they  abstain  from  the  shed- 
ding of  blood  who  worship  bloodthirsty  deities, 
Mars  and  Bellona?  or  how  shall  they  spare  their 
parents  who  worship  Jupiter,  who  drove  out  his 
father  ?  or  how  shall  they  spare  their  own  infants 
who  worship  Saturnus?  how  shall  they  uphold 
chastity  who  worship  a  goddess  who  is  naked, 
and  an  adulteress,  and  who  prostitutes  herself  as 
it  were  among  the  gods?  how  shall  they  with- 
hold themselves  from  plunder  and  frauds  who 
are  acquainted  with  the  thefts  of  Mercurius,  who 
teaches  that  to  deceive  is  not  the  part  of  fraud, 
but  of  cleverness  ?  how  shall  they  restrain  their 
lusts  who  worship  Jupiter,  Hercules,  Liber, 
Apollo,  and  the  others,  whose  adulteries  and 
debaucheries  with  men  and  women  are  not  only 
known  to  the  learned,  but  are  even  set  forth  in 
the  theatres,  and  made  the  subject  of  songs,  so 
that  they  are  notorious  5  to  all  ?  Among  these 
things  is  it  possible  for  men  to  be  just,  who, 
althougii  they  were  naturally  good,  would  be 
trained  to  injustice  by  the  very  gods  themselves? 
For,  that  you  may  propitiate  the  god  whom  you 
worship,  there  is  need  of  those  things  with  which 
you  know  that  he  is  pleased  and  delighted. 
Thus  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  god  fashions  the 
life  of  his  worshippers  according  to  the  character 
of  his  own  will,^  since  the  most  religious  worship 
is  to  imitate. 

CHAP.    XI.  —  OF   THE   CRUELTY   OF  THE    HEATHENS 
AGAINST  THE   CHRISTIANS. 

Therefore,  because  justice  is  burthensome  and 
unpleasant  to  those  men  who  agree  with  the 
character  of  their  gods,  they  exercise  with  vio- 
lence against  the  righteous  the  same  impiety 
which  they  show  in  other  things.  And  not  with- 
out reason  are  they  spoken  of  by  the  prophets 
as  beasts.  Therefore  it  is  excellently  said  by 
Marcus  Tullius  :  ^  "  For  if  there  is  no  one  who 
would  not  prefer  to  die  than  to  be  changed  into 
the  figure  of  a  beast,  although  he  is  about  to 
have  the  mind  of  a  man.  how  much  more  wretch- 
ed is  it  to  be  of  a  brutalized  mind  in  the  figure 
of  a  man  !  To  me,  indeed,  it  seems  as  much 
worse  as  the  mind  is  more  excellent  than  the 
body."  Therefore  they  view  with  disdain  the 
bodies  of  beasts,  though  they  are  themselves 
more  cruel  than  these  ;  and  they  pride  them- 
selves on  this  account,  that  they  were  born  men, 


5  Omnibus  notiora. 

*  Pro  qualitate  numinis  sui. 

7  \De  Republica,  iv.  i.  3.] 


Chap.  XII.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


147 


though  they  have  nothing  belonging  to  man  ex- 
cept the  features  and  the  eminent  figure.  For 
what  Caucasus,  what  India,  what  Hyrcania  ever 
nourished  beasts  so  savage  and  so  bloodthirsty  ? 
For  the  fury  of  all  wild  beasts  rages  until  their 
appetite  is  satisfied ;  and  when  their  hunger  is 
appeased,  immediately  is  pacified.  That  is  truly 
a  beast  by  whose  command  alone 

"  With  rivulets  of  slaughter  reeks 

The  stern  embattled  field." 
"Dire  agonies,  wild  terrors  swarm. 
And  Death  glares  grim  in  many  a  form." ' 

No  one  can  befittingly  describe  the  cruelty  of 
this  beast,  which  reclines  in  one  place,  and  yet 
rages  with  iron  teeth  throughout  the  world,  and 
not  only  tears  in  pieces  the  limbs  of  men,  but 
also  breaks  their  very  bones,  and  rages  over  their 
ashes,  that  there  may  be  no  place  for  their  burial, 
as  though  they  who  confess  God  aimed  at  this, 
that  their  tombs  should  be  visited,  and  not  rather 
that  they  themselves  may  reach  the  presence  of 
God. 

What  brutality  is  it,  what  fury,  what  madness, 
to  deny  light  to  the  living,  earth  to  the  dead? 
I  say,  therefore,  that  nothing  is  more  wretched 
than  those  men  whom  necessity  has  either  found 
or  made  the  ministers  of  another's  fury,  the  satel- 
lites of  an  impious  command.  For  that  was  no 
honour,  or  exaltation  of  dignity,  but  the  con- 
demnation of  a  man  to  torture,  and  also  to  the 
everlasting  punishment  of  God.  But  it  is  im- 
possible to  relate  what  things  they  performed 
individually  throughout  the  world.  For  what 
number  of  volumes  will  contain  so  infinite,  so 
varied  kinds  of  cruelty?  For,  having  gained 
power,  every  one  raged  according  to  his  own 
disposition.  Some,  through  excessive  timidity, 
proceeded  to  greater  lengths  than  they  were 
commanded ;  others  thus  acted  through  their 
own  particular  hatred  against  the  righteous ; 
some  by  a  natural  ferocity  of  mind ;  some 
through  a  desire  to  please,  and  that  by  this 
service  they  might  prepare  the  way  to  higher 
offices  :  some  were  swift  to  slaughter,  as  an  indi- 
vidual in  Phrygia,  who  burnt  a  whole  assembly 
of  people,  together  with  their  place  of  meeting. 
But  the  more  cruel  he  was,  so  much  the  more 
mercifuP  is  he  found  to  be.  But  that  is  the 
worst  kind  of  persecutors  whom  a  false  ap- 
pearance of  clemency  flatters  ;  he  is  the  more 
severe,  he  the  more  cruel  torturer,  who  deter- 
mines to  put  no  one  to  death.  Therefore  it 
cannot  be  told  what  great  and  what  grievous 
modes  of  tortures  judges  of  this  kind  devised, 
that  they  might  arrive  at  the  accomplishment  of 
their   purpose.     But  they   do   these   things   not 


'  Virg.,  /En.,  XI.  646,  ii.  368.     [Dan.  vii.  7.] 

^  The  more  severe  torture,  as  causing  immediate  death,  may  be 
regarded  as  merciful,  in  comparison  with  a  slow  and  lingering  punish- 
ment.    [This  by  an  eye-witness  of  Diocletian's  day.] 


only  on  this  account,  that  they  may  be  able  to 
boast  that  they  "have  slain  none  of  the  innocent, 
—  for  I  myself  have  heard  some  boasting  that 
their  administration  has  been  in  this  respect 
without  bloodshed,  —  but  also  for  the  sake  of 
envy,  lest  either  they  themselves  should  be  over- 
come, or  the  others  should  obtain  the  glory  due 
to  their  virtue.  And  thus,  in  devising  modes  of 
punishment,  they  think  of  nothing  else  besides 
victory.  For  they  know  that  this  is  a  contest 
and  a  battle.  I  saw  in  Bithynia  the  praefect 
wonderfully  elated  with  joy,  as  though  he  had 
subdued  some  nation  of  barbarians,  because  one 
who  had  resisted  for  two  years  with  great  spirit 
appeared  at  length  to  yield.  They  contend, 
therefore,  that  they  may  conquer  and  inflict  ex- 
quisite 3  pains  on  their  bodies,  and  avoid  nothing 
else  but  that  the  victims  may  not  die  under  the 
torture  :  as  though,  in  truth,  death  alone  could 
make  them  happy,  and  as  though  tortures  also 
in  proportion  to  their  severity  would  not  produce 
greater  glory  of  virtue.  But  they  with  obstinate 
folly  give  orders  that  diligent  care  shall  be  given 
to  the  tortured,  that  their  limbs  may  be  reno- 
vated for  other  tortures,  and  fresh  blood  be  sup- 
plied for  punishment.  What  can  be  so  pious,  so 
beneficent,  so  humane?  They  would  not  have 
bestowed  such  anxious  care  on  any  whom  they 
loved.  This  is  the  discipline  of  the  gods  :  to 
these  deeds  they  train  their  worshippers ;  these 
are  the  sacred  rites  which  they  require.  More- 
over, most  wicked  murderers  have  invented 
impious  laws  against  the  pious.  For  both  sac- 
rilegious ordinances  and  unjust  disputations  of 
jurists  are  read.  Domitius,  in  his  seventh  book, 
concerning  the  office  of  the  proconsul,  has  col- 
lected wicked  rescripts  of  princes,  that  he  might 
show  by  what  punishments  they  ought  to  be 
visited  who  confessed  themselves  to  be  worship- 
pers of  God. 

CHAP.  XII. OF   TRUE   VIRTUE  ;    AND   OF  THE   ESTI- 
MATION   OF   A    GOOD    OR    BAD    CITIZEN. 

What  would  you  do  to  those  who  give  the 
name  of  justice  to  the  tortures  inflicted  by  tyrants 
of  old,  who  fiercely  raged  against  the  innocent; 
and  though  they  are  teachers  of  injustice  and 
cruelty,  wish  to  appear  just  and  prudent,  be- 
ing blind  and  dull,  and  ignorant  of  affairs  and 
of  truth  ?  Is  justice  so  hateful  to  you,  O  aban- 
doned minds,  that  ye  regard  it  as  equal  with  the 
•greatest  crimes  ?  Is  innocence  so  utterly  lost  in 
your  eyes,  that  you  do  not  think  it  worthy  of 
death  only,'*  but  it  is  esteemed  as  beyond  all 
crimes  to  commit  no  crime,  and  to  have  a  breast 
pure  from  all  contagion  of  guilt?  And  since  we 
are  speaking  generally  with  those  who  worship 


3  Exqnisitis,  "  carefully  studied." 

*  Ne  morte  quidem  siniplici  dignum  putetis. 


148 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  V. 


gods,  let  us  have  your  permission  to  do  good 
with  you  ;  for  this  is  our  law,  this  our  business, 
this  our  religion.  If  we  appear  to  you  wise,  imi- 
tate us ;  if  foolish,  despise  us,  or  even  laugh  at 
us,  if  you  please ;  for  our  folly  is  profitable  to 
us.  Why  do  you  lacerate,  why  do  you  afflict  us? 
We  do  not  envy  your  wisdom.  We  prefer  this 
folly  of  ours  —  we  embrace  this.  We  believe 
that  this  is  expedient  for  us,  —  to  love  you,  and 
to  confer  all  things  upon  you,  who  hate  us. 

There  is  in  the  writings  of  Cicero  '  a  passage 
not  inconsistent  with  the  truth,  in  that  disputa- 
tion which  is  held  by  Furius  against  justice  :  "  I 
ask,"  he  says,  "  if  there  should  be  two  men,  and 
one  of  them  should  be  an  excellent  man,  of  the 
highest  integrity,  the  greatest  justice,  and  re- 
markable faith,  and  the  other  distinguished  by 
crime  and  audacity ;  and  if  the  state  should  be 
in  such  error  as  to  regard  that  good  man  as 
wicked,  vicious,  and  execrable,  but  should  think 
the  one  who  is  most  wicked  to  be  of  the  highest 
integrity  and  faith ;  and  if,  in  accordance  with 
this  opinion  of  all  the  citizens,  that  good  man 
should  be  harassed,  dragged  away,  should  be 
deprived  of  his  hands,  have  his  eyes  dug  out, 
should  be  condemned,  be  bound,  be  branded,  be 
banished,  be  in  want,  and  lastly,  should  most  justly 
appear  to  all  to  be  most  wretched  ;  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  if  that  wicked  man  should  be  praised, 
and  honoured,  and  loved  by  all,  —  if  all  honours, 
all  commands,  all  wealth,  and  all  abundance 
should  be  bestowed  upon  him,  —  in  short,  if  he 
should  be  judged  in  the  estimation  of  all  an  ex- 
cellent man,  and  most  worthy  of  all  fortune,  — 
who,  I  pray,  will  be  so  mad  as  to  doubt  which 
of  the  two  he  would  prefer  to  be?"  Assuredly 
he  put  forth  this  example  as  though  he  divined 
what  evils  were  about  to  happen  to  us,  and  in 
what  manner,  on  account  of  righteousness  ;  for 
our  people  suffer  all  these  things  through  the  per- 
verseness  of  those  in  error.  15ehold,  the  state, 
or  rather  the  whole  world  itself,  is  in  such  error, 
that  it  persecutes,  tortures,  condemns,  and  puts 
to  death  good  and  righteous  men,  as  though 
they  were  wicked  and  impious.  For  as  to  what 
he  says,  that  no  one  is  so  infatuated  as  to  doubt 
which  of  the  two  he  would  prefer  to  be,  he  in- 
deed, as  the  one  who  was  contending  against 
justice,  thought  this,  that  the  wise  man  would 
prefer  to  be  bad  if  he  had  a  good  reputation, 
than  to  be  good  with  a  bad  reputation. 

But  may  this  senselessness  be  absent  from  us, 
that  we  should  prefer  that  which  is  false  to  the 
true  ?  Or  does  the  character  of  our  good  man 
depend  upon  the  errors  of  the  people,  more 
than  upon  our  own  conscience  and  the  judgment 
of  God  ?  Or  shall  any  prosperity  ever  allure  us, 
so  that  we  should  not  rather  choose  true  good- 


'  [From  the  Republic,  iii.  xvii.  27.] 


ness,  though  accompanied  with  all  evil,  than  false 
goodness  together  with  all  prosperity  ?  Let  kings 
retain  their  kingdoms,  the  rich  their  riches,  as 
Plautus  says,^  the  wise  their  wisdom ;  let  them 
leave  to  us  our  folly,  which  is  evidently  proved 
to  be  wisdom,  from  the  very  fact  that  they  envy 
us  its  possession  :  for  who  would  envy  a  fool,  but 
he  who  is  himself  most  foolish  ?  But  they  are 
not  so  foolish  as  to  envy  fools ;  but  from  the 
fact  of  their  following  us  up  with  such  care  and 
anxiety,  they  allow  that  we  are  not  fools.  For 
why  should  they  rage  with  such  cruelty,  unless  it 
is  that  they  fear  lest,  as  justice  grows  strong  from 
day  to  day,  they  should  be  deserted  together 
with  their  decaying''  gods?  If,  therefore,  the 
worshippers  of  gods  are  wise,  and  we  are  foolish, 
why  do  they  fear  lest  the  wise  shall  be  allured  by 
the  foolish? 

CHAP.  XIII.  —  OF   THE   INCREASE   AND  THE  PUNISH- 
MENT   OF   THE    CHRISTIANS.* 

But  since  our  number  is  continually  increased 
from  the  worshippers  of  gods,  but  is  never 
lessened,  not  even  in  persecution  itself,  —  since 
men  may  commit  sin,  and  be  defiled  by  sacrifice, 
but  they  cannot  be  turned  away  from  God,  for 
the  truth  prevails  by  its  own  power,  —  who  is 
there,  I  pray,  so  foolish  and  so  blind  as  not  to 
see  on  which  side  wisdom  is?  But  they  are 
blinded  by  malice  and  fury,  that  they  cannot 
see  ;  and  they  think  that  those  are  foolish  who, 
when  they  have  it  in  their  power  to  avoid  pun- 
ishments, nevertheless  prefer  to  be  tortured  and 
to  be  put  to  death ;  whereas  they  might  see 
from  this  very  circumstance,  that  it  is  not  folly  to 
which  so  many  thousands  throughout  the  world 
agree  with  one  and  the  same  mind.  For  if 
women  fall  into  error  through  the  weakness  of 
their  sex  (for  these  persons  sometimes  call  it  a 
womanish  and  anile  superstition),  men  doubtless 
are  wise.  If  boys,  if  youths  are  improvident 
through  their  age,  the  mature  and  aged  doubtless 
have  a  fixed  judgment.  If  one  city  is  unwise,  it 
is  evident  that  the  other  innumerable  cities  cannot 
be  foolish.  If  one  province  or  one  nation  is 
without  prudence,  the  rest  must  have  understand- 
ing of  that  which  is  right.  But  since  the  divine 
law  has  been  received  from  the  rising  even  to  the 
setting  of  the  sun,  and  each  sex,  every  age,  and 
nation,  and  country,  with  one  and  the  same  mind 
obeys  God  —  since  there  is  everywhere  the  same 
patient  endurance,  the  same  contempt  of  death 
—  they  ought  to  have  understood  that  there  is 
some  reason  in  that  matter,  that  it  is  not  without 
a  cause  that  it  is  defended  even  to  death,  that 
there  is  some  foundation  and  solidity,  which  not 


*  Curctil.,  i.  3,  22. 

3  Cariosis.     There  is  a  great  variety  of  readings  in  this  place. 

*  [Vol.  iv.  p.  n6;  same  vol.,  p.  125. J 


Chap.  XIV.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


149 


only  frees  that  religion  from  injuries  and  molesta- 
tion, but  always  increases  and  makes  it  stronger. 
For  in  this  respect  also  the  malice  of  those  is 
brought  to  light,  who  think  that  they  have  utterly 
overthrown  the  religion  of  God  if  they  have  \ 
corrupted  men,  when  it  is  permitted  them  to  j 
make  satisfaction  also  to  God  ;  and  there  is  no 
worshipper  of  God  so  evil  who  does  not,  when 
the  opportunity  is  given  him,  return  to  appease 
God,  and  that,  too,  with  greater  devotedness. 
For  the  consciousness  of  sin  and  the  fear  of 
punishment  make  a  man  more  religious,  and  the 
faith  is  always  much  stronger  which  is  replaced 
through  repentance.  If,  therefore,  they  them- 
selves, when  they  think  that  the  gods  are  angry 
with  them,  nevertheless  believe  that  they  are 
appeased  by  gifts,  and  sacrifices,  and  incense, 
what  reason  is  there  why  they  should  imagine 
our  God  to  be  so  unmerciful  and  implacable, 
that  it  should  appear  impossible  for  him  to  be  a 
Christian,  who  by  compulsion  and  against  his 
will  has  poured  a  libation  to  their  gods  ?  Unless 
by  chance  they  think  that  those  who  are  once 
contaminated  are  about  to  change  their  mind, 
so  that  they  may  now  begin  of  their  own  accord 
to  do  that  which  they  have  done  under  the  influ- 
ence of  torture.  Who  would  willingly  undertake 
that  duty  which  began  with  injury?  Who,  when 
he  sees  the  scars  on  his  own  sides,  would  not 
the  more  hate  the  gods,  on  account  of  whom 
he  bears  the  traces  of  lasting  punishment,  and 
the  marks  imprinted  upon  his  flesh  ?  Thus  it 
comes  to  pass,  that  when  peace  is  given  from 
heaven,  those  who  were  estranged '  from  us  re- 
turn, and  a  fresh  crowd  ^  of  others  are  added, 
on  account  of  the  wonderful  nature  ^  of  the 
virtue  displayed.  For  when  the  people  see  that 
men  are  lacerated  by  various  kinds  of  tortures, 
and  that  they  retain  their  patience  unsubduecl 
while  the  executioners  are  wearied,  they  think, 
as  is  really  the  case,  that  neither  the  agreement 
of  so  many  nor  the  constancy  of  the  dying  is 
without  meaning,  and  that  patience  itself  could 
not  surmount  such  great  tortures  without  the 
aid  of  God.  Robbers  and  men  of  robust  frame 
are  unable  to  endure  lacerations  of  this  kind  : 
they  utter  exclamations,  and  send  forth  groans  ; 
for  they  are  overcome  by  pain,  becausq  they  are 
destitute  of  patience  infused  *  into  them.  But 
in  our  case  (not  to  speak  of  men),  boys  and 
delicate  women  in  silence  overpower  their  tor- 
turers, and  even  the  fire  is  unable  to  extort  from 
them  a  groan.  Let  the  Romans  go  and  boast 
in  their  Mutius  or  Regulus,  —  the  one  of  whom 
gave  himself  up  to  be  slain  by  the  enemy,  be- 
cause he  was  ashamed  to  live  as  a  captive  ;  the  j 

'  Et  qui  fuerint  aversi,  redeant.     The  common  reading  is,  "  et 
qui  fu^erunt,  universi  redeant." 
-  Alius  novus  populus. 
^   Propter  miraculum  virtutis. 
4  Dcest  illis  iiispirata  paticntia. 


other  being  taken  by  the  enemy,  when  he  saw 
that  he  could  not  escape  death,  laid  his  hand 
upon  the  burning  hearth,  that  he  might  make 
atonement  for  his  crime  to  the  enemy  whom  he 
wished  to  kill,  and  by  that  punishment  received 
the  pardon  which  he  had  not  deserved.  Behold, 
the  weak  sex  and  fragile  age  endure  to  be  lacer- 
ated in  the  whole  body,  and  to  be  burned  :  not 
of  necessity,  for  it  is  permitted  them  to  escape 
if  they  wished  to  do  so ;  but  of  their  own  will, 
because  they  put  their  trust  in  God.s 

CHAP.    XIV. OF   THE    FORTITUDE    OF    THE    CHRIS- 

TI.ANS. 

But  this  is  true  virtue,  which  the  vaunting  phi- 
losophers also  boast  of,  not  in  deed,  but  with 
empty  words,  saying  that  nothing  is  so  befitting 
the  gravity  and  constancy  of  a  wise  man  as  to  be 
able  to  be  driven  away  from  his  sentiment  and 
purpose  by  no  torturers,  but  that  it  is  worth  his 
while ^  to  suffer  torture  and  death  rather  than  be- 
tray a  trust  or  depart  from  his  duty,  or,  overcome 
by  fear  of  death  or  severity  of  pain,  commit  any 
injustice.  Unless  by  chance  Flaccus  appears  to 
them  to  rave  in  his  lyrics,  when  he  says, 

"  Not  the  rage  of  the  million  commanding  things  evil ; 
Not  the  doom  frowning  near  in  the  brows  of  the  tyrant, 
.Shakes  the  upright  and  resolute  man 
In  his  solid  completeness  of  soul."' 

And  nothing  can  be  more  true  than  this,  if  it  is 
referred  to  those  who  refuse  no  tortures,  no  kind 
of  death,  that  they  may  not  turn  aside  from  faith 
and  justice ;  who  do  not  tremble  at  the  com- 
mands of  tyrants  nor  the  swords  of  rulers,^  so  as 
not  to  maintain  true  and  solid  liberty  with  con- 
stancy of  mind,  which  wisdom  is  to  be  observed 
in  this  alone.  For  who  is  so  arrogant,  who  so 
lifted  up,  as  to  forbid  me  to  raise  my  eyes  to 
heaven?  Who  can  impose  upon  me  the  neces- 
sity either  of  worshipping  that  which  I  am  un- 
willing to  worship,  or  of  abstaining  from  the 
worship  of  that  which  I  wisli  to  worship?  What 
further  will  now  be  left  to  us,  if  even  this,  which 
must  be  done  of  one's  own  will,^  shall  be  ex- 
torted from  me  by  the  caj^rice  of  another?  No 
one  will  effect  this,  if  we  have  any  courage  to 
despise  death  and  pain.  But  if  we  possess  this 
constancy,  why  are  we  judged  foolish  when  we 
do  those  things  which  philosophers  praise? 
Seneca,  in  charging  men  with  inconsistency, 
rightly  says  the  highest  virtue  appears  to  them 
to  consist  in  greatness  of  spirit ;  and  yet  the 
same  persons  regard  him  who  despises  death  as 
a  madman,  which  is  plainly  a  mark  of  tlie  great- 
est  perverseness.     But  those   followers  of  \ain 

5   [Vol.  ill.  p.  700,  this  series.] 
•^  T.inti  est  .  .  .  ne. 

7  Horai.,  Carm.,  iii.  3,  Lord  Lytton's  translation. 

8  i.e.,  of  provinces. 

9  Voluntale. 


I50 


THE    DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  V, 


religions  urge  this  with  the  same  folly  with  which 
they  fail  to  understand  the  true  God ;  and  these 
the  Erythraean  Sibyl  calls  "  deaf  and  senseless,"  ' 
since  they  neither  hear  nor  perceive  divine 
things,  but  fear  and  adore  an  earthen  image 
moulded  by  their  own  fingers. 

CH.AP.    XV.  —  OF     FOLLY,     WISDOM,     PIETV',     EQUITY, 
AND   JUSTICE. 

But  the  reason  on  account  of  which  they  im- 
agine those  who  are  wise  to  be  foolish  has  strong 
grounds  of  support  (for  they  are  not  deceived 
without  reason).  And  this  must  be  diligently 
explained  by  us,  that  they  may  at  length  (if  it  is 
possible)  recognise  their  errors.  Justice  by  its 
own  nature  has  a  certain  appearance  of  folly, 
and  I  am  able  to  confirm  this  both  by  divine 
and  human  testimonies.  But  perhaps  we  should 
not  succeed  with  them,  unless  we  should  teach 
them  from  their  own  authorities  that  no  one  can 
be  just,  a  matter  which  is  united  with  true  wis- 
dom, unless  he  also  appears  to  be  foolish. 
Carneades  was  a  philosopher  of  the  Academic 
sect ;  and  one  who  knpws  not  what  power  he 
had  in  discussion,  what  eloquence,  what  sagacity, 
will  nevertheless  understand  the  character  of  the 
man  himself  from  the  praises  of  Cicero  or  of 
Lucilius,  in  whose  writings  Neptune,  discoursing 
on  a  subject  of  the  greatest  difficulty,  shows  that 
it  cannot  be  explained,  even  if  Orcus  should 
restore  Carneades  himself  to  life.  This  Car- 
neades, when  he  had  been  sent  by  the  Athenians 
as  ambassador  to  Rome,  disputed  copiously  on 
the  subject  of  justice,  in  the  hearing  of  Galba 
and  Cato,  who  had  been  censor,  who  were  at 
that  time  the  greatest  of  orators.  But  on  the 
next  day  the  same  man  overthrew  his  own  argu- 
ment by  a  disputation  to  the  contrary  effect,  and 
took  away  the  justice  which  he  had  praised  on 
the  preceding  day,  not  indeed  with  the  gravity 
of  a  philosopher,  whose  prudence  ought- to  be 
firm  and  his  opinion  settled,  but  as  it  were  by  an 
oratorical  kind  of  exercise  of  disputing  on  both 
sides.  And  he  was  accustomed  to  do  this,  that 
he  might  be  able  to  refute  others  who  asserted 
anything.  L.  Furius,  in  Cicero,  makes  mention 
of  that  discussion  in  which  justice  is  overthrown. ^ 
I  believe,  inasmuch  as  he  was  discussing  the 
subject  of  the  state,  he  did  it  that  he  might  in- 
troduce the  defence  and  praise  of  that  without 
which  he  thought  that  a  state  could  not  be  gov- 
erned. But  Carneades,  that  he  might  refute 
Aristotle  and  Plato,  the  advocates  of  justice,  in 
that  first  disputation  collected  all  the  arguments 
which  were  alleged  in  behalf  of  justice,  that  he 
might  be  able  to  overthrow  them,  as  he  did.  For 
it  was  very  easy  to  shake  justice,  having  no  roots, 

*  Kui(t>ov<;  Ka\  avOTiTOv;, 

2  [See  Rep.,  iii.  cap.  6,  part  iv.  vol.  2,  p.  300,  ed.  Klotz.] 


inasmuch  as  there  was  then  none  on  the  earth, 
that  its  nature  or  qualities  might  be  perceived 
by  philosophers.  And  I  could  wish  that  men, 
so  many  and  of  such  a  character,  had  possessed 
knowledge  also,  in  proportion  to  their  eloquence 
and  spirit,  for  completing  the  defence  of  this 
greatest  virtue,  which  has  its  origin  in  religion, 
its  principle  in  equity  !  But  those  who  were 
ignorant  of  that  first  part  could  not  possess  the 
second.  But  I  wish  first  to  show,  summarily 
and  concisely,  what  it  is,  that  it  may  be  under- 
stood that  the  philosophers  were  ignorant  of 
justice,  and  were  unable  to  defend  that  with 
which  they  were  unacquainted.  Although  justice 
embraces  all  the  virtues  together,  yet  there  are 
two,  the  chief  of  all,  which  cannot  be  torn  asun- 
der and  separated  from  it  —  piety  and  equity. 
For  fidelity,  temperance,  uprightness,  innocence, 
integrity,  and  the  other  things  of  this  kind,  either 
naturally  or  through  the  training  of  parents,  may 
exist  in  those  men  who  are  ignorant  of  justice, 
as  they  have  always  existed ;  for  the  ancient 
Romans,  who  were  accustomed  to  glory  in  jus- 
tice, used  evidently  to  glory  in  those  virtues 
which  (as  I  have  said)  may  proceed  from  justice, 
and  be  separated  from  the  very  fountain  itself. 
But  piety  and  equity  are,  as  it  were,  its  veins  : 
for  in  these  two  fountains  the  whole  of  justice  is 
contained  ;  but  its  source  and  origin  is  in  the 
first,  all  its  force  and  method  in  the  second. 
But  piety  is  nothing  else  but  the  conception  ^  of 
God,  as  Trismegistus  most  truly  defined  it,  as  we 
have  said  in  another  place.  If,  therefore,  it  is 
piety  to  know  God,  and  the  sum  of  this  knowl- 
edge is  that  you  worship  Him,  it  is  plain  that  he 
is  ignorant  of  justice  who  does  not  possess  the 
knowledge  of  God.  For  how  can  he  know  jus- 
tice itself,  who  is  ignorant  of  the  source  from 
which  it  arises?  Plato,  indeed,  spoke  many 
things  respecting  the  one  God,  by  whom  he  said 
that  the  world  was  framed ;  but  he  spoke  noth- 
ing respecting  religion  ;  for  he  had  dreamed  of 
God,  but  had  not  known  Him.  But  if  either  he 
himself  or  any  other  person  had  wished  to  com- 
plete the  defence  of  justice,  he  ought  first  of  all 
to  have  overthrown  the  religions  of  the  gods,  be- 
cause they  are  opposed  to  piety.  And  because 
Socrates  indeed  tried  to  do  this,  he  was  thrown 
into  prison  ;  that  even  then  it  might  be  seen 
what  was  about  to  happen  to  those  men  who  had 
begun  to  defend  true  justice,  and  to  ser\^e  the 
only  God. 

The  other  part  of  justice,  therefore,  is  equity ; 
and  it  is  plain  that  I  am  not  speaking  of  the 
equity  of  judging  well,  though  this  also  is  praise- 
worthy in  a  just  man,  but  of  making  himself 
equal  to  others,  which  Cicero  calls  equability.* 
For  God,  who   produces  and  gives   breath   to 


3  Notio.  , 

*  l£>e  Officiis,  i.  26;  and  see  vol.  ii.  p.  421,  this  series.] 


Chap.  XVII.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


151 


men,  willed  that  all  should  be  equal,  that  is, 
equally  matched.'  He  has  imposed  on  all  the 
same  condition  of  living ;  He  has  produced  all 
to  wisdom ;  He  has  promised  immortality  to 
all ;  no  one  is  cut  off  from  His  heavenly  benefits. 
For  as  He  distributes  to  all  alike  His  one  light, 
sends  forth  His  fountains  to  all,  supplies  food, 
and  gives  the  most  pleasant  rest  of  sleep  ;  so  He 
bestows  on  all  equity  and  virtue.  In  His  sight 
no  one  is  a  slave,  no  one  a  master ;  for  if  all 
have  the  same  Father,  by  an  equal  right  we  are 
all  children.  No  one  is  poor  in  the  sight  of 
God,  but  he  who  is  without  justice ;  no  one  is 
rich,  but  he  who  is  full  of  virtues ;  no  one,  in 
short,  is  excellent,  but  he  who  has  been  good 
and  innocent ;  no  one  is  most  renowned,  but  he 
who  has  abundantly  performed  works  of  mercy  ; 
no  one  is  most  perfect,  but  he  who  has  filled  all 
the  steps  of  virtue.  Therefore  neither  the  Ro- 
mans nor  the  Greeks  could  possess  justice,  be- 
cause they  had  men  differing  from  one  another 
by  many  degrees,  from  the  poor  to  the  rich, 
from  the  humble  to  the  powerful ;  in  short,  from 
private  persons  to  the  highest  authorities  of  kings. 
For  where  all  are  not  equally  matched,  there  is 
not  equity  ;  and  inequality  of  itself  excludes  jus- 
tice, the  whole  force  of  which  consists  in  this, 
that  it  makes  those  equal  who  have  by  an  equal 
lot  arrived  at  the  condition  of  this  life. 

CH.\P.    XVI. OF   THE    DUTIES    OF    THE    JUST    M.4N, 

AN-D    THE    EQUITY    OF    CHRISTIANS. 

Therefore,  since  those  two  fountains  of  justice 
are  changed,  all  virtue  and  all  truth  are  taken 
away,  and  justice  itself  returns  to  heaven.  And 
on  this  account  the  true  good  was  not  discovered 
by  philosophers,  because  they  were  ignorant  both 
of  its  origin  and  effects  :  which  has  been  re- 
vealed to  no  others  but  to  our  people.-  Some 
one  will  say.  Are  there  not  among  you  some  poor, 
and  others  rich ;  some  servants,  and  others  mas- 
ters? Is  there  not  some  difference  between  in- 
dividuals ?  There  is  none ;  nor  is  there  any 
other  cause  why  we  mutually  bestow  upon  each 
other  the  name  of  brethren,  except  that  we  be- 
Heve  ourselves  to  be  equal.  For  since  we  meas- 
ure all  human  things  not  by  the  body,  but  by  the 
spirit,  although  the  condition  of  bodies  is  differ- 
ent, yet  we  have  no  ser\'ants,  but  we  both  regard 
and  speak  of  them  as  brothers  in  spirit,  in  reli- 
gion as  fellow-servants.  Riches  also  do  not 
render  men  illustrious,  except  that  ^  they  are  able 
to  make  them  more  conspicuous  by  good  works. 
For  men  are  rich,  not  because  they  possess 
riches,  but  because  they  employ  them  on  works 


'  [A  striking  parallel  to  Cyprian's  saying,  vol.  v.  note  2,  p.  460, 
this  series,  1 


[Cap.  XV.  p.  150,  sjifira^^ 

Kisi  qu6d.    Some  editions  read,  "  nisi 


quos,"  except  those  whom, 


of  justice  ;  and  they  who  seem  to  be  poor,  on 
this  account  are  rich,  because  they  are  not  ■♦  in 
want,  and  desire  nothing. 

Though,  therefore,  in  lowliness  .of  mind  we  are 
on  an  equality,  the  free  with  slaves,  and  the  rich 
with  the  poor,  nevertheless  in  the  sight  of  God 
we  are  distinguished  by  virtue.  And  every  one 
is  more  elevated  in  proportion  to  his  greater 
justice.  For  if  it  is  justice  for  a  man  to  put 
himself  on  a  level  even  with  those  of  lower  rank, 
although  he  excels  in  this  very  thing,  that  he 
made  himself  equal  to  his  inferiors  ;  yet  if  he 
has  conducted  himself  not  only  as  an  equal,  but 
even  as  an  inferior,  he  will  plainly  obtain  a 
much  higher  rank  of  dignity  in  the  judgment  of 
God. 5  For  assuredly,  since  all  things  in  this 
temporal  life  are  frail  and  liable  to  decay,  men 
both  prefer  themselves  to  others,  and  contend 
about  dignity  ;  than  which  nothing  is  more  foul, 
nothing  more  arrogant,  nothing  more  removed 
from  the  conduct  of  a  wise  man :  for  these 
earthly  things  are  altogether  opposed  to  heavenly 
things.  For  as  the  wisdom  of  men  is  the  greatest 
foolishness  with  God,  and  foolishness  is  (as  I 
have  shown)  the  greatest  wisdom ;  so  he  is  low 
and  abject  in  the  sight  of  God  who  shall  have 
been  conspicuous  and  elevated  on  earth.  For, 
not  to  mention  that  these  present  earthly  goods 
to  which  great  honour  is  paid  are  contrary  to  vir- 
tue, and  enervate  the  vigour  of  the  mind,  what 
nobility,  I  pray,  can  be  so  firm,  what  resources, 
what  power,  since  God  is  able  to  make  kings 
themselves  even  lower  than  the  lowest?  And 
therefore  God  has  consulted  our  interest  in  pla- 
cing this  in  particular  among  the  divine  pre- 
cepts :  "  He  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased  ; 
and  he  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted."  ^ 
And  the  wholesomeness  of  this  precept  teaches 
that  he  who  shall  simply  place  himself  on  a  level 
with  other  men,  and  carry  himself  with  humility, 
is  esteemed  excellent  and  illustrious  in  the  sight 
of  God.  For  the  sentiment  is  not  false  which  is 
brought  forward  in  Euripides  to  this  effect :  — 

"  The  things  which  are  here  considered  evil  are  esteemed 
good  in  heaven." 

CHAP.      XVII. OF     THE      EQUITY,      WISDOM,      AND 

FOOLISHNESS    OF    CHRISTIANS. 

I  have  explained  the  reason  why  philosophers 
were  unable  either  to  find  or  to  defend  justice. 
Now  I  return  to  that  which  I  had  purposed. 
Carneades,  therefore,  since  the  arguments  of  the 
philosophers  were  weak,  undertook  the  bold  task 
of  refuting  them,  because  he  understood  that 
they  were  capable  of  refutation.  The  substance 
of  his  disputation  was  this  :  "  That  men  ?  enacted 


■«  Quia  non  egent.    Some  editors  omit  tion  ;  but  this  is  not  so  good. 

5   [  Jas.  i.  9,  10,  and  ii.  1-8.] 

*  Luke  xiv.  ii. 

'  [From  the  Republic,  book  iii.  cap.  12,  sec.  21.] 


152 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  V. 


laws  for  themselves,  with  a  view  to  their  own 
advantage,  difiering  indeed  according  to  their 
characters,  and  in  the  case  of  the  same  persons 
often  changed  according  to  the  times  ;  but  that 
there  was  no  natural  law :  that  all,  both  men 
and  other  animals,  were  borne  by  the  guidance 
of  nature  to  their  own  advantage  ;  therefore  that 
there  was  no  justice,  or  if  any  did  exist,  it  was 
the  greatest  folly,  because  it  injured  itself  by 
promoting  the  interests  of  others."  And  he 
brought  forward  these  arguments :  "  That  all 
nations  which  flourished  with  dominion,  even 
the  Romans  themselves,  who  were  masters  of  the 
whole  world,  if  they  wish  to  be  just,  that  is,  to 
restore  the  possessions  of  others,  must  return  to 
cottages,  and  lie  down  in  want  and  miseries." 
Then,  leaving  general  topics,  he  came  to  particu- 
lars. "  If  a  good  man,"  he  says,  "  has  a  runaway 
slave,  or  an  unhealthy  and  infected  house,  and  he 
alone  knows  these  faults,  and  on  this  account 
offers  it  for  sale,  will  he  give  out  that  the  slave 
is  a  runaway,  and  the  house  which  he  offers  for 
sale  is  infected,  or  will  he  conceal  it  from  the 
purchaser?  If  he  shall  give  it  out,  he  is  good 
indeed,  because  he  will  not  deceive ;  but  still 
he  will  be  judged  foolish,  because  he  will  either 
sell  at  a  low  price  or  not  sell  at  all.  If  he  shall 
conceal  it,  he  will  be  wise  indeed,  because  he 
will  consult  his  own  interest ;  but  he  will  be  also 
wicked,  because  he  will  deceive.  Again,  if  he 
should  find  any  one  who  supposes  that  he  is  sell- 
ing copper  ore  when  it  is  gold,  or  lead  when  it 
is  silver,  will  he  be  silent,  that  he  may  buy  it  at 
a  small  price  ;  or  will  he  give  information  of  it, 
so  that  he  may  buy  it  at  a  great  price  ?  It  evi- 
dently appears  foolish  to  prefer  to  buy  it  at  a 
great  price."  From  which  he  wished  it  to  be 
understood,  both  that  he  who  is  just  and  good 
is  foolish,  and  that  he  who  is  wise  is  wicked  ; 
and  yet  that  it  may  possibly  happen  without  ruin, 
for  men  to  be  contented  with  poverty.  There- 
fore he  passed  to  greater  things,  in  which  no  one 
could  be  just  without  danger  of  his  life.  For 
he  said  :  "  Certainly  it  is  justice  not  to  put  a 
man  to  death,  not  to  take  the  property  of  another. 
What,  then,  will  the  just  man  do,  if  he  shall 
happen  to  have  suffered  shipwreck,  and  some 
one  weaker  than  himself  shall  have  seized  a 
plank  ?  Will  he  not  thrust  him  from  the  plank, 
that  he  himself  may  get  upon  it,  and  supported 
by  it  may  escape,  especially  since  there  is  no 
witness  in  the  middle  of  the  sea?  If  he  is  wise, 
he  will  do  so ;  for  he  must  himself  perish  unless 
he  shall  thus  act.  But  if  he  choose  rather  to  die 
than  to  inflict  violence  upon  another,  in  this  case 
he  is  just,  but  foolish,  in  not  sparing  his  own  life 
while  he  spares  the  life  of  another.  Thus  also, 
if  the  army  of  his  own  people  shall  have  been 
routed,  and  the  enemy  have  begim  to  press  upon 
them,  and  that  just  man  shall  have  met  with  a 


wounded  man  on  horseback,  will  he  spare  him 
so  as  to  be  slain  himself,  or  will  he  throw  him 
from  his  horse,  that  he  himself  may  escape  from 
the  enemy?  If  he  shall  do  this,  he  will  be  wise, 
but  also  wicked  ;  if  he  shall  not  do  it,  he  will  be 
just,  but  also  of  necessity  foolish."  When,  there- 
fore, he  had  thus  divided  justice  into  two  parts, 
saying  that  the  one  was  civil,  the  other  natural, 
he  subverted  both :  because  the  civil  part  is 
wisdom,  but  not  justice  ;  but  the  natural  part  is 
justice,  but  not  wisdom.  These  arguments  are 
altogether  subtle  and  acute,'  and  such  as  Mar- 
cus Tullius  was  unable  to  refute.  For  when  he 
represents  Lslius  as  replying  to  Furius,  and 
speaking  in  behalf  of  justice,  he  passed  them  by 
as  a  pitfall  without  refuting  them  ;  so  that  the 
same  Lgelius  appears  not  to  have  defended  nat- 
ural justice,  which  had  fallen  under  the  charge 
of  folly,  but  that  civil  justice  which  Furius  had 
admitted  to  be  wisdom,  but  unjust.^ 

CHAP.    XVIII. OF   JUSTICE,    WISDOM,    AND   FOLLY. 

With  reference  to  our  present  discussion,  I 
have  shown  how  justice  bears  the  resemblance 
of  folly,  that  it  may  appear  that  those  are  not 
deceived  without  reason  who  think  that  men  of 
our  religion  are  foolish  in  appearing  to  do  such 
things  as  he  proposed.  Now  I  perceive  that  a 
greater  undertaking  is  required  from  me,  to  show 
why  God  wished  to  enclose  justice  under  the 
appearance  of  folly,  and  to  remove  it  from  the 
eyes  of  men,  when  I  shall  have  first  replied  to 
Furius,  since  Laelius  has  not  sufficiently  replied 
to  him  ;  who,  although  he  was  a  wise  man,  as  he 
was  called,  yet  could  not  be  the  advocate  of 
true  justice,  because  he  did  not  possess  the  source 
and  fountain  of  justice.  But  this  defence  is 
easier  for  us,  to  whom,  by  the  bounty  of  Heaven 
this  justice  is  familiar  and  well  known,  and  who 
know  it  not  in  name,  but  in  reality.  For  Plato 
and  Aristotle  desired  with  an  honest  will  to  de- 
fend justice,  and  would  have  effected  something, 
if  their  good  endeavours,  their  eloquence,  and 
vigour  of  intellect  had  been  aided  also  by  a 
knowledge  of  divine  things.  I'hus  their  work, 
being  vain  and  useless,  was  neglected  :  nor  were 
they  able  to  persuade  any  of  men  to  live  accord- 
ing to  their  precept,  because  that  system  had  no 
foundation  from  heaven.  But  our  work  must  be 
more  certain,  since  we  are  taught  of  God.  For 
they  represented  justice  in  words,  and  pictured 
it  when  it  was  not  in  sight ;  nor  were  they  able 
to  confirm  their  assertions  by  present  examples. 
For  the  hearers  might  have  answered  that  it  was 
impossible  to  live  as  they  prescribed  in  their 
disputation ;  so  that  none  have  as  yet  existed 
who  followed  that  course  of  life.     But  we  show 


'  Venenata.  [See  De  Fim'bus,  book  v.  cap.  23.] 
^  [See  p.  150,  supra.^ 


Chap.  XVIII.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


15; 


the  truth  of  our  statements  not  only  by  words, 
but  also  by  examples  derived  from  the  truth. 
Therefore  Carneades  understood  what  is  the  na- 
ture of  justice,  except  that  he  did  not  sufficiently 
perceive  that  it  was  not  folly ;  although  I  seem 
to  myself  to  understand  with  what  intention  he 
did  this.  For  he  did  not  really  think  that  he 
who  is  just  is  foolish  ;  but  when  he  knew  that 
he  was  not  so,  but  did  not  comprehend  the  cause 
why  he  appeared  so,  he  wished  to  show  that  the 
truth  lay  hidden,  that  he  might  maintain  the 
dogma  of  his  own  sect,'  the  chief  opinion  of 
which  is,  "  that  nothing  can  be  fully  compre- 
hended." 

Let  us  see,  therefore,  whether  justice  has  any 
agreement  with  folly.  The  just  man,  he  says,  if 
he  does  not  take  away  from  the  wounded  man 
his  horse,  and  from  the  shipwrecked  man  his 
plank,  in  order  that  he  may  preserve  his  own  life, 
is  foolish.  First  of  all,  I  deny  that  it  can  in 
any  way  happen  that  a  man  who  is  truly  just 
should  be  in  circumstances  of  this  kind ;  for  the 
just  man  is  neither  at  enmity  with  any  human 
being,  nor  desires  anything  at  all  which  is  the 
property  of  another.  For  why  should  he  take 
a  voyage,  or  what  should  he  seek  from  another 
land,  when  his  own  is  sufficient  for  him?  (3r 
why  should  he  carry  on  war,  and  mix  himself 
with  the  passions  of  others,  when  his  mind  is 
engaged  in  perpetual  peace  with  men  ?  Doubt- 
less he  will  be  delighted  with  foreign  merchan- 
dise or  with  human  blood,  who  does  not  know 
how  to  seek  gain,  who  is  satisfied  with  his  mode 
of  living,  and  considers  it  unlawful  not  only  him- 
self to  commit  slaughter,  but  to  be  present  with 
those  who  do  it,  and  to  behold  it !  But  I  omit 
these  things,  since  it  is  possible  that  a  man  may 
be  compelled  even  against  his  will  to  undergo 
these  things.  Do  you  then,  O  Furius  —  or  rather 
O  Carneades,  for  all  this  speech  is  his  —  think 
that  justice  is  so  useless,  so  superfluous,  and  so 
despised  by  God,  that  it  has  no  power  and  no 
influence  in  itself  which  may  avail  for  its  own 
preservation?  pjut  it  is  evident  that  they  who 
are  ignorant  of  the  mystery^  of  man,  and  who 
therefore  refer  all  things  to  this  present  life,  can- 
not know  how  great  is  the  force  of  justice.  For 
when  they  discuss  the  subject  of  virtue,  although 
they  understand  that  it  is  very  full  of  labours 
and  miseries,  nevertheless  they  say  that  it  is  to 
be  sought  for  its  own  sake ;  for  they  by  no 
means  see  its  rewards,  which  are  eternal  and 
immortal.  Thus,  by  referring  all  things  to  the 
present  life,  they  altogether  reduce  virtue  to  folly, 
since  it  undergoes  such  great  labours  of  this  life 
in  vain  and  to  no  purpose.  But  more  on  this 
subject  at  another  opportunity. 


In  the  meanwhile  let  us  speak  of  justice,  as 
we  began,  the  power  of  which  is  so  great,  that 
when  it  has  raised  its  eyes  to  heaven,  it  deserves 
all  things  from  God.  Flaccus  therefore  rightly 
said,  that  the  power  of  innocence  is  so  great, 
that  wherever  it  journeys,  it  needs  neither  arms 
nor  strength  for  its  protection  :  — 

"  He  whose  life  hath  no  flaw,  pure  from  guile,  need  not 
borrow 
Or  the  bow  or  the  darts  of  the  Moor,  O  my  Fuscus  I 
He  relies  for  defence  on  no  quiver  that  teems  with 

Poison-steept  arrows. 
Though  his  path  be  along  sultry  African  Syrtes, 
Or  Caucasian  ravines,  where  no  guest  finds  a  shelter, 
Or  the  banks  which  Hydaspes,  the  stream  weird  ^  with 
fable, 

Licks  languid-flowing."'' 

It  is  impossible,  therefore,  that  amidst  the  dan- 
gers of  tempests  and  of  wars  the  just  man  should 
be  unprotected  by  the  guardianship  of  Heaven  ; 
and  that  even  if  he  should  be  at  sea  in  company 
with  parricides  and  guilty  men,  the  wicked  also 
should  not  be  spared,  that  this  one  just  and  in- 
nocent soul  may  be  freed  from  danger,  or  at  any 
rate  may  be  alone  preserved  while  the  rest  perish. 
But  let  us  grant  that  the  case  which  the  pliiloso- 
pher  proposes  is  possible  :  what,  then,  will  the 
just  man  do,  if  he  shall  have  met  with  a  wounded 
man  on  a  horse,  or  a  shipwrecked  man  on  a 
plank?  I  am  not  unwilling  to  confess  he  will 
rather  die  than  put  another  to  death.  Nor  will 
justice,  which  is  the  chief  good  of  man,  on  this 
account  receive  the  name  of  folly.  For  what 
ought  to  be  better  and  dearer  to  man  than  inno- 
cence ?  And  this  must  be  the  more  perfect,  the 
more  you  bring  it  to  extremity,  and  choose  to 
die  rather  than  to  detract  from  the  character  of 
innocence.  It  is  folly,  he  says,  to  spare  the  life 
of  another  in  a  case  which  involves  the  destruc- 
tion of  one's  own  life.  Then  do  you  think  it 
foolish  to  perish  even  for  friendship? 

Why,  then,  are  those  Pythagorean  friends 
praised  by  you,  of  whom  the  one  gave  himself 
to  the  tyrant  as  a  surety  for  the  life  of  the  other, 
and  the  other  at  the  appointed  time,  when  his 
surety  was  now  being  led  to  execution,  presented 
himself,  and  rescued  him  by  his  own  interposi- 
tion? Whose  virtue  would  not  be  held  in  such 
glory,  when  one  of  them  was  willing  to  die  for 
his  friend,  the  other  even  for  his  word  5  which 
had  been  pledged,  if  they  were  regarded  as  fools. 
In  fine,  on  account  of  this  very  virtue  the  tyrant 
rewarded  them  by  presendng  both,  and  thus  the 
disposition  of  a  most  cruel  man  was  changed. 
Moreover,  it  is  even  said  that  he  entreated''  them 
to  admit  him  as  a  third  party  to  their  friendship, 
from  which  it  is  plain  that  he  regarded  them  not 


'  i.e.,  The  Academic  School. 

^  Sacramentum,  "  the  true  theorj'  of  human  life." 


3  Fabulosus. 

^  Hor.,  Carm.,  i.  22.  i,  Lord  Lytton's  translation. 

5  Pro  fide. 

'i  Deprecatus  esse  dicitur. 


154 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  V. 


as  fools,  but  as  good  and  wise  men.  Therefore 
I  do  not  see  why,  since  it  is  reckoned  the  high- 
est glory  to  die  for  friendship  and  for  one's  word, 
it  is  not  glorious  to  a  man  to  die  even  for  his 
innocence.  They  are  therefore  most  foolish  who 
impute  it  as  a  crime  to  us  that  we  are  willing  to 
die  for  God,  when  they  themselves  extol  to  the 
heavens  with  the  highest  praises  him  who  was 
willing  to  die  for  a  man.  In  short,  to  conclude 
this  disputation,  reason  itself  teaches  that  it  is 
impossible  for  a  man  to  be  at  once  just  and  fool- 
ish, wise  and  unjust.  For  he  who  is  foolish  is 
unacquainted  with  that  which  is  just  and  good, 
and  therefore  always  errs.  For  he  is,  as  it  were, 
led  captive  by  his  vices  ;  nor  can  he  in  any  way 
resist  them,  because  he  is  destitute  of  the  virtue 
of  which  he  is  ignorant.  But  the  just  man  ab- 
stains from  all  fault,  because  he  cannot  do  other- 
wise, although  he  has  the  knowledge  of  right 
and  wrong. 

But  who  is  able  to  distinguish  right  from  wrong 
except  the  wise  man?  Thus  it  comes  to  pass, 
that  he  can  never  be  just  who  is  foolish,  nor  wise 
who  is  unjust.  And  if  this  is  most  true,  it  is 
plain  that  he  who  has  not  taken  away  a  plank 
from  a  shipwrecked  man,  or  a  horse  from  one 
who  is  wounded,  is  not  foolish  ;  because  it  is  a 
sin  to  do  these  things,  and  the  wise  man  abstains 
from  sin.  Nevertheless  I  myself  also  confess 
that  it  has  this  appearance,  through  the  error  of 
men,  who  are  ignorant  of  the  peculiar  character  ' 
of  everything.  And  thus  the  whole  of  this  in- 
quiry is  refuted  not  so  much  by  arguments  as  by 
definidon.  Therefore  folly  is  the  erring  in  deeds 
and  words,  through  ignorance  of  what  is  right 
and  good.  Therefore  he  is  not  a  fool  who  does 
not  even  spare  himself  to  prevent  injury  to 
another,  which  is  an  evil.  And  this,  indeed, 
reason  and  the  truth  itself  dictate.^  For  we  see 
that  in  all  animals,  because  they  are  destitute  of 
wisdom,  nature  is  the  provider  of  supplies  for 
itself.  Therefore  they  injure  others  that  they 
may  profit  themselves,  for  they  do  not  understand 
that  the  ^  committing  an  injury  is  evil.  But  man, 
who  has  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  abstains 
from  committing  an  injury  even  to  his  own  dam- 
age, which  an  animal  without  reason  is  unable 
to  do  ;  and  on  this  account  innocence  is  reckoned 
among  the  chief  virtues  of  man.  Now  by  these 
things  it  appears  that  he  is  the  wisest  man  who 
prefers  to  perish  rather  than  to  commit  an  injury, 
that  he  may  preserve  that  sense  of  duty*  by 
which  he  is  distinguished  from  the  dumb  crea- 
tion. For  he  who  does  not  point  out  the  error 
of  one  who  is  offering  the  gold  for  sale,  in  order 
that  he  may  buy  it  for  a  small  sum,  or  he  who 


'  Proprietatem. 

2  Conciliatricem  sui. 

3  Nesciunt,  quia  malum  est  nocere. 
*  Officium. 


does  not  avow  that  he  is  offering  for  sale  a  runa- 
way slave  or  an  infected  house,  having  an  eye  to 
his  own  gain  or  advantage,  is  not  a  wise  man,  as 
Carneades  wished  it  to  appear,  but  crafty  and 
cunning.  Now  craftiness  and  cunning  exist  in 
the  dumb  animals  also  :  either  when  they  lie  in 
wait  for  others,  and  take  them  by  deceit,  that 
they  may  devour  them  ;  or  when  they  avoid  the 
snares  of  others  in  various  ways.  But  wisdom 
falls  to  man  alone.  For  wisdom  is  understanding 
either  with  the  purpose  of  doing  that  which  is 
good  and  right,  or  for  the  abstaining  from  im- 
proper words  and  deeds.  Now  a  wise  man  never 
gives  himself  to  the  pursuit  of  gain,  because  he 
despises  these  earthly  advantages  :  nor  does  he 
allow  any  one  to  be  deceived,  because  it  is  the 
duty  of  a  good  man  to  correct  the  errors  of 
men,  and  to  bring  them  back  to  the  right  way ; 
since  the  nature  of  man  is  social  and  beneficent, 
in  which  respect  alone  he  bears  a  relation  to 
God. 

CHAP.  XIX.  —  OF  VIRTUE  AND  THE  TORTURES  OF 
CHRISTIANS,  AND  OF  THE  RIGHT  OF  A  FATHER 
AND   IklASTER. 

But  undoubtedly  this  is  the  cause  5  why  he 
appears  to  be  foolish  who  prefers  to  be  in  want, 
or  to  die  rather  than  to  inflict  injury  or  take 
away  the  property  of  another,  —  namely,  because 
they  think  that  man  is  destroyed  by  death.  And 
from  this  persuasion  all  the  errors  both  of  the 
common  people  and  also  of  the  philosophers 
arise.  For  if  we  have  no  existence  after  death, 
assuredly  it  is  the  part  of  the  most  foolish  man 
not  to  promote  the  interests  of  the  present  life, 
that  it  may  be  long-continued,  and  "may  abound 
with  all  advantages.  But  he  who  shall  act  thus 
must  of  necessity  depart  from  the  rule  of  justice. 
But  if  there  remains  to  man  a  longer  and  a 
better  life  —  and  this  we  learn  both  from  the 
arguments  of  great  philosophers,  and  from  the 
answers  of  seers,  and  the  divine  words  of  prophets 
—  it  is  the  part  of  the  wise  man  to  despise  this 
present  life  with  its  advantages,  since  its  entire 
loss  is  compensated  by  immortality.  The  same 
defender  of  justice,  Lselius,  says  in  Cicero  :  ^ 
"  Virtue  altogether  wishes  for  honour ;  nor  is 
there  any  other  reward  of  virtue."  There  is  in- 
deed another,  and  that  most  worthy  of  virtue, 
which  you,  O  L?elius,  could  never  have  supposed  ; 
for  you  had  no  knowledge  of  the  sacred  writings. 
And  this  reward  it  easily  receives,  and  does  not 
harshly  demand.  You  are  greatly  mistaken,  if 
you  think  that  a  reward  can  be  paid  to  virtue  by 
man,  since  you  yourself  most  truly  said  in  another 


5  Thus  far  he  has  refuted  the  arguments  of  Furius,  the  advocate 
of  injustice.  He  now  shows  the  reasons  why  La;lius,  who  was  esteemed 
most  wise,  does  not  worthily  maintain  the  cause  of  justice,  i.e.,  be- 
cause he  was  ignorant  of  heavenly  wisdom.  [See  cap.  xvii.  p.  152, 
su/>ra.} 

6  De  Republ.,  i.  3. 


Chap.  XX.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


155 


place  :  "  What  riches  will  you  offer  to  this  man  ? 
what  commands?  what  kingdoms?  He  who 
regards  these  things  as  human,  judges  his  own 
advantages  to  be  divine."  Who,  therefore,  can 
think  you  a  wise  man,  O  Lselius,  when  you  con- 
tradict yourself,  and  after  a  short  interval  take 
away  from  virtue  that  which  you  have  given  to 
her?  But  it  is  manifest  that  ignorance  of  the 
truth  makes  your  opinion  uncertain  and  wavering. 

In  the  next  place,  what  do  you  add  ?  "  But  if 
all  the  ungrateful,  or  the  many  who  are  envious,  or 
powerful  enemies,  deprive  virtue  of  its  rewards." 
Oh  how  frail,  how  worthless,  have  you  repre- 
sented virtue  to  be,  if  it  can  be  deprived  of  its 
reward  !  For  if  it  judges  its  goods  to  be  divine, 
as  you  said,  how  can  there  be  any  so  ungrateful, 
so  envious,  so  powerful,  as  to  be  able  to  deprive 
virtue  of  those  goods  which  were  conferred  upon 
it  by  the  gods?  "Assuredly  it  delights  itself," 
he  says,  "  by  many  comforts,  and  especially  sup- 
ports itself  by  its  own  beauty."  By  what  com- 
forts? by  what  beauty?  since  that  beauty  is  often 
charged  upon  it  as  a  fault,  and  turned  into  a 
punishment.  For  what  if,  as  Furius  said,'  a  man 
should  be  dragged  away,  harassed,  banished, 
should  be  in  want,  be  deprived  of  his  hands, 
have  his  eyes  put  out,  be  condemned,  put  into 
chains,  be  burned,  be  miserably  tortured  also? 
will  virtue  lose  its  reward,  or  rather,  will  it  perish 
itself?  By  no  means.  But  it  will  both  receive 
its  reward  from  God  the  Judge,  and  it  will  live, 
and  always  flourish.  And  if  you  take  away  these 
things,  nothing  in  the  life  of  man  can  appear  to 
be  so  useless,  so  foolish,  as  virtue,  the  natural 
goodness  and  honour  of  which  may  teach  us 
that  the  soul  is  not  mortal,  and  that  a  divine  re- 
ward is  appointed  for  it  by  God.  But  on  this 
account  God  willed  that  virtue  itself  should  be 
concealed  under  the  character  of  folly,  that  the 
mystery  of  truth  and  of  His  religion  might  be 
secret ;  that  He  might  show  the  vanity  and  error 
of  these  superstitions,  and  of  that  earthly  wisdom 
which  raises  itself  too  highly,  and  exhibits  great 
self-complacency,  that  its  difficulty  being  at  length 
set  forth,  that  most  narrow  path  might  lead  to  the 
lofty  reward  of  immortality. 

I  have  shown,  as  I  think,  why  our  people  are 
esteemed  foolish  by  the  foolish.  For  to  choose 
to  be  tortured  and  slain,  rather  than  to  take  in- 
cense in  three  fingers,  and  throw  it  upon  the 
hearth,^  appears  as  foolish  as,  in  a  case  where 
life  is  endangered,  to  be  more  careful  of  the  life 
of  another  than  of  one's  own.  For  they  do  not 
know  how  great  an  act  of  impiety  it  is  to  adore 
any  other  object  than  God,  who  made  heaven  and 
earth,  who  fashioned  the  human  race,  breathed 
into  them  the  breath  of  life,  and  gave  them  light. 
But  if  he  is  accounted  the  most  worthless  of 


'   Vi'd.  ch.  xii. 

*  [In  focum.    Here  it  means  the  3raz/Vr  placed  before  an  image.] 


slaves  who  runs  away  and  deserts  his  master,  and 
if  he  is  judged  most  deserving  of  stripes  and 
chains,  and  a  prison,  and  the  cross,  and  of  all 
evil ;  and  if  a  son,  in  the  same  manner,  is  thought 
abandoned  and  impious  who  deserts  his  father, 
that  he  may  not  pay  him  obedience,  and  on  this 
account  is  considered  deserving  of  being  disin- 
herited, and  of  having  his  name  removed  for  ever 
from  his  family,  —  how  much  more  so  does  he  who 
forsakes  God,  in  whom  the  two  names  entitled  to 
equal  reverence,  of  Lord  and  Father,  alike  meet  ? 
For  what  benefit  does  he  who  buys  a  slave  bestow 
upon  him,  beyond  the  nourishment  with  which 
he  supplies  him  for  his  own  ad\'antage?  And 
he  who  begets  a  son  has  it  not  in  his  power  to 
effect  that  he  shall  be  conceived,  or  born,  or 
live ;  from  which  it  is  evident  that  he  is  not  the 
father,  but  only  the  instrument  -'  of  generation. 
Of  what  punishments,  therefore,  is  he  deserving, 
who  forsakes  Him  who  is  both  the  true  Master 
and  Father,  but  those  which  God  Himself  has 
appointed?  who  has  prepared  everlasting  fire  for 
the  wicked  spirits  ;  and  this  He  Himself  threat- 
ens by  His  prophets  to  the  impious  and  the  re- 
bellious.'* 

CHAP.  XX. OF  THE  VANITY  A^^D  CRIMES  OF  IM- 
PIOUS SUPERSTITIONS,  AND  OF  THE  TORTURES  OF 
THE    CHRISTIANS. 

Therefore,  let  those  who  destroy  their  own 
souls  and  the  souls  of  others  learn  what  an  in- 
expiable crime  they  commit ;  in  the  first  place, 
because  they  cause  their  own  death  by  serving 
most  abandoned  demons,  whom  God  has  con- 
demned to  everlasting  punishments  ;  in  the  next 
place,  because  they  do  not  permit  God  to  be 
worshipped  by  others,  but  endeavour  to  turn 
men  aside  to  deadly  rites,  and  strive  with  the 
greatest  diligence  that  no  life  may  be  without 
injury  on  earth,  which  looks  to  heaven  with  its 
condition  secured.  What  else  shall  I  call  them 
but  miserable  men,  who  obey  the  instigations  of 
their  own  plunderers, 5  whom  they  think  to  be 
gods  ?  of  whom  they  neither  know  the  condition, 
nor  origin,  nor  names,  nor  nature  ;  but,  clinging 
to  the  persuasion  of  the  people,  they  willingly 
err,  and  favour  their  own  folly.  And  if  you 
should  ask  them  the  grounds  of  their  persuasion, 
they  can  assign  none,  but  have  recourse  to  the 
judgment  of  their  ancestors,  saying  that  they 
were  wise,  that  they  approved  them,  that  they 
knew  what  was  best ;  and  thus  they  deprive 
themselves  of  all  power  of  perception  :  they  bid 
adieu  to  reason,  while  they  place  confidence  in 
the  errors  of  others.    Thus,  involved  in  ignorance 

3  Generandi  ministrum. 

*  [Perpetually  recurring  are  such  ideas  and  interpretations  of 
God's  warnings.     Vol.  iv.  p.  542] 

5  Pra;donum.  Some  refer  this  to  the  priests:  others,  with  greater 
probability,  to  the  demons  alluded  to  in  the  sentence. 


1.6 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  V, 


of  all  things,  they  neither  know  themselves  nor 
their  gods.  And  would  to  heaven  that  they  had 
been  willing  to  err  by  themselves,  and  to  be  un- 
wise by  themselves  !  But  they  hurry  away  others 
also  to  be  companions  of  their  evil,  as  though 
they  were  about  to  derive  comfort  from  the 
destruction  of  many.  But  this  very  ignorance 
causes  them  to  be  so  cruel  in  persecuting  the 
wise  ;  and  they  pretend  that  they  are  promoting 
their  welfare,  that  they  wish  to  recall  them  to  a 
good  mind. 

Do  they  then  strive  to  effect  this  by  conversa- 
tion, or  by  giving  some  reason  ?  By  no  means  ;  but 
they  endeavour  to  effect  it  by  force  and  tortures. 
O  wonderful  and  blind  infatuation  !  It  is  thought 
that  there  is  a  bad  mind  in  those  who  endeavour 
to  preserve  their  faith,  but  a  good  one  in  execu- 
tioners. Is  there,  then,  a  bad  mind  in  those  who, 
against  every  law  of  humanity,  against  every  prin- 
ciple of  justice,  are  tortured,  or  rather,  in  those 
who  inflict  on  the  bodies  of  the  innocent  such 
things,  as  neither  the  most  cruel  robljers,  nor  the 
most  enraged  enemies,  nor  the  most  savage  bar- 
barians have  ever  practised?  Do  they  deceive 
themselves  to  such  an  extent,  that  they  mutually 
transfer  and  change  the  names  of  good  and  evil? 
Why,  therefore,  do  they  not  call  day  night  —  the 
sun  darkness?  Moreover,  it  is  the  same  impu- 
dence to  give  to  the  good  the  name  of  evil,  to  the 
\vise  the  name  of  foolish,  to  the  just  the  name  of 
impious.  Besides  this,  if  they  have  any  confidence 
in  philosophy  or  in  eloquence,  let  them  arm 
themselves,  and  refute  these  arguments  of  ours 
if  they  are  able;  let  them  meet  us  hand  to  hand, 
and  examine  every  point.  It  is  befitting  that 
they  should  undertake  the  defence  of  their  gods, 
lest,  if  our  affairs  should  increase  (as  they  do  in- 
crease daily),  theirs  should  be  deserted,  together 
with  their  shrines  and  their  vain  mockeries  ; ' 
and  since  they  can  effect  nothing  by  violence 
(for  the  religion  of  God  is  increased  the  more  it 
is  oppressed),  let  them  rather  act  by  the  use  of 
reason  and  exhortations. 

Let  their  priests  come  forth  into  the  midst, 
whether  the  inferior  ones  or  the  greatest ;  their 
flamens,  augurs,  and  also  sacrificing  kings,  and 
the  priests  and  ministers  of  their  superstitions. 
Let  them  call  us  together  to  an  assembly ;  let 
them  exhort  us  to  undertake  the  worship  of  their 
gods ;  let  them  persuade  us  that  there  are  many 
beings  by  whose  deity  and  providence  all  things 
are  governed  ;  let  them  show  how  the  origins 
and  beginnings  of  their  sacred  rites  and  gods 
were  handed  down  to  mortals ;  let  them  explain 
what  is  their  source  and  principle  ;  let  them  set 
forth  what  reward  there  is  in  their  worship,  and 
what  punishment  awaits  neglect ;  why  they  wish 
to  be  worshipped  by  men ;  what  the   piety  of 

'  Ludibriis. 


men  contributes  to  them,  if  they  are  blessed  : 
and  let  them  confirm  all  these  things  not  by  their 
own  assertion  (for  the  authority  of  a  mortal  man 
is  of  no  weight),  but  by  some  divine  testimonies, 
as  we  do.  There  is  no  occasion  for  violence  and 
injury,  for  religion  cannot  be  imposed  by  force ; 
the  matter  must  be  carried  on  by  words  rather 
than  by  blows,  that  the  will  may  be  affected.  Let 
them  unsheath  the  weapon  of  their  intellect ;  if 
their  system  is  true,  let  it  be  asserted.  We  are 
prepared  to  hear,  if  they  teach  ;  while  they  are 
silent,  we  certainly  pay  no  credit  to  them,  as  we 
do  not  yield  to  them  even  in  their  rage.  Let 
them  imitate  us  in  setting  forth  the  system  of  the 
whole  matter  :  for  we  do  not  entice,  as  they  say ; 
but  we  teach,  we  prove,  we  show.  And  thus  no 
one  is  detained  by  us  against  his  will,  for  he  is 
unserviceable  to  God  who  is  destitute  of  faith 
and  devotedness  ;  and  yet  no  one  departs  from 
us,  since  the  truth  itself  detains  him.  Let  them 
teach  in  this  manner,  if  they  have  any  confidence 
in  the  truth  ;  let  them  speak,  let  them  give  utter- 
ance ;  let  them  venture,  I  say,  to  discuss  with 
us  something  of  this  nature ;  and  then  assuredly 
their  error  and  folly  will  be  ridiculed  by  the  old 
women,  whom  they  despise,  and  by  our  boys. 
For,  since  they  are  especially  clever,  they  know 
from  books  the  race  of  the  gods,  and  their  ex- 
ploits, and  commands,  and  deaths,  and  tombs ; 
they  may  also  know  that  the  rites  themselves,  in 
which  they  have  been  initiated,  had  their  origin 
either  in  human  actions,  or  in  casualties,  or  in 
deaths.^  It  is  the  part  of  incredible  madness  to 
imagine  that  they  are  gods,  whom  they  cannot 
deny  to  have  been  mortal ;  or  if  they  should  be 
so  shameless  as  to  deny  it,  their  own  writings, 
and  those  of  their  own  people,  will  refute  them  ; 
in  short,  the  very  beginnings  of  the  sacred  rites 
will  convict  them. 3  They  may  know,  therefore, 
even  from  this  very  thing,  how  great  a  difference 
there  is  between  truth  and  falsehood ;  for  they 
themselves  with  all  their  eloquence  are  unable 
to  persuade,  whereas  the  unskilled  and  the  un- 
educated are  able,  because  the  matter  itself  and 
the  truth  speaks. 

Why  then  do  they  rage,  so  that  wliile  they 
wish  to  lessen  their  folly,  they  increase  it?  Tor- 
ture ■♦  and  piety  are  widely  different;  nor  is  it 
possible  for  truth  to  be  united  with  violence,  or 
justice  with  cruelty.  But  with  good  reason  they 
do  not  venture  to  teach  anything  concerning  di- 
vine things,  lest  they  should  both  be  derided  by 
our  people  and  be  deserted  by  their  own.  For 
the  common  people  for  the  most  part,  if  they 
ascertain  that  these  mysteries  were  instituted  in 
memory  of  the  dead,  will  condemn  them,  and 
seek  for  some  truer  object  of  worship. 


2  Ex  mortibus.     Another  reading  is,  ex  moribus. 

3  [That  is,  the  introductions,  historically  recorded,  of  such  rites; 
e.g.,  by  Niima.     See  vol.  iii.  p.  36,  this  series.] 

*  Carmficina. 


Chap.  XX.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


157 


"  Hence  rites  of  mystic  awe  "  ' 

were  instituted  by  crafty  men,  that  the  people 
may  not  know  what  they  worship.  But  since 
we  are  acquainted  with  their  systems,  why  do 
they  either  not  beheve  us  who  are  acquainted 
with  both,  or  envy  us  because  we  have  preferred 
truth  to  falsehood?  But,  they  say,  the  public 
rites  of  religion  ^  must  be  defended.  Oh  with 
what  an  honourable  inclination  the  wretched 
men  go  astray  !  For  they  are  aware  that  there 
is  nothing  among  men  more  excellent  than  reli- 
gion, and  that  this  ought  to  be  defended  with 
the  whole  of  our  power  ;  but  as  they  are  deceived 
in  the  matter  of  religion  itself,  so  also  are  they 
in  the  manner  of  its  defence.  For  religion  is  to 
be  defended,  not  by  putting  to  death,  but  by 
dying  ;  not  by  cruelty,  but  by  patient  endurance  ; 
not  by  guilt,  but  by  good  faith  :  for  the  former 
belong  to  evils,  but  the  latter  to  goods ;  and  it 
is  necessary  for  that  which  is  good  to  have  place 
in  religion,  and  not  that  which  is  evil.  For  if 
you  wish  to  defend  religion  by  bloodshed,  and 
by  tortures,  and  by  guilt,  it  will  no  longer  be 
defended,  but  will  be  polluted  and  profaned. 
For  nothing  is  so  much  a  matter  of  free-will  as 
religion  ;  in  which,  if  the  mind  of  the  worship- 
per is  disinclined  to  it,  religion  is  at  once  taken 
away,  and  ceases  to  e.xist.  The  right  method 
therefore  is,  that  you  defend  religion  by  patient 
endurance  or  by  death  ;  in  which  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  faith  is  both  pleasing  to  God  Himself, 
and  adds  authority  to  religion.  For  if  he  who 
in  this  earthly  warfare  preserves  his  faith  to  his 
king  in  some  illustrious  action,  if  he  shall  con- 
tinue to  live,  because  more  beloved  and  accepta- 
ble, and  if  he  shall  fall,  obtains  the  highest  glory, 
because  he  has  undergone  death  for  his  leader  ; 
how  much  more  is  faith  to  be  kept  towards  God, 
the  Ruler  of  all,  who  is  able  to  pay  the  reward 
of  virtue,  not  only  to  the  living,  but  also  to  the 
dead  !  Therefore  the  worship  of  God,  since  it 
belongs  to  heavenly  warfare,  requires  the  great- 
est devotedness  and  fidelity.  For  how  will  God 
either  love  the  worshipper,  if  He  Himself  is  not 
loved  by  him,  or  grant  to  the  petitioner  whatever 
he  shall  ask,  when  he  draws  nigh  to  offer  his 
prayer  without  sincerity  or  reverence  ?  But  these 
men,  when  they  come  to  offer  sacrifice,  present  to 
their  gods  nothing  from  within,  nothing  of  their 
own  —  no  uprightness  of  mind,  no  reverence  or 
fear.  Therefore,  when  the  worthless  sacrifices 
are  completed,  they  leave  their  religion  altogether 
in  the  temple,  and  with  the  temple,  as  they  had 
found  it ;  and  neither  bring  with  them  anything 
of  it,  nor  take  anything  back.  Hence  it  is  that 
religious  observances  of  this  kind  are  neither 
able  to  make  men  good,  nor  to  be  firm  and  un- 


*  Virg.,  yEti.,  iii.  112. 

*  Suscepta  public^  sacra. 


changeable.  And  thus  men  are  easily  led  away 
from  them,  because  nothing  is  learned  in  them 
relating  to  the  life,  nothing  relating  to  wisdom, 
nothing  to  faith. ^  For  what  is  the  religion  of 
those  gods?  what  is  its  power?  what  its  disci- 
pline ?  what  its  origin  ?  what  its  principle  ?  what 
its  foundation?  what  its  substance?  what  is  its 
tendency?  or  what  does  it  promise,  so  that  it 
may  be  faithfully  preserved  and  boldly  defended 
by  man?  I  see  nothing  else  in  it  than  a  rite 
pertaining  to  the  fingers  only.*  But  our  religion 
is  on  this  account  firm,  and  solid,  and  unchange- 
able, because  it  teaches  justice,  because  it  is 
always  with  us,  because  it  has  its  existence  alto- 
gether in  the  soul  of  the  worshipper,  because  it 
has  the  mind  itself  for  a  sacrifice.  In  that  reh- 
gion  nothing  else  is  required  but  the  blood  of 
animals,  and  the  smoke  of  incense,  and  the 
senseless  pouring  out  of  libations  ;  but  in  this 
of  ours,  a  good  mind,  a  pure  breast,  an  innocent 
life  :  those  rites  are  frequented  by  unchaste  adul- 
teresses without  any  discrimination,  by  impudent 
procuresses,  by  filthy  harlots  ;  they  are  frequented 
by  gladiators,  robbers,  thieves,  and  sorcerers,  who 
pray  for  nothing  else  but  that  they  may  commit 
crimes  with  impunity.  For  what  can  the  robber 
ask  when  he  sacrifices,  or  the  gladiator,  but  that 
they  may  slay?  what  the  poisoner,  but  that  he 
may  escape  notice  ?  what  the  harlot,  but  that  she 
may  sin  to  the  uttermost?  what  the  adulteress, 
but  either  the  death  of  her  husband,  or  that  her 
unchastity  may  be  concealed  ?  what  the  procur- 
ess, but  that  she  may  deprive  many  of  their 
property  ?  what  the  thief,  but  that  he  may  com- 
mit more  peculations  ?  But  in  our  religion  there 
is  no  place  even  for  a  slight  and  ordinary  offence  ; 
and  if  any  one  shall  come  to  a  sacrifice  without 
a  sound  conscience,  he  hears  what  threats  God 
denounces  against  him  :  that  God,  I  say,  who 
sees  the  secret  places  of  the  heart,  who  is  alway 
hostile  to  sins,  who  requires  justice,  who  demands 
fidelity.  What  place  is  there  here  for  an  evil 
mind  or  for  an  evil  prayer?  But  those  unhappy 
men  neither  understand  from  their  own  crimes 
how  evil  it  is  to  worship,  since,  defiled  by  all 
crimes,  they  come  to  offer  prayer ;  and  they 
imagine  that  they  offer  a  pious  sacrifice  if  they 
wash  their  skin ;  as  though  any  streams  could 
wash  away,  or  any  seas  purify,  the  lusts  which 
are  shut  up  within  their  breast.  How  much 
better  it  is  rather  to  cleanse  the  mind,  which  is 
defiled  by  evil  desires,  and  to  drive  away  all 
vices  by  the  one  laver  of  virtue  and  faith  ! 
For  he  who  shall  do  this,  although  he  bears 
a  body  which  is  defiled  and  sordid,  is  pure 
enough. 


I"  Parous  Deorum  cultor  et  infrequens:"  so  Horace  describes 
If^in  this  spirit.     Odes,  book  i.  34,  p.  215,  ed.  Delphin.] 


himse 

*  [See  p.  iss,  note  2,  supra.l 


isS 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  V. 


CH.\P.    XXI. OF    THE    WORSHIP    OF    OTHER     GODS 

AND     THE     TRUE     GOD,     AND     OF     THE     ANIMALS 
WHICH   THE   EGVPTUNS   WORSHIPPED. 

But  they,  because  they  know  not  the  object 
or  the  mode  of  worship,  bhndly  and  uncon- 
sciously fall  into  the  contrary  practice.  Thus 
they  adore  their  enemies,  they  appease  with  vic- 
tims their  robbers  and  murderers,  and  they  place 
their  own  souls  to  be  burned  with  the  very  in- 
cense on  detestable  altars.  The  wretched  men 
are  also  angry,  because  others  do  not  perish  in 
like  manner,  with  incredible  blindness  of  minds. 
For  what  can  they  see  who  do  not  see  the  sun  ? 
As  though,  if  they  were  gods,  they  would  need 
the  assistance  of  men  against  their  despisers. 
Why,  therefore,  are  they  angr}'  with  us,  if  they 
have  no  power  to  effect  anything  ?  Unless  it  be 
that  they  destroy  their  gods,  whose  power  they 
distrust,  they  are  more  irreligious  than  those  who 
do  not  worship  them  at  all.  Cicero,  in  his  Laws,' 
enjoining  men  to  approach  with  holiness  to  the 
sacrifices,  says, ''  Let  them  put  on  piety,  let  them 
lay  aside  riches  ;  if  any  one  shall  act  otherwise, 
God  Himself  will  be  the  avenger."  This  is  well 
spoken  ;  for  it  is  not  right  to  despair  about  God, 
whom  you  worship  on  this  account,  because  you 
think  Him  powerful.  For  how  can  He  avenge 
the  wrongs  of  His  worshippers,  if  He  is  unable 
to  avenge  His  own?  I  wish  therefore  to  ask 
them  to  whom  especially  they  think  that  they 
are  doing  a  service  in  compelling  them  to  sacri- 
fice against  their  will,  Is  it  to  those  whom  they 
compel?  But  that  is  not  a  kindness  which  is 
done  to  one  who  refuses  it.  But  we  must  con- 
sult their  interests,  even  against  their  will,  since 
they  know  not  what  is  good.  Why,  then,  do 
they  so  cruelly  harass,  torture,  and  weaken  them, 
if  they  wish  for  their  safety?  or  whence  is  piety 
so  impious,  that  they  either  destroy  in  this 
wretched  manner,  or  render  useless,  those  whose 
welfare  they  wish  to  promote  ?  Or  do  they  do 
service  to  the  gods?  But  that  is  not  a  sacrifice 
which  is  extorted  from  a  person  against  his  will. 
For  unless  it  is  offered  spontaneously,  and  from 
the  soul,  it  is  a  curse ;  when  men  sacrifice,  com- 
pelled by  proscription,  by  injuries,  by  prison,  by 
tortures.  If  they  are  gods  who  are  worshipped 
in  this  manner,  if  for  this  reason  only,  they  ought 
not  to  be  worshipped,  because  they  wish  to  be 
worshipped  in  this  manner  :  they  are  doubtless 
worthy  of  the  detestation  of  men,  since  libations 
are  made  to  them  with  tears,  with  groaning,  and 
with  blood  flowing  from  all  the  limbs. 

But  we,  on  the  contrary,  do  not  require  that 
any  one  should  be  compelled,  whether  he  is 
willing  or  unwilling,  to  worship  our  God,  who  is 
the  God  of  all  men  ;  nor  are  we  angry  if  any  one 


does  not  worship  Him.     For  we  trust   in   the 
majesty  of  Him  who  has  power  to  avenge  con- 
tempt shown  towards  Himself,  as  also  He  has 
power  to  avenge  the  calamities  and  injuries  in- 
flicted on  His  servants.     And  therefore,  when 
we  suffer  such  impious  things,  we  do  not  resist 
even  in  word  ;  but  we  remit  vengeance  to  God, 
not  as  they  act  who  would  have  it  appear  that 
they  are  defenders  of  their  gods,  and  rage  with- 
out restraint  against  those  who  do  not  worship 
them.     From  which  it  may  be  understood  how 
it  is  not  good  to  worship  their  gods,  since  men 
ought  to  have  been  led  to  that  which  is  good  by 
good,  and  not  by  evil ;  but  because  this  is  evil, 
even  its  office  is  destitute  of  good.     But  they 
who  destroy  religious  systems  must  be  punished. 
Have  we  destroyed  them  in  a  worse  manner  than 
the  nation  of  the  Egyptians,  who  worship  the 
most  disgraceful   figures  of  beasts   and   cattle, 
and  adore  as  gods  some  things  which  it  is  even 
shameful  to  speak  of?     Have  we  done  worse 
than  those  same  who,  when  they  say  that  they 
worship  the  gods,  yet  publicly  and  shamefully 
deride  them?  —  for  they  even  allow  pantomimic  ^ 
representations  of  them  to  be  acted  with  laughter 
and  pleasure.     What  kind  of  a  religion  is  this, 
or  how  great  must  that  majesty  be  considered, 
which  is  adored  in  temples  and  mocked  in  the- 
atres?    And  they  who  have  done  these  things 
do  not  suffer  the  vengeance  of  the  injured  deity, 
but  even  go  away  honoured  and  praised.     Do  we 
destroy  them  in  a  worse  manner  than  certain 
philosophers,  who  say  that  there  are  no  gods  at 
all,  but  that  all  things  are  spontaneously  pro- 
duced, and  that  all  things  which  are  done  hap- 
pen by  chance  ?    Do  we  destroy  them  in  a  worse 
manner  than  the  Epicureans,  who  admit  the  ex- 
istence of  gods,  but  deny  that  they  regard  any- 
thing, and  say  that  they  are  neither  angry  nor 
are  influenced  by  favour  ?     By  which  words  they 
plainly  persuade  men  that  they  are  not  to  be 
worshipped  at  all,  inasmuch  as  they  neither  re- 
gard their  worshippers,  nor  are  angry  with  those 
who   do   not   worship   them.     Moreover,  when 
they  argue  against  fears,  they  endeavour  to  effect 
nothing  else  than  that  no  one  should  fear  the 
gods.     And  yet  these  things  are  willingly  heard 
by  men,  and  discussed  with  impunity. 

CHAP.    XXII.  OF     THE    RAGE    OF    THE     DEMONS 

AGAINST    CHRISTIANS,     AND     THE    ERROR    OF    UN- 
BELIEVERS. 

They  do  not  therefore  rage  against  us  on  this 
account,  because  their  gods  are  not  worshipped 
by  us,  but  because  the  truth  is  on  our  side, 
which  (as  it  has  been  said  most  truly)  produces 
hatred.    What,  then,  shall  we  think,  but  that  they 


'  [Lib.  ii.  cap.  lo. 
sonong  men.] 


A  noble  reference  in  this  chapter  to  equality 


2  Mimos  agi. 


Chap.  XXIIL] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


159 


are  ignorant  of  wliat  they  suffer?  For  they  act ' 
with  a  blind  and  unreasonable  fury,  which  we 
see,  but  of  which  they  are  ignorant.  For  it  is 
not  the  men  themselves  who  persecute,  for  they 
have  no  cause  of  anger  against  the  innocent ; 
but  those  contaminated  and  abandoned  spirits 
by  whom  the  truth  is  both  known  and  hated, 
insinuate  themselves  into  their  minds,  and  goad 
them  in  their  ignorance  to  fury.  For  these,  as 
long  as  there  is  peace  among  the  people  of  God, 
flee  from  the  righteous,  and  fear  them  ;  and  when 
they  seize  upon  the  bodies  of  men,  and  harass 
their  souls,  they  are  adjured  by  them,  and  at 
the  name  of  the  true  God  are  put  to  flight.  For 
when  they  hear  this  name  they  tremble,  cry  out, 
and  assert  that  they  are  branded  and  beaten  ; 
and  being  asked  who  they  are,  whence  they  are 
come,  and  how  they  have  insinuated  themselves 
into  a  man,  confess  it.  Thus,  being  tortured  and 
excruciated  by  the  power  of  the  divine  name, 
they  come  out  of  the  man.^  On  account  of 
these  blows  and  threats,  they  always  hate  holy 
and  just  men ;  and  because  they  are  unable 
of  themselves  to  injure  them,  they  pursue  with 
pubHc  hatred  those  whom  they  perceive  to  be 
grievous  to  them,  and  they  exercise  cruelty,  with 
all  the  violence  which  they  can  employ,  that  they 
may  either  weaken  their  faith  by  pain,  or,  if  they 
are  unable  to  effect  that,  may  take  them  away 
altogether  from  the  earth,  that  there  may  be 
none  to  restrain  their  wickedness.  It  does  not 
escape  my  notice  what  reply  can  be  made  on 
the  other  side.  Why,  then,  does  that  God  of 
surpassing  power,  that  mighty  One,  whom  you 
confess  to  preside  over  all  things,  and  to  be  Lord 
of  all,  permit  these  things  to  be  done,  and  neither 
avenge  nor  defend  His  worshippers?  Why,  in 
short,  are  they  who  do  not  worship  Him  rich,  and 
powerful,  and  happy?  and  why  do  they  enjoy 
honours  and  kingly  state,  and  have  these  very 
persons  ^  subject  to  their  power  and  sway  ? 

We  must  also  give  a  reason  for  this,  that  no 
error  may  remain.  For  this  is  especially  the 
cause  why  it  is  thought  that  religion  has  not  the 
power  of  God,  because  men  are  influenced  by 
the  appearance  of  earthly  and  present  goods, 
which  in  no  way  have  reference  to  the  care  of 
the  mind ;  and  because  they  see  that  the  right- 
eous are  without  these  goods,  and  that  the  un- 
righteous abound  in  them,  they  both  judge  that 
the  worship  of  God  is  worthless,  in  which  they 
do  not  see  these  things  contained,  and  they  im- 
agine that  the  rites  of  other  gods  are  true,  since 
their  worshippers  enjoy  riches  and  honours  and 
kingdoms.  But  they  who  are  of  this  opinion  do 
not  attentively  consider  the  power  and  method 


of  man,  which  consists  altogether  in  the  mind, 
and  not  in  the  body.  For  they  see  nothing 
more  than  is  seen,  namely  the  body  ;  and  because 
this  is  to  be  seen  and  handled,"*  it  is  weak,  frail, 
and  mortal ;  and  to  this  belong  all  those  goods 
which  are  their  desire  and  admiration,  wealth, 
honours,  and  governments,  since  they  bring 
pleasures  to  the  body,  and  therefore  are  as  liable 
to  decay  as  the  body  itself.  But  the  soul,  in 
which  alone  man  consists,  since  it  is  not  exposed 
to  the  sight  of  the  eyes,  and  its  goods  cannot  be 
seen,  for  they  are  placed  in  virtue  only,  must 
therefore  be  as  firm,  and  constant,  and  lasting 
as  virtue  itself,  in  which  the  good  of  the  soul 
consists. 

CHAP.   XXIII. OF   THE    JUSTICE   AND    PATIENCE    OF 

THE    CHRISTIANS. 


'  Pergitur  enim  .  .  .  furore.  Another  reading  is,  "  Perciti  enim 
perferuntur  .  .  .  furore." 

2  Exsulantur.  Other  readings  are,  "  exsolantur,"  "  expelluntur," 
"exultant\ir."     [^ Compare  p.  393,  note  i,  vol.  v.,  this  series.] 

*  Eos  ipsos,  I.e.,  Christians. 


1  It  would  be  a  lengthened  task  to  draw  forth 
!  all  the  appearances  of  virtue,  to  show  respecting 
I  each  how  necessary  it  is  for  a  wise  and  just  man 
to  be  far  removed  from  those  goods,  the  enjoy- 
ment of  which  by  the  unjust  causes  the  worship 
of  their  gods  to  be  regarded  as  true  and  effica- 
cious. As  our  present  intjuiry  is  concerned,  it 
will  be  sufficient  to  prove  our  point  from  the 
case  of  a  single  virtue.  For  instance,  patience 
is  a  great  and  leading  virtue,  which  the  public 
voices  of  the  people  and  philosophers  and  orators 
alike  extol  with  the  highest  praises.  But  if  it 
cannot  be  denied  that  this  is  a  virtue  of  the 
highest  kind,  it  is  necessary  that  the  just  and 
wise  man  should  be  in  the  power  of  the  unjust, 
for  obtaining  patience  ;  for  patience  is  the  bear- 
ing with  equanimity  of  the  evils  which  are  either 
inflicted  or  happen  to  fall  upon  us.  Therefore 
the  just  and  wise  man,  because  he  exercises 
virtue,  has  patience  in  himself;  but  he  will  be 
altogether  free  from  this  if  he  shall  suffer  no 
adversity.  On  the  other  hand,  the  man  who 
lives  in  prosperity  is  impatient,  and  is  without 
the  greatest  virtue.  I  call  him  impatient,  because 
he  suffers  nothing.  He  is  also  unable  to  preserve 
innocency,  which  virtue  is  peculiar  to  the  just 
and  wise  man.  But  he  often  acts  unjustly  also, 
and  desires  the  property  of  others,  and  seizes 
ujton  that  which  he  has  desired  by  injustice,  be- 
cause he  is  without  virtue,  and  is  subject  to  vice 
and  sin ;  and  forgetful  of  his  frailty,  he  is  puffed 
up  with  a  mind  elated  with  insolence. 

From  this  cause  the  unjust,  and  those  who  are 
ignorant  of  God,  abound  with  riches,  and  power, 
and  honours.  For  all  these  things  are  the  re- 
wards of  injustice,  because  they  cannot  be  per- 
petual, and  they  are  sought  through  lust  and 
violence.  But  the  just  and  wise  man,  because 
he  deems  all  these  things  as  human,  as  it  has 
been  said  by  Lslius,  and  his  own  goods  as  divine, 


*  Quia  oculis  manuquc  tractabile  est. 


i6o 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  V. 


neither  desires  anything  which  belongs  to  another, 
lest  he  should  injure  any  one  at  all  in  violation 
of  the  law  of  humanity ;  nor  does  he  long  for 
any  power  or  honour,  that  he  may  not  do  an 
injury  to  any  one.  For  he  knows  that  all  are 
produced  by  the  same  God,  and  in  the  same 
condition,  and  are  joined  together  by  the  right 
of  brotherhood."  But  being  contented  with  his 
own,  and  f/uif  a  little,  because  he  is  mindful  of 
his  frailty,  he  does  not  seek  for  anything  beyond 
that  which  may  support  his  life ;  and  even  from 
that  which  he  has  he  bestows  a  share  on  the 
destitute,  because  he  is  pious;  but  piety  is  a 
very  great  virtue.  To  this  is  added,  that  he 
despises  frail  and  vicious  pleasures,  for  the  sake 
of  which  riches  are  desired ;  since  he  is  tem- 
perate, and  master  of  his  passions.  He  also, 
having  no  pride  or  insolence,  does  not  raise 
himself  too  highly,  nor  lift  up  his  head  with 
arrogance  ;  but  he  is  calm  and  peaceful,  lowly  ^ 
and  courteous,  because  he  knows  his  own  condi- 
tion. Since,  therefore,  he  does  injury  to  none, 
nor  desires  the  property  of  others,  and  does  not 
even  defend  his  own  if  it  is  taken  from  him  by 
violence,  since  he  knows  how  even  to  bear  with 
moderation  an  injury  inflicted  upon  him,  because 
he  is  endued  with  virtue  ;  it  is  necessary  that 
the  just  man  should  be  subject  to  the  unjust, 
and  that  the  wise  should  be  insulted  by  the 
foolish,  that  the  one  may  sin  because  he  is  unjust, 
and  the  other  may  have  virtue  in  himself  because 
he  is  just. 

But  if  any  one  shall  wish  to  know  more  fully 
why  God  permits  the  wicked  and  the  unjust  to 
become  powerful,  happy,  and  rich,  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  suffers  the  pious  to  be  humble,  I 
wretched,  and  poor,  let  him  take  the  book  of  j 
Seneca  which  has  the  title,  "  ^Vhy  many  evils 
happen  to  good  men,  though  there  is  a  provi- 
dence ; "  in  which  book  he  has  said  many 
things,  not  assuredly  with  the  ignorance  of  this 
world,  but  wisely,  and  almost  with  divine  inspi- 
ration.^  "  God,"  he  says,  "  regards  men  as  His 
children,  but  He  permits  the  corrupt  and  vicious 
to  Hve  in  luxury  and  delicacy,  because  He  does 
not  think  them  worthy  of  His  correction.  But 
He  often  chastises  the  good  whom  He  loves, 
and  by  continual  labours  exercises  them  to  the 
practice  of  virtue  :  nor  does  He  permit  them  to 
be  corrupted  and  depraved  by  frail  and  perish- 
able goods."  From  which  it  ought  to  appear 
strange  to  no  one  if  we  are  often  chastised  by 
God  for  our  faults.  Yea,  rather,  when  we  are 
harassed  and  pressed,  then  we  especially  give 
thanks  to  our  most  indulgent  Father,  because 
He  does  not  permit  our  corruption  to  proceed 


'  [See  vol.  iii    (cap.  36),  p.  45,  note  i,  this  series.] 
*  Planus  et  communis. 

3  ["  Deus  homines  pro  liberis  habet  sed  corruptos."  He  attributes 
a  sort  of  inspiration  to  such  a  writer,  as  to  Orpheus  and  the  Sibyl. J 


to  greater  lengths,  but  corrects  it  with  stripes 
and  blows.  From  which  we  understand  that  we 
are  an  object  of  regard  to  God,  since  He  is 
angry  when  we  sin.  For  when  He  might  have 
bestowed  upon  His  people  both  riches  and 
kingdoms,  as  He  had  before  given  them  to  the 
Jews,  whose  successors  and  posterity  we  are ; 
on  this  account  He  would  have  them  live  under 
the  power  and  government  of  others,  lest,  being 
corrupted  by  the  happiness  of  prosperity,  they 
should  glide  into  luxury  and  despise  the  precepts 
of  God ;  as  those  ancestors  of  ours,  who,  oft- 
times  enervated  by  these  earthly  and  frail  goods, 
departed  from  discipline  and  burst  the  bonds  of 
the  law.  Therefore  He  foresaw  how  far  He 
would  afford  rest  to  His  worshippers  if  they 
should  keep  His  commandments,  and  yet  cor- 
rect them  if  they  did  not  obey  His  precepts. 
Therefore,  lest  they  should  be  as  much  cor- 
rupted by  ease  as  their  fathers  had  been  by  in- 
dulgence,-*  it  was  His  will  that  they  should  be 
oppressed  by  those  in  whose  power  He  placed 
them,  that  He  may  both  confirm  them  when 
wavering,  and  renew  them  to  fortitude  when  cor- 
rupted, and  try  and  prove  them  when  faithful. 
For  how  can  a  general  prove  the  valour  of  his 
soldiers,  unless  he  shall  have  an  enemy?  And 
yet  there  arises  an  adversary  to  him  against  his 
will,  because  he  is  mortal,  and  is  able  to  be  con- 
quered ;  but  because  God  cannot  be  opposed, 
He  Himself  stirs  up  adversaries  to  His  name, 
not  to  fight  against  God  Himself,  but  against 
His  soldiers,  that  He  may  either  prove  the  de- 
votedness  and  fidelity  of  His  servants,  or  may 
strengthen  them,  until  He  corrects  their  wasting 
discipline  by  the  stripes  of  affliction.^ 

There  is  also  another  cause  why  He  permits 
persecutions  to  be  carried  on  against  us,  that  the 
people  of  God  may  be  increased.'^  Nor  is  it 
difficult  to  show  why  or  how  this  happens. 
First  of  all,  great  numbers  are  driven  from  the 
worship  of  the  false  gods  by  their  hatred  of 
cruelty.  For  who  would  not  shrink  from  such 
sacrifices?  In  the  next  place,  some  are  pleased 
with  virtue  and  faith  itself.  Some  suspect  that 
it  is  not  without  reason  that  the  worship  of  the 
gods  is  considered  evil  by  so  many  men,  so  that 
they  would  rather  die  than  do  that  which  others 
do  that  they  may  preserve  their  life.  Some  one 
desires  to  know  what  that  good  is  which  is  de- 
fended even  to  death,  which  is  preferred  to  all 
things  which  are  pleasant  and  beloved  in  this  life, 
from  which  neither  the  loss  of  goods,  nor  of  the 
light,  nor  bodily  pain,  nor  tortures  of  the  vitals 
deter  them.  These  things  have  great  effect; 
but  these  causes  have  always  especially  increased 


■♦  LicentiS. 

5  Pressurae  verberibus.      The  word  "pressura"is  used   by  the 
Fathers  to  express  persecution  or  calamity. 

*>  [SeeTertullian.vol.iii.pp. 36  (notei),45  (note£),49,55,and6o.] 


Chap.  XXIV.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


i6i 


the  number  of  our  followers.  The  people  who 
stand  around  hear  them  saying  in  the  midst  of 
these  very  torments  that  they  do  not  sacrifice  to 
stones  wrought  by  the  hand  of  man,  but  to  the 
living  God,  who  is  in  heaven  :  many  understand 
that  this  is  true,  and  admit  it  into  their  breast. 
In  the  next  place,  as  it  is  accustomed  to  happen 
in  matters  of  uncertainty  while  they  make  in- 
quiry of  one  another,  what  is  the  cause  of  this 
perseverance,  many  things  which  relate  to  reli- 
gion, being  spread  abroad  and  carefully  observed 
by  rumour  among  one  another,  are  learned  ;  and 
because  these  are  good  they  cannot  fail  to  please. 
Moreover,  the  revenge  which  follows,  as  always 
happens,  greatly  impels  men  to  beheve.  Nor, 
indeed,  is  it  a  slight  cause  that  the  unclean 
spirits  of  demons,  having  received  permission, 
throw  themselves  into  the  bodies  of  many ;  and 
when  these  have  afterwards  been  driven  out, 
they  who  have  been  healed  cling  to  the  religion, 
the  power  of  which  they  have  experienced. 
These  numerous  causes  being  collecteti  together, 
wonderfully  gain  over  a  great  multitude  to  God.' 

CHAP.  XXIV. OF  THE  DIVINE  VENGEANCE  IN- 
FLICTED ON  THE  TORTURERS  OF  THE  CHRIS- 
TIANS. 

Whatever,  therefore,  wicked  princes  plan 
against  us,  God  Himself  permits  to  be  done. 
And  yet  most  unjust  persecutors,  to  whom  the 

'  [A  most  important  resume  of  the  effects  upon  the  heathen  of 
Christian  fortitude  and  patience.  See  TertuUian  on  "  the  Seed  of  the 
Church,"  vol.  iii.  pp.  55  and  60;  also  vol.  iv.  p.  126.] 


name  of  God  was  a  subject  of  reproach  and 
mockery,  must  not  think  that  they  will  escape 
with  impunity,  because  they  have  been,  as  it 
were,  the  ministers  of  His  indignation  against 
us.  For  they  will  be  punished  with  the  judg- 
ment of  God,  who,  having  received  power,  have 
abused  it  to  an  inhuman  degree,  and  have  even 
insulted  God  in  their  arrogance,  and  placed  His 
eternal  name  beneath  their  feet,  to  be  impiously 
and  wickedly  trampled  upon.  On  this  account 
He  promises  that  He  will  quickly  take  ven- 
geance upon  them,  and  exterminate  the  evil 
monsters-  from  the  earth.  But  He  also,  although 
He  is  accustomed  to  avenge  the  persecutions  ^ 
of  His  people  even  in  the  present  world,  com- 
mands us,  however,  to  await  patiently  that  day 
of  heavenly  judgment,  in  which  He  Himself 
will  honour  or  punish  every  man  according  to 
his  deserts.  Therefore  let  not  the  souls  of  the 
sacrilegious  expect  that  those  whom  they  thus 
trample  upon  will  be  despised  and  unavenged. 
Those  ravenous  and  voracious  wolves  who  have 
tormented  just  and  innocent  souls,  without  the 
commission  of  any.  crimes,  will  surely  meet  with 
their  reward.  Only  let  us  labour,  that  nothing 
else  in  us  may  be  punished  by  men  but  right- 
eousness alone  :  let  us  strive  with  all  our  power 
that  we  may  at  once  deserve  at  the  hands  of 
God  the  avenging  of  our  suffering  and  a  reward. 

2  Bestias  malas.  Lactantius  in  several  passages  applies  this  ex- 
pression to  the  persecutors  of  the  Christians.  [A  quotation  from  the 
Cretian  poet  cited  by  St.  Paul.  "  Cretenses  semper  mendaces  mala 
^^i//«",  ventres  pigri."     Tit.  ii.  12. J 

■3  Vexationes." 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 
BOOK    VI. 


OF    TRUE    WORSHIP. 


CHAP.  I.  —  OF  THE  WORSHIP  OF  THE  TRUE  GOD, 
AND  OF  INNOCENCY,  AND  OF  THE  WORSHIP  OF 
FALSE    GODS. 

We  have  completed  that  which  was  the  object 
of  our  undertakhig,  through  the  teaching  of  the 
Divine  Spirit,  and  the  aid   of  the  truth  itself; 
the  cause  of  asserting  and  explaining  which  was 
imposed  upon  me  both  by  conscience  and  faith, 
and  by  our  Lord  Himself,  without  whom  nothing 
can  be  known  or  clearly  set  forth.     I  come  now 
to  that  which  is  the  chief  and  greatest  part  of 
this  work — to  teach  in  what  manner  or  by  what 
sacrifice  God  must  be  worshipped.     For  that  is 
the  duty  of  man,  and  in  that  one  object  the  sum 
of  all  things  and  the  whole  course  of  a  happy 
life  consists,  since  we  were  fashioned  and  re- 
ceived the  breath  of  life  from  Him  on  this  ac- 
count, not  that  we  might  behold  the  heaven  and 
the  sun,  as  Anaxagoras  supposed,  but  that  we 
might  with  pure  and  uncorrupted  mind  worship 
Him  who  made  the  sun  and  the  heaven.     But 
although  in  the  preceding  books,  as  far  as  my 
moderate  talent  permitted,  I  defended  the  truth, 
yet  it  may  especially  be  elucidated  '  by  the  mode 
of  worship  itself.     For  that  sacred  and  surpass- 
ing majesty  requires  from   man   nothing   more 
than  innocence  alone  ;  and  if  any  one  has  pre- 
sented this  to  God,  he  has  sacrificed  with  suf- 
ficient piety  and  religion.     But  men,  neglecting 
justice,    though    they   are    polluted    by    crimes 
and    outrages    of   all    kinds,    think    themselves 
religious  if  they  have  stained  the  temples  and 
altars  with  the  blood  of  victims,  if  they  have 
moistened  the  hearths  with  a  profusion  of  fra- 
grant and  old  wine.     Moreover,  they  also  pre- 
pare sacred  feasts  and  choice  banquets,  as  though 
they  offered  to  those  who  would  taste  something 
from  them.     Whatever  is  rarely  to  be  viewed, 
whatever  is  precious  in  workmanship  or  in  fra- 
grance, that  they  judge  to  be  pleasing  to  their 


gods,  not  by  any  reference  to  their  divinity,  of 
which  they  are  ignorant,  but  from  their  own 
desires ;  nor  do  they  understand  that  God  is  in 
no  want  of  earthly  resources. 

For  they  have  no  knowledge  of  anything  ex- 
cept the  earth,  and  they  estimate  good  and  evil 
things  by  the  perception  and  pleasure  of  the 
body  alone.     And  as  they  judge  of  religion  ac- 
cording to  its  pleasure,  so  also  they  arrange  the 
acts  of  their  whole  life.     And  since  they  have 
turned  away  once  for  all  from  the  contemplation 
of  the  heaven,  and  have  made  that  heavenly  fac- 
ulty the  slave  of  the  body,  they  give  the  reins  to 
their  lusts,  as  though  they  were  about  to  bear 
away  pleasure  with  themselves,  which  they  hasten 
to  enjoy  at  every  moment ;   whereas  the  soul 
ought  to  employ  the  service  of  the  body,  and 
not  the  body  to  make  use  of  the  service  of  the 
soul.     The  same  men  judge  riches  to  be  the 
greatest  good.     And  if  they  cannot  obtain  them 
by  good   practices,  they   endeavour   to   obtain 
them  by  evil  practices  ;  they  deceive,  they  carry 
off  by  violence,  they  plunder,  they  lie  in  wait, 
they  deny  on  oath  ;  in  short,  they  have  no  con- 
sideration  or  regard  for  anything,^  if  only  they 
can  glitter  with  gold,  and  shine  conspicuous  with 
plate,  with  jewels,  and  with  garments,  can  spend 
riches  upon  their  greedy  appetite,  and  always 
walk  attended  with  crowds  of  slaves  through  the 
people  compelled  to  give  way.3     Thus  devoting  + 
themselves  to  the  service  of  pleasures,  they  ex- 
tinguish the  force  and  vigour  of  the  mind ;  and 
when  they  especially  think  that  they  are  alive, 
they  are  hastening  with  the  greatest  precipitation 
to  death.     For,  as  we   showed   in   the   second 
book,  the  soul  is  concerned  with  heaven,  the 
body  with  the  earth.s     They  who  neglect  the 
goods  of  the  soul,  and  seek  those  of  the  body, 


'  Elucere  potest. 


2  Nihil  moderati  aut  pensi  habent.     The  expression  is  borrowed 
from  Salhist,  Catiline,  xii. 

3  Per  diniotum  populum. 

4  Addicti  et  servientes  vohiptatibus. 

5  [See  book  ii.  cap.  2,  p.  43.  supra.\ 


162 


Chap.  II.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


i6- 


are  engaged  with  darkness  and  death,  which  be- 
long to  the  earth  and  to  the  body,  because  Hfe 
and  light  are  from  heaven ;  and  they  who  are 
without  this,  by  serving  the  body,  are  far  re- 
moved from  the  understanding  of  divine  things. 
The  same  blindness  everywhere  oppresses  the 
wretched  men ;  for  as  they  know  not  who  is 
the  true  God,  so  they  know  not  what  constitutes 
true  worship. 

CHAP.    II. OF   THE   WORSHIP    OF    FALSE   GODS  AND 

THE   TRUE    GOD. 

Therefore  they  sacrifice  fine  and  fat  victims  to 
God,  as  though  He  were  hungry ;  they  pour 
forth  wine  to  Him,  as  though  He  were  thirsty ; 
they  kindle  lights  to  Him,  as  though  He  were  in 
darkness.'  But  if  they  were  able  to  conjecture 
or  to  conceive  in  their  mind  what  those  heavenly 
goods  are,  the  greatness  of  which  we  cannot 
imagine,  while  we  are  still  encompassed  with  an 
earthly  body,  they  would  at  once  know  that 
they  are  most  foolish  with  their  empty  offices. 
Or  if  they  would  contemplate  that  heavenly 
light  which  we  call  the  sun,  they  will  at  once 
perceive  how  God  has  no  need  of  their  candles, 
who  has  Himself  given  so  clear  and  bright  a 
light  for  the  use  of  man.'  And  when,  in  so 
small  a  circle,  which  on  account  of  its  distance 
appears  to  have  a  measure  no  greater  than  that 
of  a  human  head,  there  is  still  so  much  brilliancy 
that  mortal  eye  cannot  behold  it,  and  if  you 
should  direct  your  eye  to  it  for  a  short  time  mist 
and  darkness  would  overspread  your  dimmed 
eyes,  what  light,  I  pray,  what  brightness,  must 
we  stippose  that  there  is  in  God,  with  whom 
there  is  no  night?  For  He  has  so  attempered 
this  very  light,  that  it  might  neither  injure  living 
creatures  by  excessive  brightness  or  vehement 
heat,  and  has  given  it  so  much  of  these  proper- 
ties as  mortal  bodies  might  endure  or  the  ripen- 
ing of  the  crops  require.  Is  that  man,  therefore, 
to  be  thought  in  his  senses,  who  presents  the  light 
of  candles  and  torches  as  an  offering  to  Him 
who  is  the  Author  and  Giver  of  light?  The 
light  which  He  requires  from  us  is  of  another 
kind,  and  that  indeed  not  accompanied  with 
smoke,  but  (as  the  poet  says)  clear  and  bright ; 
I  mean  the  light  of  the  mind,  on  account  of 
which  we  are  called  by  the  poets  photes,^  which 
light  no  one  can  exhibit  unless  he  has  known 
God.  But  their  gods,  because  they  are  of  the 
earth,  stand  in  need  of  lights,  that  they  may  not 
be  in  darkness  ;  and  their  worshippers,  because 
they  have  no  taste  for  anything  heavenly,  are 
recalled  to  the  earth  even  by  the  religious  rites 
to  which  they  are  devoted.'     For  on  the  earth 


'  [The  ritual  use  of  lights  was  unknown  to  primitive  Christians, 
■  however  harmless  it  may  be.] 

2  '/xuTi?.  There  is  here  a  play  on  the  double  meaning  of  the 
word  —  i/i'.)?,  a  light,  and  <|)uis,  a  man.  Some  editions  read  "  (|)io9 
nuncupatur." 


there  is  need  of  a  light,  because  its  system  and 
nature  are  dark.  Therefore  they  do  not  attribute 
to  the  gods  a  heavenly  perception,  but  rather  a 
human  one.  And  on  this  account  they  believe 
that  the  same  things  are  necessary  and  pleasing 
to  them  as  to  us,  who,  when  hungry,  have  need 
of  food ;  or,  when  thirsty,  of  drink ;  or,  when 
we  are  cold,  require  a  garment ;  or,  when  the 
sun  has  withdrawn  himself,  require  a  light  that 
we  may  be  able  to  see.^ 

From  nothing,  therefore,  can  it  be  so  plainly 
proved  and  understood  that  those  gods,  since 
they  once  lived,  are  dead,  as  from  their  worship 
itself,  which  is  altogether  of  the  earth.  For 
what  heavenly  influence  can  there  be  in  the 
shedding  of  the  blood  of  beasts,  with  which 
they  stain  their  altars?  unless  by  chance  they 
imagine  that  the  gods  feed  upon  that  which  men 
shrink  from  touching.  And  whoever  shall  have 
offered  to  them  this  food,*  although  he  be  an 
assassin,  an  adulterer,  a  sorcerer,  or  a  parricide, 
he  will  be  happy  and  prosperous.  Him  they 
love,  him  they  defend,  to  him  they  afford  all 
things  which  he  shall  wish  for.  Persius  there- 
lore  deservedly  ridicules  superstitions  of  this 
kind  in  his  own  style  :  5  "  With  what  bribe,"  he 
says,  "  dost  thou  win  the  ears  of  gods  ?  Is  it 
with  lungs  and  rich  intestines?"  He  plainly 
perceived  that  there  is  no  need  of  flesh  for 
appeasing  the  majesty  of  heaven,  but  of  a  pure 
mind  and  a  just  spirit,  and  a  breast,  as  he  him- 
self says,  which  is  generous  with  a  natural  love 
of  honour.  This  is  the  religion  of  heaven  — 
not  that  which  consists  of  corrupt  things,  but  of 
the  virtues  of  the  soul,  which  has  its  origin 
from  heaven  ;  this  is  true  worship,  in  which  the 
mind  of  the  worshipper  presents  itself  as  an 
undefiled  offering  to  God.  But  how  this  is  to 
be  obtained,  how  it  is  to  be  afforded,  the  dis- 
cussion of  this  book  will  show ;  for  nothing  can 
be  so  illustrious  and  so  suited  to  man  as  to 
train  men  to  righteousness.^ 

In  Cicero,  Catulus  in  the  Hortensius,  while 
he  prefers  philosophy  to  all  things,  says  that  he 
would  rather  have  one  short  treatise  respecting 
duty,  than  a  long  speech  in  behalf  of  a  seditious 
man  Cornelius.  And  this  is  plainly  to  be  re- 
garded not  as  the  opinion  of  Catulus,  who  per- 
haps did  not  utter  this  saying,  but  as  that  of 
Cicero,  who  wrote  it.  I  believe  that  he  wrote  it 
for  the  purpose  of  recommending  these  books 
which  he  was  about  to  write  on  Offices,  in  which 
very  books  he  testifies  that  nothing  in  the  whole 


3  ['The  Lutherans  retain  altar-lights  in  Europe,  and  their  use  has 
never  Deen  wholly  obsolete  in  the  Anglican  churches;  but  it  is  evi- 
dent from  our  author  that  "  from  the  beginning  it  was  not  so."  This 
is  not  said  with  any  scruple  against  their  use  where  it  is  authorized 
by  competent  legislation.] 

*  Sagin.im,  thick  coarse  food,  such  as  that  which  was  given  to 
gladiators. 

5  Persius,  Sat.,  ii.  29. 

*  [."^d  justitiam.  In  Christi.in  use,  it  means  more  than  "jus- 
tice," which  is  put  here  by  the  iranslalur.] 


164 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VI. 


range  of  philosophy  is  better  and  more  profit- 
able than  to  give  precepts  for  living.  But  if 
this  is  done  by  those  who  do  not  know  the 
truth,  how  much  more  ought  we  to  do  it,  who 
are  able  to  give  true  precepts,'  being  taught  and 
enlightened  by  God?  Nor,  however,  shall  we 
so  teach  as  though  we  were  delivering  the  first 
elements  of  virtue,  which  would  be  an  endless 
task,  but  as  though  we  had  undertaken  the  hi- 
struction  of  him  who,  with  them,  appears  to  be 
already  perfect.  For  while  their  precepts  re- 
main, which  they  are  accustomed  to  give  cor- 
rectly, with  a  view  to  uprightness,  we  will  add  to 
them  things  which  were  unknown  to  them,  for 
the  completion  and  consummation  of  righteous- 
ness, which  they  do  not  possess.  But  I  will 
omit  those  things  which  are  common  to  us  with 
them,  that  I  may  not  appear  to  borrow  from 
those  whose  errors  I  have  determined  to  convict 
and  bring  to  light. 

CHAP.    III.  OF     THE    WAYS,    AND     OF    VICES    AND 

VIRTUES  ;     AND     OF    THE     REWARDS     OF    HEAVEN 
AXD   THE    PUNISH.MENTS    OF    HELL. 

There  are  two  ways,^  O  Emperor  Constantine, 
by  which  human  life  must  proceed  —  the  one 
which  leads  to  heaven,  the  other  which  sinks  to 
hell ;  and  these  ways  poets  have  introduced  in 
their  poems,  and  philosophers  in  their  disputa- 
tions. And  indeed  philosophers  have  repre- 
sented the  one  as  belonging  to  virtues,  the  other 
to  vices ;  and  they  have  represented  that  which 
belongs  to  virtues  as  steep  and  rugged  at  the 
first  entrance,  in  which  if  any  one,  having  over- 
come the  difficulty,  has  climbed  to  the  summit, 
they  say  that  he  afterwards  has  a  level  path,  a 
bright  and  pleasant  plain,  and  that  he  enjoys 
abundant  and  delightful  fruits  of  his  labours  ; 
but  that  those  whom  the  difficulty  of  the  first 
approach  has  deterred,  glide  and  turn  aside  into 
the  way  of  vices,  which  at  its  first  entrance  ap- 
pears to  be  pleasant  and  much  more  beaten,  but 
afterwards,  when  they  have  advanced  in  it  a  little 
further,  that  the  appearance  of  its  pleasantness 
is  withdrawn,  and  that  there  arises  a  steep  way, 
now  rough  with  stones,  now  overspread  with 
thorns,  now  interrupted  by  deep  waters  or  vio- 
lent with  torrents,  so  that  they  must  be  in  diffi- 
culty, hesitate,  slip  about,  and  fall.  And  all 
these  things  are  brought  forward  that  it  may 
appear  that  there  are  very  great  labours  in  under- 
taking virtues,  but  that  when  they  are  gained 
there  are  the  greatest  advantages,  and  firm  and 
incorruptible  pleasures ;  but  that  vices  ensnare 
the  minds  of  men  with  certain  natural  blandish- 


•  fi  John  iii.  1-8.  The  ethical  truth  of  the  Gospel  was  under- 
stood and  exempHfied  by  the  primitive  faithful  ] 

-  [One  wonders  whether  the  Dnce  I'iie  here  be  not  a  reference  to 
the  "  Apost.  Constitutions"  (book  vii.),  which,  with  the  Bryennios 
discoTcry,  will  receive  attention  hereafter.] 


ments,  and  lead  them  captivated  by  the  appear- 
ance of  empty  pleasures  to  bitter  griefs  and 
miseries,  —  an  altogether  wise  discussion,  if  they 
knew  the  forms  and  limits  of  the  virtues  them- 
selves. For  they  had  not  learned  either  what 
they  are,  or  what  reward  awaits  them  from  God  : 
but  this  we  will  show  in  these  two  books. 

But  these  men,  because  they  were  ignorant  or 
in  doubt  that  the  souls  of  men  are  immortal, 
estimated  both  virtues  and  vices  by  earthly  hon- 
ours or  punishments.  Therefore  all  this  discus- 
sion respecting  the  two  ways  ^  has  reference  to 
frugality  and  luxury.  For  they  say  that  the 
course  of  human  life  resembles  the  letter  Y,  be- 
cause every  one  of  men,  when  he  has  reached 
the  threshold  of  early  youth,  and  has  arrived  at 
the  place  "  where  the  way  divides  itself  into  two 
parts,"  ^  is  in  doubt,  and  hesitates,  and  does  not 
know  to  which  side  he  should  rather  turn  himself. 
If  he  shall  meet  with  a  guide  who  may  direct 
him  wavering  to  better  things  —  that  is,  if  he 
shall  learn  philosophy  or  eloquence,  or  some 
honourable  arts  by  which  he  may  turn  to  good 
conduct,^  which  cannot  take  place  without  great 
labour  —  they  say  that  he  will  lead  a  life  of 
honour  and  abundance  ;  but  if  he  shall  not  meet 
with  a  teacher  of  temperance,^  that  he  falls  into 
the  way  on  the  left  hand,  which  assumes  the 
appearance  of  the  better,  —  that  is,  he  gives 
himself  up  to  idleness,  sloth,  and  luxury,  which 
seem  pleasant  for  a  time  to  one  who  is  ignorant 
of  true  goods,  but  that  afterwards,  having  lost 
all  his  dignity  and  property,  he  will  live  in  all 
wretchedness  and  ignominy.  Therefore  they 
referred  the  end  of  those  ways  ^  to  the  body,  and 
to  this  life  which  we  lead  on  earth.  The  poets 
perhaps  did  better,  who  would  have  it  that  this 
twofold  way  was  in  the  lower  regions ;  but  they 
are  deceived  in  this,  that  they  proposed  these 
ways  to  the  dead.  Both  therefore  spoke  with 
truth,  but  yet  both  incorrectly ;  for  the  ways 
themselves  ought  to  have  been  referred  to  life, 
their  ends  to  death.  We  therefore  speak  better 
and  more  truly,  who  say  that  the  two  ways  ^  be- 
long to  heaven  and  hell,  because  immortality  is 
promised  to  the  righteous,  and  everlasting  pun- 
ishment is  threatened  to  the  unrighteous. 

But  I  will  explain  how  these  ways  either  exalt 
to  heaven  or  thrust  down  to  hell,  and  I  will  set 
forth  what  these  virtues  are  of  which  the  philoso- 
phers were  ignorant ;  then  I  will  show  what  are 
their  rewards,  and  also  what  are  vices,  and  what 
their  punishments.  For  perhaps  some  one  may 
expect  that  I  shall  speak  separately  of  vices  and 
virtues ;  whereas,  when  we  discuss  the  subject 
of  good  or  evil,  that  which  is  contrary  may  also 


3  [Again  the  Diire  /-».     See  capp.  i  and  5,  in  (eds.  Hitchcock 
and  Brown)  the  Bryennios  MS.,  pp.  3  and  13.] 
■•  Virc-,  /Etieid,  vi.  540. 
5  Evadat  ad  bonam  frugem. 
''  1' rugalitatis. 


Chap.  IV.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


165 


be  understood.  For,  whather  you  introduce 
virtues,  vices  will  spontaneously  depart ;  or  if 
you  take  away  vices,  virtues  will  of  their  own 
accord  succeed.  The  nature  of  good  and  evil 
things  is  so  fixed,  that  they  always  oppose  and 
drive  out  one  another  :  and  thus  it  comes  to 
pass  that  vices  cannot  be  removed  without 
virtues,  nor  can  virtues  be  introduced  without 
the  removal  of  vices.  Therefore  we  bring  for- 
ward these  ways  in  a  very  different  manner 
from  that  in  which  the  philosophers  are  accus- 
tomed to  present  them  :  first  of  all,  because  we 
say  that  a  guide  is  proposed  to  each,  and  in 
each  case  an  immortal  :  but  that  the  one  is  hon- 
oured who  presides  over  virtues  and  good  qual- 
ities, the  other  condemned  who  presides  over 
vices  and  evils.  But  they  place  a  guide  only  on 
the  right  side,  and  that  not  one  only,  nor  a  last- 
ing one  ;  inasmuch  as  they  introduce  any  teacher 
of  a  good  art,  who  may  recall  men  from  sloth, 
and  teach  them  to  be  temperate.  But  they  do 
not  represent  any  as  entering  upon  that  way  ex- 
cept boys  and  young  men  ;  for  this  reason,  that 
the  arts  are  learned  at  these  ages.  We,  on  the 
other  hand,  lead  those  of  each  sex,  every  age 
and  race,  into  this  heavenly  path,  because  God, 
who  is  the  guide  of  that  way,  denies  immortality 
to  no  human  being.'  The  shape  also  of  the 
ways  themselves  is  not  as  they  supposed.  For 
what  need  is  there  of  the  letter  Y  in  matters 
which  are  different  and  opposed  to  one  another? 
But  the  one  which  is  better  is  turned  towards 
the  rising  of  the  sun,  the  other  which  is  worse 
towards  its  setdng  :  since  he  who  follows  truth 
and  righteousness,  having  received  the  reward 
of  immortality,  will  enjoy  perpetual  light ;  but  he 
who,  enticed  by  that  evil  guide,  shall  prefer  vices 
to  virtues,  falsehood  to  truth,  must  be  borne  to 
the  setting  of  the  sun,  and  to  darkness.^  I  will 
therefore  describe  each,  and  will  point  out  their 
properties  and  habits. 

CHAP.   IV. OF  THE  WAYS  OF  LIFE,  OF   PLEASURES, 

ALSO  OF  THE  HARDSHIPS  OF  CHRISTIANS. 

There  is  one  way,  therefore,  of  virtue  and  the 
good,  which  leads,  not,  as  the  poets  say,  to  the 
Elysian  plains,  but  to  the  very  citadel  of  the 
world  :  — 

"The  left  giv'es  sinners  up  to  pain, 
And  leads  to  Tartarus'  guilty  reign."  ^ 

For  it  belongs  to  that  accuser  who,  having  in- 
vented false  religions,  turns  men  away  from  the 
heavenly  path,  and  leads  them  into  the  way  of 
perdition.  And  the  appearance  and  shape  of 
this  way  is  so  composed  to  the  sight,  that  it 

'  [Universal  redemption  is  lovingly  set  forth  by  our  author,] 

^  [A  reference  to  the  baptismal  rite;   the  catechumen  renouncing 

the  works  of  darkness  with  his  face  to  the  west,  and  turning  eastward 

to  confess  the  Sun  of  Righteousness.] 
3  Virg.,  /Eneidf  vi.  542. 


appears  to  be  level  and  open,  and  delightful  with 
all  kinds  of  flowers  and  fruits.  For  there  are 
placed  ^  in  it  all  things  which  are  esteemed  on 
earth  as  good  things  —  I  mean  wealth,  honour, 
repose,  pleasure,  all  kinds  of  enticements ;  but 
together  with  these  also  injustice,  crtielty,  pride, 
perfidy,  lust,  avarice,  discord,  ignorance,  false- 
hood, folly,  and  other  vices.  But  the  end  of  this 
way  is  as  follows  :  When  they  have  reached  the 
point  from  which  there  is  now  no  return,  it  is  so 
suddenly  removed,  together  with  all  its  beauty, 
that  no  one  is  able  to  foresee  the  fraud  before 
that  he  falls  headlong  into  a  deep  abyss.  For 
whoever  is  captivated  by  the  appearance  of  pres- 
ent goods,  and  occupied  with  the  pursuit  and 
enjoyment  of  these,  shall  not  have  foreseen  the 
things  which  are  about  to  follow  after  death,  and 
shall  have  turned  aside  from  God  ;  he  truly  will 
be  cast  down  to  hell,  and  be  condemned  to 
eternal  punishment. 

But  that  heavenly  way  is  set  forth  as  difficult 
and  hilly,  or  rough  with  dreadful  thorns,  or  en- 
tangled with  stones  jutting  out ;  so  that  every 
one  must  walk  with  the  greatest  labour  and  wear- 
ing of  the  feet,  and  with  great  precautions  against 
falling.  In  this  he  has  placed  justice,  temperance, 
patience,  faith,  chastity,  self-restraint,  concord, 
knowledge,  truth,  wisdom,  and  the  other  virtues  ; 
but  together  with  these,  poverty,  ignominy,  labour, 
I^ain,  and  all  kinds  of  hardship.  For  whoever 
has  extended  his  hope  beyond  the  present,  and 
chosen  better  things,  will  be  without  these  earthly 
goods,  that,  being  lightly  equipped  and  without 
impediment,  he  may  overcome  the  difificulty  of 
the  way.  For  it  is  impossible  for  him  who  has 
surrounded  himself  with  royal  pomp,  or  loaded 
himself  with  riches,  either  to  enter  upon  or  to 
])ersevere  in  these  difficulties.  And  from  this  it 
is  understood  that  it  is  easier  for  the  wicked  and 
the  unrighteous  to  succeed  in  their  desires,  be- 
cause their  road  is  downward  and  on  the  decline  ; 
but  that  it  is  difficult  for  the  good  to  attain  to 
their  wishes,  because  they  walk  along  a  difficult 
and  steep  path.  Therefore  the  righteous  man, 
since  he  has  entered  upon  a  hard  and  rugged 
way,  must  be  an  object  of  contempt,  derision, 
and  hatred.  For  all  whom  desire  or  pleasure 
drags  headlong,  envy  him  who  has  been  able 
to  attain  to  virtue,  and  take  it  ill  that  any  one 
possesses  that  which  they  themselves  do  not  pos- 
sess. Therefore  he  will  be  poor,  humble,  ignoble, 
subject  to  injury,  and  yet  enduri.ng  all  things 
which  are  grievous ;  and  if  he  shall  continue  his 
patience  unceasingly  to  that  last  step  and  end, 
the  crown  of  virtue  will  be  given  to  him,  and  he 
will  be  rewarded  by  God  with  immortality  for 
the  labours  which  he  has  endured  in  life  for  the 
sake  of  righteousness.    These  are  the  ways  which 


■»  Posita  sunt  omnia.      There  is  another  reading,  "  posuit  Deus 
omnia." 


i66 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VI. 


God  has  assigned  to  human  hfe,  in  each  of  which 
he  has  shown  both  good  and  evil  things,  but  in 
a  changed  and  inverted  order.  In  the  one  he 
has  pointed  out  in  the  first  place  temporal  evils 
followed  by  eternal  goods,  which  is  the  better 
order ;  in  the  other,  first  temporal  goods  followed 
by  eternal  evils,  which  is  the  worse  order :  so 
that,  whosoever  has  chosen  present  evils  together 
with  righteousness,  he  will  obtain  greater  and  more 
certain  goods  than  those  were  which  he  despised  ; 
but  whoever  has  preferred  present  goods  to  right- 
eousness, will  fall  into  greater  and  more  lasting 
evils  than  those  were  which  he  avoided.  For  as 
this  bodily  life  is  short,  therefore  its  goods  and 
evils  must  also  be  short ;  but  since  that  spiritual 
hfe,  which  is  contrary  to  this  earthly  life,  is  ever- 
lasting, therefore  its  goods  and  evils  are  also 
everlasting.  Thus  it  comes  to  pass,  that  goods 
of  short  duration  are  succeeded  by  eternal  evils, 
and  evils  of  short  duration  by  eternal  goods. 

Since,  therefore,  good  and  evil  things  are  set 
before  man  at  the  same  time,  it  is  befitting  that 
every  one  should  consider  with  himself  how 
much  better  it  is  to  compensate  evils  of  short 
duration  by  perpetual  goods,  than  to  endure  per- 
petual evils  for  short  and  perishable  goods.  For 
as,  in  this  life,  when  a  contest  with  an  enemy- 
is  set  before  you,,  you  must  first  labour  that  you 
may  afterwards  enjoy  repose,  you  must  suffer 
hunger  and  thirst,  you  must  endure  heat  and 
cold,  you  must  rest  on  the  ground,  must  watch 
and  undergo  dangers,  that  your  children,'  and 
house,  and  property  being  preserved,  you  may 
be  able  to  enjoy  all  the  blessings  of  peace  and 
victory ;  but  if  you  should  choose  present  ease 
in  preference  to  labour,  you  must  do  yourself 
the  greatest  injury  :  for  the  enemy  will  surprise 
you  offering  no  resistance,  your  lands  will  be 
laid  waste,  your  house  plundered,  your  wife  and 
children  become  a  prey,  you  yourself  will  be 
slain  or  taken  prisoner ;  to  prevent  the  occur- 
rence of  these  things,  present  advantage  must 
be  put  aside,  that  a  greater  and  more  lasting  ad- 
vantage may  be  gained  ;  —  so  in  the  whole  of 
this  life,  because  God  has  provided  an  adversary 
for  us,  that  we  might  be  able  to  acquire  virtue, 
present  gratification  must  be  laid  aside,  lest  the 
enemy  should  overpower  us.  We  must  be  on 
the  watch,  must  post  guards,  must  undertake 
military  expeditions,  must  shed  our  blood  to  the 
uttermost ;  in  short,  we  must  patiently  submit  to 
all  things  which  are  unpleasant  and  grievous, 
and  the  more  readily  because  God  our  com- 
mander has  appointed  for  us  eternal  rewards  for 
our  labours.  And  since  in  this  earthly  warfare 
men  expend  so  much  labour  to  acquire  for  them- 
selves those  things  which  may  perish  in  the  same 
manner  as  that  in  which  they  were  acquired, 


Pignoribus. 


assuredly  no  labour'ought  to  be  refused  by  us, 
by  whom  that  is  gained  which  can  in  no  way  be 
lost. 

For  God,  who  created  men  to  this  warfare, 
desired  that  they  should  stand  prepared  in  bat- 
tle array,  and  with  minds  keenly  intent  should 
watch  against  the  stratagems  or  open  attacks 
of  our  single  enemy,  who,  as  is  the  practice  of 
skilful  and  experienced  generals,  endeavours  to 
ensnare  us  by  various  arts,  directing  his  rage  ac- 
cording to  the  nature  and  disposition  of  each. 
For  he  infuses  into  some  insatiable  avarice,  that, 
being  chained  by  their  riches  as  by  fetters,  he 
may  drive  them  from  the  way  of  truth.  He  in- 
flames others  with  the  excitement  of  anger,  that 
while  they  are  rather  intent  upon  inflicting  in- 
jury, he  may  turn  them  aside  from  the  con- 
templation of  God.  He  plunges  others  into 
immoderate  lusts,  that,  giving  themselves  to 
pleasure  of  the  body,  they  may  be  unable  to 
look  towards  virtue.  He  inspires  others  with 
envy,  that,  being  occupied  with  their  own  tor- 
ments, they  may  think  of  nothing  but  the  happi- 
piness  of  those  whom  they  hate.  He  causes 
others  to  swell  with  ambitious  desires.  These 
are  they  who  direct  the  whole  occupation  and 
care  of  their  life  to  the  holding  of  magistracies, 
that  they  may  set  a  mark  upon  the  annals,^  and 
give  a  name  to  the  years.  The  desire  of  others 
mounts  higher,  not  that  they  may  rule  provinces 
with  the  temporal  sword,  but  with  boundless  and 
perpetual  power  may  wish  to  be  called  lords  of 
the  whole  human  race.^  Moreover,  those  whom 
he  has  seen  to  be  pious  he  involves  in  various  ^ 
superstitions,  that  he  may  make  them  impious. 
But  to  those  who  seek  for  wisdom,  he  dashes 
philosophy  before  their  eyes,5  that  he  may  bhnd 
them  with  the  appearance  of  light,  lest  any  one 
should  grasp  and  hold  fast  the  truth.  Thus  he 
has  blocked  up  all  the  approaches  against  men, 
and  has  occupied  the  way,  rejoicing  in  public 
errors  ;  but  that  we  might  be  able  to  dispel  these 
errors,  and  to  overcome  the  author  of  evils  him- 
self, God  has  enlightened  us,  and  has  armed  us 
with  true  and  heavenly  virtue,  respecting  which 
I  must  now  speak. 

CHAP.    V.  OF    FALSE   AND  TRUE    VIRTUE  ;    AND  OF 

KNOWLEDGE. 

But  before  I  begin  to  set  forth  the  separate 
virtues,  I  must  mark  out  the  character  of  virtue 
itself,  which   the  philosophers  have  not  rightly 


2  It  was  customary  in  many  of  the  ancient  states  to  connect  the 
year  with  the  name  of  the  chief  magistrate  who  was  then  in  office. 
Thus  at  Athens  the  title  of  the  chief  magistrate  was  Archon  Epony- 
mus,  giving  name  to  the  year;  and  at  Rome,  the  year  was  reckoned 
by  the  names  of  the  consuls  then  in  office. 

3  [Ut  infinita  et  perpelua  potestate  dominos  se  dici  velint  universi 
generis  humani.     A  bold  hint  to  Constaniine.] 

■»  Variis.     Another  reading  is  "  vanis." 

5  Philosophiam  in  oculos  impingit.  [A  warning  to  the  emperor, 
a  reflection  on  such  as  the  Antonines,  and  a  prolepsis  of  Julian.] 


Chap.  V.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


167 


defined,  as  to  its  nature,  or  in  what  things  it 
consisted  ;  and  I  must  describe  its  operation  and 
office.  For  they  only  retained  the  name,  but  lost 
its  power,  and  nature,  and  effect.  But  whatever 
they  are  accustomed  to  say  in  their  definition  of 
virtue,  Lucilius  puts  together  and  expresses  in  a 
few  verses,  which  I  prefer  to  introduce,  lest, 
while  I  refute  the  opinions  of  many,  I  should  be 
longer  than  is  necessary  :  — 

"  It  is  virtue,  O  Albinus,  to  pay  the  proper  price, 
To  attend  to  the  matters  in  which  we  are  engaged,  and 

in  which  we  live. 
It  is  virtue  for  a  man  to  know  the  nature  of  everything. 
It  is  virtue  for  a  man  to  know  what  is  right  and  useful 

and  honourable. 
What  things  are  good,  and  what  are  evil. 
Whiit  is  useless,'  base,  and  dishonourable. 
It  is  virtue  to  know  the  end  of  an  object  to  be  sought, 

and  the  means  of  piociiring  it. 
It  is  virtue  to  be  able  to  assign  their  value  to  riches. 
It  is  virtue  to  give  that  which  is  really  due  to  honour ; 
To  be  the  enemy  and  the  foe  ^  of  bad  men  and  manners, 

but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  defender  of  good  men 

and  manners ; 
To  esteem  these  highly,  to  wish  them  well,  to  live  in 

friendship  with  them , 
Moreover,  to  consider  the   interest  of   one's   country 

first; 
Then  those  of  parents,  to  put  our  own  interests  in  the 

third  and  last  place." 

From  these  definitions,  which  the  poet  briefly 
puts  together,  Marcus  Tullius  derived  the  offices 
of  living,  following  Pancetius  the  Stoic,^  and  in- 
cluded them  in  three  books. 

But  we  shall  presently  see  how  false  these 
things  are,  that  it  may  appear  how  much  the 
divine  condescension  has  bestowed  on  us  in 
opening  to  us  the  truth.  He  says  that  it  is  vir- 
tue to  know  what  is  good  and  evil,  what  is  base, 
what  is  honourable,  what  is  useful,  what  is  useless. 
He  might  have  shortened  his  treatise  if  he  had 
only  spoken  of  that  which  is  good  and  evil ; 
for  nothing  can  be  useful  or  honourable  which 
is  not  also  good,  and  nothing  useless  and  base 
which  is  not  also  evil.  And  this  also  appears 
to  be  thus  to  philosophers,  and  Cicero  shows  it 
likewise  in  the  third  book  of  the  above-mentioned 
treatise.''  But  knowledge  cannot  be  virtue,  be- 
cause it  is  not  within  us,  but  it  comes  to  us  from 
without.  But  that  which  is  able  to  pass  from 
one  to  the  other  is  not  virtue,  because  virtue  is 
the  property  of  each  individual.  Knowledge 
therefore  consists  in  a  benefit  derived  from  an- 
other;  for  it  depends  upon  hearing.  Virtue  is 
altogether  our  own  ;  for  it  depends  upon  the 
will  of  doing  that  which  is  good.  As,  therefore, 
in  undertaking  a  journey,  it  is  of  no  profit  to 
know  the  way,  unless  we  also  have  the  effort  and 


'  rinutilia.] 

2  Hostem  atque  inimicum:   the  former  word  signifies  a  "  public," 
the  latter  a  "  private  enemy." 

3  \De  Offtciis,  passim.     Notably,  to  begin  with,  book  i.  cap.  3: 
"  Triplex  igitur,"  etc.] 

■*  \De  Nat.  Dear.,  iii.     See  also  De  Off.,  cap.  5,  sec.  18.] 


Strength  for  walking,  so  truly  knowledge  is  of  no 
avail  if  our  virtue  fails.  For,  in  general,  even 
they  who  sin  perceive  what  is  good  and  evil, 
though  not  perfectly ;  and  as  often  as  they  act 
improperly,  they  know  that  they  sin,  and  there- 
fore endeavour  to  conceal  their  actions.  But 
though  the  nature  of  good  and  evil  does  not  es- 
cape their  notice,  they  are  overpowered  by  an 
evil  desire  to  sin,  because  they  are  wanting  in 
virtue,  that  is,  the  desire  of  doing  right  and  hon- 
ourable things.  Therefore  that  the  knowledge 
of  good  and  evil  is  one  thing,  and  virtue  another, 
appears  from  this,  because  knowledge  can  exist 
without  virtue,  as  it  has  been  in  the  case  of  many 
of  the  philosophers  ;  in  which,  since  not  to  have 
done  what  you  knew  to  be  right  is  justly  censur- 
able, a  depraved  will  and  a  vicious  mind,  which 
ignorance  cannot  excuse,  will  be  justly  punished. 
Therefore,  as  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  is 
not  virtue,  so  the  doing  that  which  is  good  and 
the  abstaining  from  evil  is  virtue.  And  yet 
knowledge  is  so  united  with  virtue,  that  knowl- 
edge precedes  virtue,  and  virtue  follows  knowl- 
edge ;  because  knowledge  is  of  no  avail  unless 
it  is  followed  up  by  action.  Horace  therefore 
speaks  somewhat  better  :  "  Virtue  is  the  fleeing 
from  vice,  and  the  first  wisdom  is  to  be  free  from 
folly."  5  But  he  speaks  improperly,  because  he 
defined  virtue  by  its  contrary,  as  though  he  should 
say,  That  is  good  which  is  not  evil.  For  when 
I  know  not  what  virtue  is,  I  do  not  know  what 
vice  is. "  Each  therefore  requires  definition,  be- 
cause the  nature  of  the  case  is  such  that  each 
must  be  understood  or  not  understood.*^ 

But  let  us  do  that  which  he  ought  to  have 
done.  It  is  a  virtue  to  restrain  anger,  to  con- 
trol desire,  to  curb  lust ;  for  this  is  to  flee  from 
vice.  For  almost  all  things  which  are  done  un- 
justly and  dishonestly  arise  from  these  affections. 
For  if  the  force  of  this  emotion  which  is  called 
anger  be  blunted,  all  the  evil  contentions  of  men 
will  be  lulled  to  rest ;  no  one  will  plot,  no  one 
will  rush  forth  to  injure  another.  Also,  if  de- 
sire be  restrained,  no  one  will  use  violence  by 
land  or  by  sea,  no  one  will  lead  an  army  to  car- 
ry off  and  lay  waste  the  property  of  others.  Also, 
if  the  ardour  of  lusts  be  repressed,  every  age 
and  sex  will  retain  its  sanctity  ;  no  one  will  suf- 
fer, or  do  anything  disgraceful.  Therefore  all 
crimes  and  disgracefiil  actions  will  he.  taken 
away  from  the  life  and  character  of  men,  if 
these  emotions  are  appeased  and  calmed  by 
virtue.  And  this  calming  of  the  emotions  and 
affections  has  this  meaning,  that  we  do  all  things 
which  are  right.  The  whole  duty  of  virtue  then 
is,  not  to  sin.  And  assuredly  he  cannot  dis- 
charge this  who  is  ignorant  of  God,  since  igno- 

5  Efiz'st.,  i.  I.  41. 

6  [To  be  taken  with  a  grain  of  salt,  but  apparently  comprehended 
in  our  author's  personal  theodicy.] 


1 68 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VI. 


ranee  of  Him  from  whom  good  things  proceed 
must  thrust  a  man  unawares  into  vices.  There- 
fore, that  I  may  more  briefly  and  significantly 
fix  the  ofiices  of  each  subject,  knowledge  is  to 
know  God,  \-irtue  is  to  worship  Him  :  the  former 
implies  wisdom,  the  latter  righteousness. 

CH.4P.    VI.  —  OF     THE     CHIEF     GOOD     AND     VIRTUE, 
AND    OF    KNOWLEDGE   AND    RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

1  have  said  that  which  was  the  first  thing,  that 
the  knowledge  of  good  is  not  virtue ;  and  sec- 
ondly, I  have  shown  what  virtue  is,  and  in  what 
it  consists.  It  follows  that  I  should  show  this 
also,  that  the  philosophers  were  ignorant  of  what 
is  good  and  evil ;  and  this  briefly,  because  it  has 
oeen  ahuost '  made  plain  in  the  third  book, 
when  I  was  discussing  the  subject  of  the  chief 
good.  And  because  they  did  not  know  what 
the  chief  good  was,  they  necessarily  erred  in  the 
case  of  the  other  goods  and  evils  which  are  not 
the  chief;  for  no  one  can  weigh  these  with  a 
true  judgment  who  does  not  possess  the  fountain 
itself  from  which  they  are  derived.  Now  the 
source  of  good  things  is  God ;  but  of  evils,  he 
who  is  always  the  enemy  of  the  divine  name,  of 
whom  we  have  often  spoken.  From  these  two 
sources  good  and  evil  things  have  their  origin. 
Those  which  proceed  from  God  have  this  ob- 
ject, to  procure  immortality,  which  is  the  great- 
est good ;  but  those  which  arise  from  the  other 
have  this  oftice,  to  call  man  away  from  heavenly 
things  and  sink  him  in  earthly  things,  and  thus 
to  consign  him  to  the  punishment  of  everlast- 
ing death,  which  is  the  greatest  evil.  Is  it  there- 
fore doubtful  but  that  all  those  were  ignorant  of 
what  was  good  and  evil,  who  neither  knew  God 
nor  the  adversary  of  God  ?  Therefore  they  re- 
ferred the  end  of  good  things  to  the  body,  and 
to  this  short  life,  which  must  be  dissolved  and 
perish  :  they  did  not  advance  further.  But  all 
their  precepts,  and  all  the  things  which  they  in- 
troduce as  goods,  adhere  to  the  earth,  and  lie  on 
the  ground,  since  they  die  with  the  body,  which 
is  earth  ;  for  they  do  not  tend  to  procure  life  for 
man,  but  either  to  the  acquisition  or  increase  of 
riches,  honour,  glory,  and  power,  which  are  alto- 
gether mortal  things,  as  much  so  indeed  as  he 
who  has  laboured  to  obtain  them.  Hence  is 
that  saying,^  "  It  is  virtue  to  know  the  end  of  an 
object  3  to  be  sought,  and  the  means  of  procur- 
ing it ;  "  for  they  enjoin  by  what  means  and  by 
what  practices  property  is  to  be  sought,  for  they 
see  that  it  is  often  sought  unjustly.  But  virtue 
of  this  kind  is  not  proposed  to  the  wise  man  ; 
for  it   is  not  virtue   to   seek  riches,  of  which 

'  Poene:  others  read"  pleni,"  and"  planfe."   [c.  30,  p.  loo,  j?</rrt.] 

2  [The  first  of  the  three  tnutilia  of  Lucihus,  ut  supra,  tjius: 
(i)  "Virtus  quserendae  rei  finem  scire,  modiimque;"  (2)  "Virtus 
divitiis  pretium  persolvere  posse ;  "  (3)  "  Virtus  id  dare  quod  re  ipsa 
debetur  honori."     See  p.  167,  supra.\ 

3  See  chap.  v.  [p.  167,  supra\. 


neither  the  finding  nor  the  possession  is  in  our 
power :  therefore  they  are  more  easy  to  be 
gained  and  to  be  retained  by  the  bad  than  by 
the  good.  Virtue,  then,  cannot  consist  in  the 
seeking  of  those  things  in  the  despising  of  which 
the  force  and  purport  of  virtue  appears ;  nor 
will  it  have  recourse  to  those  very  things  which, 
with  its  great  and  lofty  mind,  it  desires  to  tram- 
ple upon  and  bruise  under  foot ;  nor  is  it  lawful 
for  a  soul  which  is  earnestly  fixed  on  heavenly 
goods  to  be  called  away  from  its  immortal  pur- 
suits, that  it  may  acquire  for  itself  these  frail 
things.  But  the  course  ^  of  virtue  especially 
consists  in  the  acquisition  of  those  things  which 
neither  any  man,  nor  death  itself,  can  take  away 
from  us.  Since  these  things  are  so,  that  which 
follows  is  true  :  "  It  is  virtue  to  be  able  to  assign 
their  value  to  riches  :  "  which  verse  is  nearly  of 
the  same  meaning  as  the  first  two.  But  neither 
he  nor  any  of  the  philosophers  was  able  to  know 
the  price  itself,  either  of  what  nature  or  what  it 
is  ;  for  the  poet,  and  all  those  whom  he  followed, 
thought  that  it  meant  to  make  a  right  use  of 
riches,  —  that  is,  to  be  moderate  in  living,  not 
to  make  costly  entertainments,  not  to  squander 
carelessly,  not  to  expend  property  on  superfluous 
or  disgraceful  objects. 5 

Some  one  will  perhaps  say.  What  do  you  say? 
Do  you  deny  that  this  is  virtue  ?  I  do  not  deny 
it  indeed ;  for  if  I  should  deny  it,  I  should  ap- 
pear to  prove  the  opposite.  But  I  deny  that  it 
is  true  virtue  ;  because  it  is  not  that  heavenly 
principle,  but  is  altogether  of  the  earth,  since  it 
produces  no  effect  but  that  which  remains  on  the 
earth. ^  But  what  it  is  to  make  a  right  use  of 
wealth,  and  what  advantage  is  to  be  sought  from 
riches,  I  will  declare  more  openly  when  I  shall 
begin  to  speak  of  the  duty  of  piety.  Now  the 
other  things  which  follow  are  by  no  means  true  ; 
for  to  proclaim  enmity  against  the  wicked,  or  to 
undertake  the  defence  of  the  good,  may  be  com- 
mon to  it  with  the  evil.  For  some,  by  a  pretence 
of  goodness,  prepare  the  way  for  themselves  to 
power,  and  do  many  things  which  the  good  are 
accustomed  to  do,  and  that  the  more  readily  be- 
cause they  do  them  for  the  sake  of  deceiving ; 
and  I  wish  that  it  were  as  easy  to  carry  out 
goodness  in  action  as  it  is  to  pretend  to  it.  But 
when  they  have  begun  to  attain  to  their  purpose 
and  their  wish  in  reaching  the  highest  step  of 
power,  then,  truly  laying  aside  pretence,  these 
men  discover  their  character ;  they  seize  upon 
everything,  and  offer  violence,  and  lay  waste  ; 
and  they  press  upon  the  good  themselves,  whose 
cause  they  had  undertaken  ;  and  they  cut  away 
the  steps  by  which  they  mounted,  that  no  one 


*  Ratio  virtutis. 

S  [How  I  love  our  author  for  his  winning  reproof  of  mere  philo- 
sophical virtue  in  contrast  with  evangelical  righteousness!] 

''  [See  the  Quis  Dives  Salvetur  of  Clement,  vol.  ii.  p.  591,  this 
series.] 


Chap.  VII.] 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


169 


may  be  able  to  imitate  them  against  themselves. 
But,  however,  let  us  suppose  that  this  duty  of 
defending  the  good  belongs  only  to  the  good 
man.  Yet  to  undertake  it  is  easy,  to  fulfil  it  is 
difficult ;  because  when  you  have  committed 
yourself  to  a  contest  and  an  encounter,  the 
victory  is  placed  at  the  disposal  of  God,  not  in 
your  own  power.  And  for  the  most  part  the 
wicked  are  more  powerful  both  in  number  and 
in  combination  than  the  good,  so  that  it  is  not 
so  much  virtue  which  is  necessary  to  overcome 
them  as  good  fortune.  Is  any  one  ignorant  how 
often  the  better  and  the  juster  side  has  been 
overcome?  From  this  cause  harsh  tyrannies 
have  always  broken  out  against  the  citizens.  All 
history  is  full  of  examples,  but  we  will  be  content 
with  one.  Cnceus  Pompeius  wished  to  be  the 
defender  of  the  good,  since  he  took  up  arms 
m  defence  of  the  commonwealth,  in  defence  of 
the  senate,  and  in  defence  of  liberty ;  and  yet 
the  same  man,  being  conquered,  perished  to- 
gether with  liberty  itself,'  and  being  mutilated 
by  Egyptian  eunuchs,  was  cast  forth  unburied.^ 

It  is  not  virtue,  therefore,  either  to  be  the 
enemy  of  the  bad  or  the  defender  of  the  good, 
because  virtue  cannot  be  subject  to  uncertain 
chances. 

"  Moreover,  to  reckon  the  interests  of  our  country  as  in 
the  first  place." 

When  the  agreement  of  men  is  taken  away, 
viftue  has  no  existence  at  all ;  for  what  are  the 
interests  of  our  country,  but  the  inconveniences 
of  another  state  or  nation  ?  —  that  is,  to  extend 
the  boundaries  which  are  violently  taken  from 
others,  to  increase  the  power  of  the  state,  to  im 
prove  the  revenues,  —  all  which  things  are  not 
virtues,  but  the  overthrowing  of  virtues  :  for,  in 
the  first  place,  the  union  of  humati  society  is 
taken  away,  innocence  is  taken  away,  the  ab- 
staining from  the  property  of  another  is  taken 
away ;  lastly,  justice  itself  is  taken  away,  which 
is  unable  to  bear  the  tearing  asunder  of  the 
human  race,  and  wherever  arms  have  glittered, 
must  be  banished  and  exterminated  from  thence. 
This  saying  of  Cicero  ^  is  true  :  "  But  they  who 
say  that  regard  is  to  be  had  to  citizens,  but  that 
it  is  not  to  be  had  to  foreigners,  these  destroy 
the  common  society  of  the  human  race  ;  and 
when  this  is  removed,  beneficence,  liberality, 
kindness,  and  justice  are  entirely  +  taken  away." 
For  how  can  a  man  be  just  who  injures,  who 
hates,  who  despoils,  who  puts  to  death?  And 
they  who  strive  to  be  serviceable  to  their  country 
do  all  these  thmgs  :  for  they  are  ignorant  of  what 
this  being  serviceable  is,  who  think  nothing  use- 


'  [Haggai  li.  7.  "  La  journee  de  Pharsale  fut  la  dernifere  heure 
de  la  liuerti.  Lc  senat,  les  lois,  le  peuple,  les  mosurs,  le  mond  romain 
^taient  aneantis  avec  Pompde."  —  Lamartine.] 

-  [See,  on  Pharsalia,  etc.,  Lamartine's  eloquent  remarks,  Vie  des 
Grands  Homines  (Cesar),  vol.  v.  pp.  276-277,  ed.  Paris,  1856.] 

3  De  Offic,  ill.  6 

*  Funditus,  "  from  the  very  foundation." 


ful,  nothing  advantageous,  but  that  which  can  be 
held  by  the  hand ;  and  this  alone  cannot  be 
held,  because  it  may  be  snatched  away. 

Whoever,  then,  has  gained  for  his  country 
these  goods  —  as  they  themselves  call  them  — 
that  is,  who  by  the  overthrow  of  cities  and  the 
destruction  of  nations  has  filled  the  treasury  with 
money,  has  taken  lands  and  enriched  his  country- 
men —  he  is  extolled  with  praises  to  the  heaven  : 
in  him  there  is  said  to  be  the  greatest  and  per- 
fect virtue.  And  this  is  the  error  not  only  of  the 
people  and  the  ignorant,  but  also  ot  pnilosophers, 
who  even  give  precepts  for  injustice,  lest  folly 
and  wickedness  should  be  wanting  in  discipline 
and  authority.  Therefore,  when  they  are  speak- 
ing of  the  duties  relating  to  warfare,  all  that  dis- 
course is  accommodated  neither  to  justice  nor 
to  true  virtue,  but  to  this  life  and  to  civil  institu- 
tions ;  5  and  that  this  is  not  justice  the  matter 
itself  declares,  and  Cicero  has  testified.*"  "  But 
we,"  he  says,  "  are  not  in  possession  of  the  real 
and  life-like  figure  of  true  law  and  genuine  justice, 
we  have  nothing  but  delineations  and  sketches  ;  ? 
and  I  wish  that  we  followed  even  these,  for  they 
are  taken  from  the  excellent  copies  made  by 
nature  and  truth."  It  is  then  a  delineation  and 
a  sketch  which  they  thought  to  be  justice.  But 
what  of  wisdom  ?  does  not  the  same  man  confess 
that  it  has  no  existence  in  philosophers  ?  "  Nor," 
he  says,^  "  when  Fabricius  or  Aristides  is  called 
just,  is  an  example  of  justice  sought  from  these 
as  from  a  wise  man  ;  for  none  of  these  is  wise 
in  the  sense  in  which  we  wish  the  truly  wise  to 
be  understood.  Nor  were  they  who  are  esteemed 
and  called  wise,  Marcus  Cato  and  Caius  Laelius, 
actually  wise,  nor  those  well-known  seven  ;  ^  but 
from  their  constant  practice  of  the  '  middle  du- 
ties,' '°  they  bore  a  certain  likeness  and  appear- 
ance "  of  wise  men."  If  therefore  wisdom  is 
taken  away  from  the  philosophers  by  their  own 
confession,  and  justice  is  taken  away  from  those 
who  are  regarded  as  just,  it  follows  that  all  those 
descriptions  of  virtue  must  be  false,  because  no  one 
can  know  what  true  virtue  is  but  he  who  is  just  and 
wise.  But  no  one  is  just  and  wise  but  he  whom 
God  has  instructed  with  heavenly  precepts. 

CHAP.     VII.  OF     THE     WAY     OF     ERROR     AND     OF 

TRUTH  :      THAT     IT      IS      SINGLE,     NARROW,     AND 
STEEP,    AND    HAS    GOD    FOR    ITS    GUIDE. 

For  all  those  who,  by  the  confessed  folly  of 
others,  are  thought  wise,  being  clothed  with  the 


s  Moremque  civilem. 

6  De  Offic,  iii.  17. 

7  Umbra  et  imaginibus.  The  figure  is  borrowed  partly  from 
sculpture  and  panly  from  painting.  "  Effigies"  is  the  moulded  form, 
as  opposed  to  the  mere  outline,  "  umbra  "  and  "  imago." 

'^  De  Offic,  iii.  4.  The  words,  "  aut  ab  illis  fortitudinis,  aut," 
have  not  been  translated,  because  they  refer  to  the  "  Decii  '  and  the 
"  Scipiones,"  who  are  mentioned  by  Cicero  as  examples  of  bravery, 
but  are  omitted  by  Lactaniius. 

9   (Seep    \o\,supra.'\ 

'°  [Ex  utediaritin  officiorum  frequentia,  etc.] 

"   [Rom.  i.  22.] 


170 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VI. 


appearance  of  virtue,  grasp  at  shadows  and  out- 
lines, but  at  nothing  true.     \Vhich  happens  on 
this  account,  because  that  deceitful  road  which 
inclines  to  the  west  has  many  paths,  on  account 
of  the  variety  of  pursuits  and  systems  which  are 
dissimilar  and  varied  in  the  life  of  men.     For  as 
that  way  of  wisdom  contains  something  which 
resembles  folly,  as  we  showed  -in  the  preceding 
book,  so  this  way,  which  belongs  altogether  to 
folly,  contains  something  which  resembles  wis- 
dom, and  they  who  perceive  the  folly  of  men  in 
general  seize  upon  this ;  and  as  it  has  its  vices 
manifest,  so  it  has  something  which  appears  to 
resemble  virtue  :  as  it  has  its  wickedness  open, 
so  it  has  a  likeness  and  appearance  of  justice. 
For   how  could   the    forerunner '   of  that  way, 
whose  strength  and  power  are  altogether  in  de- 
ceit, lead  men  altogether  into  fraud,  unless  he 
showed  them  some  things  which  resembled  the 
truth  ?^     For,  that  His  immortal  secret  might 
be  hidden,  God  placed  in  his  way  things  which 
men  might  despise  as  evil  and  disgraceful,  that, 
turning  away  from  wisdom  and  truth,  which  they 
were  searching  for  without  any  guide,  they  might 
fall  upon  that  very  thing  which  they  desired  to 
avoid  and  flee  from.     Therefore  he  points  out 
that  way  of  destruction  and  death  which  has 
many  windings,  either  because  there  are  many 
kinds  of  life,  or  because  there  are   many  gods 
who  are  worshipped. 

The  deceitful  ^  and  treacherous  guide  of  this 
way,  that  there  may  appear  to  be  some  distinc- 
tion between  truth  and  falsehood,  good  and  evil, 
leads  the  luxurious  in  one  direction,  and  those 
who  are  called  temperate  ^  in  another ;  the  igno- 
rant in  one  direction,  the  learned  in  another ; 
the  sluggish  in  one  direction,  the  active  in  an- 
other ;  the  foolish  in  one  direction,  the  philoso- 
phers  in   another,  and  even  these  not  in  one 
path.     For  those  who  do  not  shun  pleasures  or 
riches,  he  withdraws  a  little  from  this  public  and 
frequented  road  ;  but  those  who  either  wish  to 
follow  virtue,  or  profess  a  contempt  for  things, 
he  drags  over  certain  rugged  precipices.     But 
nevertheless   all   those   paths  which    display  an 
appearance  of  honours  are  not  different  roads, 
but  turnings  off  5  and  bypaths,  which  appear  in- 
deed to  be  separated  from  that  common  one, 
and  to  branch  off  to  the  right,  but  yet  return 
to  the  same,  and  all  lead  at  the  very  end  to  one 
issue.     For  that  guide  unites  them  all,  where  it 
was  necessary  that  the  good  should  be  separated 
from  the  bad,  the  strong  from  the  inactive,  the 
wise  from  the  foolish  ;  namely,  in  the  worship 
of  the  gods,  in  which  he  slays  them  all  with  one 

1  Praecursor:  the  exact  meaning  of  the  word  is  a  "  scout." 

2  Verisimilia:   the  word  generally  means  "  probabilities." 

3  Praevaricator;  properly  an  advocate  who,  by  collusion,  favours 
the  cause  of  his  opponent. 

*  Frugi. 

i  Diverticula. 


sword,  because  they  were  all  foolish  without  any 
distinction,  and  plunges  them  into  death.  But 
this  way  —  which  is  that  of  truth,  and  wisdom, 
and  virtue,  and  justice,  of  all  which  there  is  but 
one  fountain,  one  source  of  strength,  one  abode 
—  is  both  simple,*"  because  with  like  minds,  and 
with  the  utmost  agreement,  we  follow  and  wor- 
ship one  God ;  and  it  is  narrow,  because  virtue 
is  given  to  the  smaller  number  ;  and  steep,  be- 
cause goodness,  which  is  very  high  and  lofty, 
cannot  be  attained  to  without  the  greatest  diffi- 
culty and  labour. 


CHAP.    VIII. OF    THE    ERRORS    OF    PHILOSOPHERS, 

AND   THE    VARIABLENESS    OF    LAW. 

This  is  the  way  which  philosophers  seek,  but 
do  not  find  on  this  account,  because  they  prefer 
to  seek  it  on  the  earth,  where  it  cannot  appear. 
Therefore  they  wander,  as  it  were,  on  the  great 
sea,  and  do  not   understand  whither  they  are 
borne,  because  they  neither  discern  the  way  nor 
follow  any  guide.     For  this  way  of  life  ought  to 
be  sought  in  the  same  manner  in  which  their 
course  is  sought  by  ships  over  the   deep  :    for 
unless  they  observe  some  light  of  heaven,  they 
wander   with   uncertain   courses.     But  whoever 
strives  to  hold  the  right  course  of  life  ought  not 
to  look  to  the  earth,  but  to  the  heaven  :  and,  to 
speak  more  plainly,  he  ought  not  to  follow  man, 
but  God ;  not  to  serve  these  earthly  images,  but 
the  heavenly  God ;  not  to  measure  all  tilings  by 
their  reference  to  the  body,  but  by  their  reference 
to  the  soul ;  not  to  attend  to  this  life,  but  the 
eternal   hfe.     Therefore,   if  you   always   direct 
your  eyes  towards  heaven,  and  observe  the  sun, 
where  it  rises,  and  take  this  as  the  guide  of  your 
life,  as  in  the  case  of  a  voyage,  your  feet  will 
spontaneously  be    directed  into  the  way;    and 
that  heavenly  light,  which  is  a  much  brigliter  sun  ?• 
to  sound  minds  than  this  which  we  behold  in 
mortal  flesh,  will  so  rule  and  govern  you  as  to 
lead  you  without  any  error  to  the  most  excellent 
harbour  of  wisdom  and  virtue. 

Therefore  the  law  of  God  must  be  undertaken, 
which  may  direct  us  to  this  path  ;  that  sacred, 
that  heavenly  law,  which  Marcus  TuUius,  in  his 
third  book  respecting  the  Republic,^  has  de- 
scribed almost  with  a  divine  voice  ;  whose  words 
I  have  subjoined,  that  I  might  not  speak  at 
greater  length  :  "  There  is  indeed  a  true  law, 
right  reason,  agreeing  with  nature,  diffused  among 
all,  unchanging,  everlasting,  which  calls  to  duty 
by  commanding,  deters  from  wrong  by  forbid- 
ding ;  which,  however,  neither  commands  nor 
forbids  the  good  in  vain,  nor  affects  the  wicked 
by  commanding  or  forbidding.     It  is  not  allow- 


6  Simplex,  as  opposed  to  the  various  paths  of  the  other. 

7  Multo  clarior  sol  est,  qu^m  hie     Others  read,  "  Multo  clarius 
sole  est,  quJim  hie,"  etc. 

8  \_Repub.,  iii.  cap.  22,  i6.J 


Chap.  IX.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


171 


able  to  alter '  the  provisions  of  this  law,  nor  is  it 
permitted  us  to  modify  it,  nor  can  it  be  entirely 
abrogated.'  Nor,  truly,  can  we  be  released  from 
this  law,  either  by  the  senate  or  by  the  people  ; 
nor  is  another  person  to  be  sought  to  explain  or 
interpret  it.  Nor  will  there  be  one  law  at  Rome 
and  another  at  Athens  ;  one  law  at  the  present 
time,  and  another  hereafter :  but  the  same  law, 
everlasting  and  unchangeable,  will  bind  all  nations 
at  all  times ;  and  there  will  be  one  common 
Master  and  Ruler  of  all,  even  God,  the  framer, 
arbitrator,  and  proposer  of  this  law ;  and  he  who 
shall  not  obey  this  will  flee  from  himself,  and, 
despising  the  nature  of  man,  will  suffer  the 
greatest  punishments  through  this  very  thing,  even 
though  he  shall  have  escaped  the  other  punish- 
ments which  are  supposed  to  exist."  Who  that 
is  acquainted  with  the  mystery  of  God  could  so 
significantly  relate  the  law  of  God,  as  a  man  far 
removed  from  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  has 
set  forth  that  law  ?  But  I  consider  that  they  who 
speak  true  things  unconsciously  are  to  be  so  re- 
garded as  though  they  prophesied  ^  under  the 
influence  of  some  spirit.  But  if  he  had  known 
or  explained  this  also,  in  what  precepts  the  law 
itself  consisted,  as  he  clearly  saw  the  force  and 
purport  of  the  divine  law,  he  would  not  have 
discharged  the  office  of  a  philosopher,  but  of  a 
prophet.  And  because  he  was  unable  to  do 
this,  it  must  be  done  by  us,  to  whom  the  law 
itself  has  been  delivered  by  the  one  great  Master 
and  Ruler  of  all,  God, 

CHAP.  IX.  —  OF  THE  LAW  AND  PRECEPT  OF  GOD  ; 
OF  MERCY,  AND  THE  ERROR  OF  THE  PHILOSO- 
PHERS. 

The  first  head  of  this  law  is,  to  know  God 
Himself,  to  obey  Him  alone,  to  worship  Him 
alone.  For  he  cannot  maintain  the  character 
of  a  man  who  is  ignorant  of  God,  the  parent  of 
his  soul :  which  is  the  greatest  impiety.  For 
this  ignorance  causes  him  to  serve  other  gods, 
and  no  greater  crime  than  this  can  be  committed. 
Hence  there  is  now  so  easy  a  step  to  wickedness 
through  ignorance  of  the  truth  and  of  the  chief 
good  ;  since  God,  from  the  knowledge  of  whom 
he  shrinks,  is  Himself  the  fountain  of  goodness. 
Or  if  he  shall  wish  to  follow  the  justice  of  God, 
yet,  being  ignorant  of  the  divine  law,  he  em- 
braces the  laws  of  his  own  country  as  true  jus- 
tice, though  they  were  clearly  devised  not  by 
justice,  but  by  utility.  For  why  is  it  that  there 
are  different  and  various  laws  amongst  all  people, 
but  that  each  nation  has  enacted  for  itself  that 
which  it  deemed  useful  for  its  own  affairs?  But 
how  greatly  utility  differs  from  justice  the  Roman 


'  Abrogo  is  to  repeal  or  abrogate  wholly;  "  derogo,"  to  abrogate 
in  part,  or  modify;   "  obrogo,"  to  supersede  by  another  law. 

-  Divinent.  [Illustrative  of  the  Sibylliti.a,  and,  in  short,  of  Ba- 
laam; and  not  less  of  Rom.  ii.  14,  15.] 


people  themselves  teach,  who,  by  proclaiming 
war  through  the  Fecials,  and  by  inflicting  inju- 
ries according  to  legal  forms,  by  always  desiring 
and  carrying  off  the  property  of  others,  have 
gained  for  themselves  the  possession  of  the 
whole  world. 3  But  these  persons  think  them- 
selves just  if  they  do  nothing  against  their  own 
laws  ;  which  may  be  even  ascribed  to  fear,  if 
they  abstain  from  crimes  through  dread  of  pres- 
ent punishment.  But  let  us  grant  that  they  do 
that  naturally,  or,  as  the  philosopher  says,  of 
their  own  accord,  which  they  are  compelled  to 
do  by  the  laws.  Will  they  therefore  be  just, 
because  they  obey  the  institutions  of  men,  who 
may  themselves  have  erred,  or  have  been  un- 
just? —  as  it  was  with  the  framers  of  the  twelve 
tables,  who  certainly  promoted  the  public  advan- 
tage according  to  the  condition  of  the  times. 
Civil  law  is  one  thing,  which  varies  everywhere 
according  to  customs ;  but  justice  is  another 
thing,  which  God  has  set  forth  to  all  as  uniform 
and  simple  :  and  he  who  is  ignorant  of  God 
must  also  be  ignorant  of  justice. 

But  let  us  suppose  it  possible  that  any  one, 
by  natural  and  innate  goodness,  should  gain 
true  virtues,  such  a  man  as  we  have  heard  that 
Cimon  was  at  Athens,  who  both  gave  alms  to  the 
needy,  and  entertained  the  poor,  and  clothed 
the  naked  ;  yet,  when  that  one  thing  which  is 
of  the  greatest  importance  is  wanting  —  the 
acknowledgment  of  God  —  then  all  those  good 
things  are  superfluous  and  empty,  so  that  in  pur- 
suing them  he  has  laboured  in  vain.'*  For  all 
his  justice  will  resemble  a  human  body  which 
has  no  head,  in  which,  although  all  the  limbs 
are  in  their  proper  position,  and  figure,  and  pro- 
portion, yet,  since  that  is  wanting  which  is  the 
chief  thing  of  all,  it  is  destitute  both  of  life  and 
of  all  sensation.  Therefore  those  limbs  have 
only  the  shape  of  limbs,  but  admit  of  no  use, 
as  much  so  as  a  head  without  a  body ;  and  he 
resembles  this  who  is  not  without  the  knowledge 
of  God,  but  yet  lives  unjusdy.  For  he  has  that 
only  which  is  of  the  greatest  importance  ;  but 
he  has  it  to  no  purpose,  since  he  is  destitute  of 
the  virtues,  as  it  were,  of  limbs. 

Therefore,  that  the  body  may  be  alive,  and 
capable  of  sensation,  both  the  knowledge  of 
God  is  necessary,  as  it  were  the  head,  and  all 
the  virtues,  as  it  were  the  body.  Thus  there 
will  exist  a  perfect  and  living  man  ;  but,  how- 
ever, the  whole  substance  is  in  the  head ;  and 
although  this  cannot  exist  in  the  absence  of  all, 
it  may  exist  in  the  absence  of  some.  And  it 
will  be  an  imperfect  and  faulty  animal,  but  yet  it 
will  be  alive,  as  he  who  knows  God  and  yet  sins 
in  some  respect.     For  God  pardons  sins.     And 


3  [Dan.  vii.  23.     An  appeal  for  reformation.] 
*  [i  Cor.   iii.   11-15.     R'"  ="■"=   '^"^  heathen  to  be  judged  by  the 
New  Covenant?     See  vol.  ii.  (Clement,  ipaniin),  this  series.] 


172 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VI. 


thvis  it  is  possible  to  live  without  some  of  the 
limbs,  but  it  is  by  no  means  possible  to  live 
without  a  head.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  phi- 
losophers, though  they  may  be  naturally  good, 
yet  have  no  knowledge  and  no  intelligence. 
All  their  learning  and  virtue  is  without  a  head, 
because  they  are  ignorant  of  God,  who  is  the 
Head  of  virtue  and  knowledge ;  and  he  who  is 
ignorant  of  Him,  though  he  may  see,  is  blind ; 
though  he  may  hear,  is  deaf;  though  he  may 
speak,  is  dumb.  But  when  he  shall  know  the 
Creator  and  Parent  of  all  things,  then  he  will 
both  see,  and  hear,  and  speak.  For  he  begins 
to  have  a  head,  in  which  all  the  senses  are 
placed,  that  is,  the  eyes,  and  ears,  and  tongue. 
For  assuredly  he  sees  who  has  beheld  with  the 
eyes  of  his  mind  the  truth  in  which  God  is,  or 
God  in  whom  the  truth  is ;  he  hears,  who  im- 
prints on  his  heart  the  divine  words  and  life- 
giving  precepts ;  he  speaks,  who,  in  discussing 
heavenly  things,  relates  the  virtue  and  majesty 
of  the  surpassing  God.  Therefore  he  is  un- 
doubtedly impious  who  does  not  acknowledge 
God ;  and  all  his  virtues,  whjch  he  thinks  that 
he  has  or  possesses,  are  found  in  that  deadly 
road  which  belongs  altogether  to  darkness. 
Wherefore  there  is  no  reason  why  any  one 
should  congratulate  himself  if  he  has  gained 
these  empty  virtues,  because  he  is  not  only 
wretched  who  is  destitute  of  present  goods,  but 
he  must  also  be  foolish,  since  he  undertakes  the 
greatest  labours  in  his  life  without  any  purpose. 
For  if  the  hope  of  immortality  is  taken  away, 
which  God  promises  to  those  who  continue  in 
His  religion,  for  the  sake  of  obtaining  which 
virtue  is  to  be  sought,  and  whatever  evils  happen 
are  to  be  endured,  it  will  assuredly  be  the 
greatest  folly  to  wish  to  comply  with  virtues 
which  in  vain  bring  calamities  and  labours  to 
man.  For  if  it  is  virtue  to  endure  and  undergo 
with  fortitude,  want,  exile,  pain,  and  death, 
which  are  feared  by  others,  what  goodness,  I 
pray,  has  it  in  itself,  that  philosophers  should 
say  that  it  is  to  be  sought  for  on  its  own 
account?  Truly  they  are  delighted  with  super- 
fluous and  useless  punishments,  when  it  is  per- 
mitted them  to  live  in  tranquillity. 

For  if  our  souls  are  mortal,  if  virtue  is  about 
to  have  no  existence  after  the  dissolution  of  the 
body,  why  do  we  avoid  the  goods  assigned  to 
us,  as  though  we  were  ungrateful  or  unworthy 
of  enjoying  the  divine  gifts  ?  For,  that  we  may 
enjoy  these  blessings,  we  must  live  in  wickedness 
and  impiety,  because  virtue,  that  is,  justice,  is 
followed  by  poverty.  Therefore  he  is  not  of 
sound  mind,  who,  without  having  any  greater 
hope  set  before  him,  prefers  labours,  and  tor- 
tures, and  miseries,  to  those  goods  which  others 
enjoy  in  life.'     But  if  virtue  is  to  be  taken  up, 


'  [1  Cor.  XV.  19.] 


as  is  most  rightly  said  by  these,  because  it  is 
evident  that  man  is  born  to  it,  it  ought  to  con- 
tain some  greater  hope,  which  may  apply  a 
great  and  illustrious  solace  for  the  ills  and 
labours  which  it  is  the  part  of  virtue  to  endure. 
Nor  can  virtue,  since  it  is  difficult  in  itself,  be 
esteemed  as  a  good  in  any  other  way  than  by 
having  its  hardship  compensated  by  the  greatest 
good.  We  can  in  no  other  way  equally  abstain 
from  these  present  goods,  than  if  there  are 
other  greater  goods  on  account  of  which  it  is 
worth  while  to  leave  the  pursuit  of  pleasures, 
and  to  endure  all  evils.  But  these  are  no  other, 
as  I  have  shown  in  the  third  book,^  than  the 
goods  of  everlasting  life.  Now  who  can  bestow 
these  except  God,  who  has  proposed  to  us  vir- 
tue itself?  Therefore  the  sum  and  substance  of 
everything  is  contained  in  the  acknowledging 
and  worship  of  God  ;  all  the  hope  and  safety 
of  man  centres  in  this  ;  this  is  the  first  step  of 
wisdom,  to  know  who  is  our  true  Father,  and  to 
worship  Him  alone  with  the  piety  which  is  due 
to  Him,  to  obey  Him,  to  yield  ourselves  to 
His  service  with  the  utmost  devotedness :  let 
our  entire  acting,  and  care,  and  attention,  be 
laid  out  in  gaining  His  favour.^ 

CHAP.  X.  —  OF  RELIGION  TOWARDS  GOD,  AND 
MERCY  TOWARDS  MEN  j  AND  OF  THE  BEGINNING 
OF   THE    WORLD. 

I  have  said  what  is  due  to  God,  I  will  now  say 
what  is  to  be  given  to  man  ;  although  this  very 
thing  which  you  shall  give  to  man  is  given  to 
God,  for  man  is  the  image  of  God.  But,  how- 
ever, the  first  office  of  justice  is  to  be  united 
with  God,  the  second  with  man.  But  the 
former  is  called  religion  ;  the  second  is  named 
mercy,  or  kindness  ;  "*  which  virtue  is  peculiar  to 
the  just,  and  to  the  worshippers  of  God,  be- 
cause this  alone  comprises  the  principle  of 
common  life.  For  God,  who  has  not  given 
wisdom  to  the  other  animals,  has  made  them 
more  safe  from  attack  in  danger  by  natural  de- 
fences. But  because  He  made  him  naked  and 
defenceless, 5  that  He  might  rather  furnish  him 
with  wisdom,  He  gave  him,  besides  other  things, 
this  feeling  of  kindness  ;  ^  so  that  man  should 
protect,  love,  and  cherish  man,  and  both  receive 
and  afford  assistance  against  all  dangers.  There- 
fore kindness  is  the  greatest  bond  of  human 
society  ;  and  he  who  has  broken  this  is  to  be 
deemed  impious,  and  a  parricide.  For  if  we 
all  derive  our  origin  from  one  man,  whom  God 


2  [See  cap,  12,  p.  79,  srtpra.'\ 

3  In  CO  promerendo.     [John  xvii.  3.] 
*  Humanitas. 

S  Fragilem. 

['{■vVij  Kepara  Tai5poi5 

On"Ad?   5'   ^Su}K€V   ITTTTOl? 

Toi!  avSpdat.i'  (j>p6vrip.a,  1 
'  Hunc  pietatis  affectum. 


Anacreon,  OJe  2.] 


Chap.  X.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


^72> 


created,  we  are  plainly  of  one  blood ;  and 
therefore  it  must  be  considered  the  greatest 
wickedness  to  hate  a  man,  even  though  guilty. 
On  which  account  God  has  enjoined  that  enmi- 
ties are  never  to  be  contracted  by  us,  but  that 
they  are  always  to  be  removed,  so  that  we  soothe 
those  who  are  our  enemies,  by  reminding  them 
of  their  relationship.  Likewise,  if  we  are  all 
inspired  and  animated  by  one  God,  what  else 
are  we  than  brothers?  And,  indeed,  the  more 
closely  united,  because  we  are  united  in  soul 
rather  than  in  body.'  Accordingly  Lucretius 
does  not  err  when  he  says  :  ^  "  In  short,  we  are 
all  sprung  from  a  heavenly  seed  ;  all  have  that 
same  father."  Therefore  they  are  to  be  ac- 
counted as  savage  beasts  who  injure  man  ;  who, 
in  opposition  to  every  law  and  right  of  human 
nature,  plunder,  torture,  slay,  and  banish. 

On  account  of  this  relationship  of  brother- 
hood, God  teaches  us  never  to  do  evil,  but 
always  good.  And  He  also  prescribes  ^  in  what 
this  doing  good  consists  :  in  affording  aid  to 
those  who  are  oppressed  and  in  difficulty,  and  in 
bestowing  food  on  those  who  are  destitute.  For 
God,  since  He  is  kind,'*  wished  us  to  be  a  social 
animal.  Therefore,  in  the  case  of  other  men, 
we  ought  to  think  of  ourselves.  We  do  not  de- 
serve to  be  set  free  in  our  own  dangers,  if  we  do 
not  succour  others  ;  we  do  not  deserve  assist- 
ance, if  we  refuse  to  render  it.  There  are  no 
precepts  of  philosophers  to  this  purport,  inas- 
much as  they,  being  captivated  by  the  appear- 
ance of  false  virtue,  have  taken  away  mercy  from 
man,  and  while  they  wish  to  heal,  have  cor- 
rupted.5  And  though  they  generally  admit  that 
the  mutual  participation  of  human  society  is  to 
be  retained,  they  entirely  separate  themselves 
from  it  by  the  harshness  of  their  inhuman  virtue. 
This  error,  therefore,  is  also  to  be  refuted,  of 
those  who  think  that  nothing  is  to  be  bestowed 
on  any  one.  They  have  introduced  not  one 
origin  only,  and  cause  of  building  a  city ;  but 
some  relate  that  those  men  who  were  first  born 
from  the  earth,  when  they  passed  a  wandering  life 
among  the  woods  and  plains,  and  were  not  united 
by  any  mutual  bond  of  speech  or  justice,  but 
had  leaves  and  grass  for  their  beds,  and  caves 
and  grottos  for  their  dwellings,  were  a  prey  to 
the  beasts  and  stronger  animals.  Then,  that 
those  who  had  either  escaped,  having  l)een  torn, 
or  had  seen  their  neighbours  torn,  being  admon- 
ished of  their  own  danger,  had  recourse  to  other 

'  Conjunctiores,  qu6d  animis,  qiiam  qu6d  (others  read  "  qui ") 
corporibus. 

^  [Modern  followers  of  Lucretius  may  learn  from  him:  — 
Denique  cnclesti  sumus  omnes  semine  oriundi; 
Omnibus  ille  idem  pater  est.] 
"■991- 

3  Isa.  Iviii.  6,  7;  Ezek.  xviii.  7;  Matt.  xxv.  35. 

<  Pius. 

5  Dum  volunt  sanare,  vitiaverunt.  There  is  another  reading: 
"  dum  vohmt  snnarc  vitia.  auxerunt,"  while  they  wish  to  apply  a  rem- 
edy to  vices,  have  increased  them. 


men,  implored  protection,  and  at  first  made 
their  wishes  known  by  nods  ;  then  that  they  tried 
the  beginnings  of  conversation,  and  by  attaching 
names  to  each  object,  by  degrees  completed  the 
system  of  speech.  But  when  they  saw  that 
numbers  themselves  were  not  safe  against  the 
beasts,  they  began  also  to  build  towns,  either 
that  they  might  make  their  nightly  repose  safe, 
or  that  they  might  ward  off  the  incursions  and 
attacks  of  beasts,  not  by  fighting,  but  by  inter- 
posing barriers.^ 

O  minds  unworthy  of  men,  which  produced 
these  foolish  trifles  !  O  wretched  and  i)itiable 
men,  who  committed  to  writing  and  handed 
down  to  memory  the  record  of  their  own  folly ; 
who,  when  they  saw  that  the  plan  of  assembling 
themselves  together,  or  of  mutual  intercourse,  or 
of  avoiding  danger,  or  of  guarding  against  evil, 
or  of  preparing  for  themselves  sleeping-places 
and  lairs,  was  natural  even  to  the  dumb  animals, 
thought,  however,  that  men  could  not  have  been 
admonished  and  learned,  except  by  examples, 
what  they  ought  to  fear,  what  to  avoid,  and  what 
to  do,  or  that  they  would  never  have  assembled 
together,  or  have  discovered  the  method  of 
speech,  had  not  the  beasts  devoured  them  ! 
These  things  appeared  to  others  senseless,  as 
they  really  were ;  and  they  said  that  the  cause 
of  their  coming  together  was  not  the  tearing  of 
wild  beasts,  but  rather  the  very  feeling  of  human- 
ity itself;  and  that  therefore  they  collected 
themselves  together,  because  the  nature  of  men 
avoided  solitude,  and  was  desirous  of  commun- 
ion and  society.  The  discrepancy  between  them 
is  not  great ;  since  the  causes  are  different,  the 
fact  is  the  same.  Each  might  have  been  true, 
because  there  is  no  direct  opposition.  But, 
however,  neither  is  by  any  means  true,  because 
men  were  not  born  from  the  ground  throughout 
the  world,  as  though  sprung  from  the  teeth  of 
some  dragon,  as  the  poets  relate  ;  but  one  man 
was  formed  by  God,  and  from  that  one  man  all 
the  earth  was  filled  with  the  human  race,  in  the 
same  way  as  again  took  ]jlace  after  the  deluge, 
which  they  certainly  cannot  deny.7  Therefore 
no  assembling  together  of  this  kind  took  place 
at  the  beginning ;  and  that  there  were  never 
men  on  the  earth  who  could  not  speak  except 
those  who  were  infants,'^  every  one  who  is  pos- 
sessed of  sense  will  understand.  Let  us  suppose, 
however,  that  these  things  are  true  which  idle 
and  foolish  old  men  vainly  say,  that  we  may  re- 
fute them  especially  by  their  own  feelings  and 
arguments. 

If  men  were  collected  together  on  this  account, 


6  Objectis  aggeribus.  "Agger"  properly  signifies  a  mound  of 
earth  or  other  material. 

7  [(jen.  X.  32.] 

^  Prater  infantlam — others  read  "propter  infans  "  —  properly 
means,  one  unable  to  speak,  [.'^t-c  fine  remarks  on  language,  etc.,  in 
De  Maistre,  Soirees,  etc.,  vol.  i.  p.  105  and  notes,  ed.  Lyon,  1S36.] 


174 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VI. 


that  they  might  protect  their  weakness  by  mutual 
help,  therefore  we  must  succour  man,  who  needs 
help.  For,  since  men  entered  into  and  con- 
tracted fellowship  with  men  for  the  sake  of  pro- 
tection, either  to  violate  or  not  to  preserve  that 
compact  which  was  entered  into  among  men 
from  the  commencement  of  their  origin,  is  to  be 
considered  as  the  greatest  impiety.  For  he  who 
withdraws  himself  from  affording  assistance  must 
also  of  necessity  withdraw  himself  from  receiving 
it ;  for  he  who  refuses  his  aid  to  another  thinks 
that  he  stands  in  need  of  the  aid  of  none.  But 
he  who  withdraws  and  separates  himself  from 
the  body '  at  large,  must  live  not  after  the  custom 
of  men,  but  after  the  manner  of  wild  beasts. 
But  if  this  cannot  be  done,  the  bond  of  human 
society  is  by  all  means  to  be  retained,  because 
man  can  in  no  way  live  without  man.  But  the 
preservation  ^  of  society  is  a  mutual  sharing  of 
kind  offices  ;  that  is,  the  affording  help,  that  we 
maybe  able  to  receive  it.  But  if,  as  those  others 
assert,  the  assembling  together  of  men  has  been 
caused  on  account  of  humanity  itself,  man  ought 
undoubtedly  to  recognise  man.  But  if  those 
ignorant  and  as  yet  uncivilized  men  did  this,  and 
that,  when  the  practice  of  speaking  was  not  yet 
established,  what  must  we  think  ought  to  be  done 
by  men  who  are  polished,  and  connected  together 
by  interchange  of  conversation  and  all  business, 
who,  being  accustomed  to  the  society  of  men, 
cannot  endure  sohtude  ? 

CHAP.  XI. OF  THE  PERSONS  UPON  WHOM  A  BENE- 
FIT   IS   TO    BE    CONFERRED. 

Therefore  humanity  is  to  be  preserved,  if  we 
wish  rightly  to  be  called  men.  But  what  else  is 
this  preservation  of  humanity  than  the  loving  a 
man  because  he  is  a  man,  and  the  same  as  our- 
selves ?  Therefore  discord  and  dissension  are 
not  in  accordance  with  the  nature  of  man  ;  and 
that  expression  of  Cicero  is  true,  which  says  ^ 
that  man,  while  he  is  obedient  to  nature,  cannot 
injure  man.  Therefore,  if  it  is  contrary  to  nature 
to  injure  a  man,  it  must  be  in  accordance  with 
nature  to  benefit  a  man  ;  and  he  who  does  not 
do  this  deprives  himself  of  the  tide  of  a  man, 
because  it  is  the  duty  of  humanity  to  succour 
the  necessity  and  peril  of  a  man.  I  ask,  there- 
fore, of  those  who  do  not  think  it  the  part  of  a 
wise  man  to  be  prevailed  upon  and  to  pity,  If  a 
man  were  seized  by  some  beast,  and  were  to 
implore  the  aid  of  an  armed  man,  whether  they 
think  that  he  ought  to  be  succoured  or  not? 
They  are  not  so  shameless  as  to  deny  that  that 
ought  to  be  done  which  humanity  demands  and 


*  A  corpore,  that  is,  from  society. 

2  Retentio.  The  word  sometimes  signifies  a  "  withholding,"  or 
"  drawing  back;  "  but  here,  as  in  other  passages,  Lactantius  uses  it 
to  express  "  preservation." 

3  De  OJjfic.,  iii.  5. 


requires.  Also,  if  any  one  were  surrounded  by 
fire,  crushed  by  the  downfall  of  a  building, 
plunged  in  the  sea,  or  carri-ed  away  by  a  river, 
would  they  think  it  the  duty  of  a  man  not  to 
assist  him?  They  themselves  are  not  men  if 
they  think  so  \  for  no  one  can  fail  to  be  liable  to 
dangers  of  this  kind.  Yes,  truly,  they  will  say 
that  it  is  the  part  of  a  human  being,  and  of  a 
brave  man  too,  to  preserve  one  who  was  on  the 
point  of  perishing.  If,  therefore,  in  casualties 
of  this  nature  which  imperil  the  life  of  man,  they 
allow  that  it  is  the  part  of  humanity  to  give  suc- 
cour, what  reason  is  there  why  they  should  think 
that  succour  is  to  be  withheld  if  a  man  should 
suffer  from  hunger,  thirst,  or  cold  ?  But  though 
these  things  are  naturally  on  an  equality  with 
those  accidental  circumstances,  and  need  one 
and  the  same  humanity,  yet  they  make  a  dis- 
tinction between  these  things,  because  they 
measure  all  things  not  by  the  truth  itself,  but  by 
present  utility.  For  they  hope  that  those  whom 
they  rescue  from  peril  will  make  a  return  of  the 
favour  to  them.  But  because  they  do  not  hope 
for  this  in  the  case  of  the  needy,  they  think  that 
whatever  they  bestow  on  men  of  this  kind  is 
thrown  away.  Hence  that  sentiment  of  Plautus 
is  detestable  :  ^  — 

"  He  deserves  ill  who  gives  food  to  a  beggar ; 
For  that  which  he  gives  is  thrown  away,  and 
It  lengthens  out  the  life  of  the  other  to  his  misery." 

But  perhaps  the  poet  spoke  for  the  actor. 5 

What  does  Marcus  TuUius  say  in  his  books 
respecting  Ofifices?  Does  he  not  also  advise 
that  bounty  should  not  be  employed  at  all  ?  For 
thus  he  speaks  :  ^  "  Bounty,  which  proceeds  from 
our  estate,  drains  the  very  source  of  our  liberal- 
ity ;  and  thus  liberality  is  destroyed  by  liberality  : 
for  the  more  numerous  they  are  towards  whom 
you  practise  it,  the  less  you  will  be  able  to  prac- 
tise it  towards  many."  And  he  also  says  shortly 
afterwards  :  "  But  what  is  more  foolish  than  so 
to  act  that  you  may  not  be  able  to  continue  to 
do  that  which  you  do  willingly  ?  "  This  professor 
of  wisdom  plainly  keeps  men  back  from  acts  of 
kindness,  and  advises  them  carefully  to  guard 
their  property,  and  to  preserve  their  money-chest 
in  safety,  rather  than  to  follow  justice.  And 
when  he  perceived  that  this  was  inhuman  and 
wicked,  soon  afterwards,  in  another  chapter,  as 
though  moved  by  repentance,  he  thus  spoke  ; 
"  Sometimes,  however,  we  must  exercise  bounty 
in  giving  :  nor  is  this  kind  of  lil)erality  altogether 
to  be  rejected  ;  and  we  must  give  from  our  prop- 
erty to  suitable  ^  persons  when  they  are  in  need 
of  assistance."     What  is  the  meaning  of  "  suit- 


^   TriiiHVim.,  ii.  2.  58. 

5  Pro  persona. 

6  De  Offic,  ii.  15. 

">  Idoneis.  Lactantius  uses  this  word  as  though  its  meaning  were 
"the  rich;  "  and  though  it  seems  to  have  passed  into  this  sense  in 
later  times,  it  is  plain  from  the  very  words  of  Cicero  himself  that  he 
uses  it  of  deserving  persons  who  need  assistance. 


Chap.  XII.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


175 


able?  "  Assuredly  those  who  are  able  to  restore 
and  give  back  the  favour.'  If  Cicero  were  now 
alive,  I  should  certainly  exclaim  :  Here,  here, 
Marcus  Tullius,  you  have  erred  from  true  justice  ; 
and  you  have  taken  it  away  by  one  word,  since 
you  measured  the  offices  of  piety  and  humanity 
by  utility.  For  we  must  not  bestow  our  bounty 
on  suitable  objects,  but  as  much  as  possible  on 
unsuitable  objects.  For  that  will  be  done  with 
justice,  piety,  and  humanity,  which  you  shall  do 
without  the  hope  of  any  return  ! 

This  is  that  true  and  genuine  justice,  of  which 
you  say  that  you  have  no  real  and  life-like  fig- 
ure.^ You  yourself  exclaim  in  many  places  that 
virtue  is  not  mercenary ;  and  you  confess  in  the 
books  of  your  Laws  ^  that  liberality  is  gratuitous, 
in  these  words  :  "  Nor  is  it  doubtful  that  he  who 
is  called  liberal  and  generous  is  influenced  by  a 
sense  of  duty,  and  not  by  advantage."  Why 
therefore  do  you  bestow  your  bounty  on  suitable 
persons,  unless  it  be  that  you  may  afterwards 
receive  a  reward?  With  you,  therefore,  as  the 
author  and  teacher  of  justice,  whosoever  shall 
not  be  a  suitable  person  will  be  worn  out  with 
nakedness,  thirst,  and  hunger  ;  nor  will  men  who 
are  rich  and  abundantly  supplied,  even  to  luxu- 
riousness,  assist  his  last  extremity.  If  virtue  does 
not  exact  a  reward ;  if,  as  you  say,  it  is  to  be 
sought  on  its  own  account,  then  estimate  justice, 
which  is  the  mother  and  chief  of  the  virtues,  at 
its  own  price,  and  not  according  to  your  advan- 
tage :  give  especially  to  him  from  whom  you 
hope  for  nothing  in  return.  Why  do  you  select 
persons?  Why  do  you  look  at  bodily  forms? 
He  is  to  be  esteemed  by  you  as  a  man,  whoever 
it  is  that  implores  you,  because  he  considers  you 
a  man.  Cast  away  those  outlines  and  sketches 
of  justice,  and  hold  fast  justice  itself,  true  and 
fashioned  to  the  life.  Be  bountiful  to  the  blind, 
the  feeble,  the  lame,  the  destitute,  who  must  die 
unless  you  bestow  your  bounty  upon  them.  They 
are  useless  to  men,  but  they  are  serviceable  to 
God,  who  retains  them  in  life,  who  endues  them 
with  breath,  who  vouchsafes  to  them  the  light. 
Cherish  as  far  as  in  you  lies,  and  support  with 
kindness,  the  lives  of  men,  that  they  may  not  be 
extinguished.  He  who  is  able  to  succour  one 
on  the  point  of  perishing,  if  he  fails  to  do  so, 
kills  him.  But  they,  because  they  neither  retain 
their  nature,  nor  know  what  reward  there  is  in 
this,  while  they  fear  to  lose,  do  lose,  and  fall  into 
that  which  they  chiefly  guard  against ;  so  that 
whatever  they  bestow  is  either  lost  altogether,  or 
profits  only  for  the  briefest  time.  For  they  who 
refuse  a  small  gift  to  the  wretched,  who  wish  to 
preserve  humanity  without  any  loss  to  them- 
selves,   squander   their    i)roperty,    so    that    they 


I  [Luke  vi.  32-34.] 

^  De  O/fic,  iii.  17.     Solidam  et  expressam. 

3  [De  Leg.,  iii.,  and  Dc  Uffic,  i.  cap.  16. J 


either  acquire  for  themselves  frail  and  perishable 
things,  or  they  certainly  gain  nothing  by  their 
own  great  loss. 

For  what  must  be  said  of  those  who,  induced 
by  the  vanity  of  popular  favour,-*  expend  on  the 
exhibition  of  shows  wealth  that  would  be  suffi- 
cient even  for  great  cities?  Must  we  not  say 
that  they  are  senseless  and  mad  who  bestow 
upon  the  people  that  which  is  both  lost  to  them- 
selves, and  which  none  of  those  on  whom  it  is 
bestowed  receives?  Therefore,  as  all  pleasure 
is  short  and  perishable,  and  esj^ecially  that  of 
the  eyes  and  ears,  men  either  forget  and  are 
ungrateful  for  the  expenses  incurred  by  another, 
or  they  are  even  offended  if  the  caprice  of  the 
people  is  not  satisfied  :  so  that  most  foolish  men 
have  even  acquired  evil  for  themselves  by  evil ; 
or  if  they  have  thus  succeeded  in  pleasing,  they 
gain  nothing  more  than  empty  favour  and  the 
talk  5  of  a  few  days.  Thus  every  day  the  estates 
of  most  trifling  men  are  expended  on  superflu- 
ous matters.  Do  they  then  act  more  wisely  who 
exhibit  to  their  fellow-citizens  more  useful  and 
lasting  gifts?  They,  for  instance,  who  by  the 
building  of  public  works  seek  a  lasting  memory 
for  their  name  ?  Not  even  do  they  act  rightly 
in  burying  their  property  in  the  earth ;  because 
the  remembrance  of  them  neither  bestows  any- 
thing upon  the  dead,  nor  are  their  works  eternal, 
inasmuch  as  they  are  either  thrown  down  and 
destroyed  by  a  single  earthquake,  or  are  con- 
sumed by  an  accidental  fire,  or  they  are  over- 
thrown by  some  attack  of  an  enemy,  or  at  any 
rate  they  decay  and  fall  to  pieces  by  mere  length 
of  time.  For  there  is  nothing,  as  the  orator 
says,^  made  by  the  work  of  man's  hand  which 
length  of  time  does  not  weaken  and  destroy. 
But  this  justice  of  which  we  speak,  and  mercy, 
flourish  more  every  day.  They  therefore  act 
better  who  bestow  their  bounty  on  their  tribes- 
men and  clients,  for  they  bestow  something  on 
men,  and  profit  them ;  but  that  is  not  true  and 
just  bounty,  for  there  is  no  conferring  of  a  bene- 
fit where  there  is  no  necessity.  Therefore,  what- 
ever is  given  to  those  who  are  not  in  need,  for 
the  sake  of  popularity,  is  thrown  away  ;  or  it  is 
repaid  with  interest,  and  thus  it  will  not  be  the 
conferring  of  a  benefit.  And  although  it  is 
pleasing  to  those  to  whom  it  is  given,  still  it  is 
not  just,  because  if  it  is  not  done,  no  evil  follows. 
Therefore  the  only  sure  and  true  office  of  liber- 
ality is  to  support  the  needy  and  unserviceable. 

CHAP.  XII. OF   THE    KINDS    OF  BENEFICENCE,  AND 

WORKS    OF   MERCY. 

This  is  that  perfect  justice  which  ])rotects  hu- 
man   society,    concerning    which    philosophers 


♦  Popular!   levitate   ducti:    an    e.vpression    somewhat   similar  to 
'  popularis  aura." 
5   I'abulam. 
f"  Cic,  fro  Murcelh.     [Niliil  opere  et  manu  factum.] 


176 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VI. 


speak.  This  is  the  chief  and  truest  advantage 
of  riches ;  not  to  use  wealth  for  the  particular 
pleasure  of  an  individual,  but  for  the  welfare  of 
many ;  not  for  one's  own  immediate  enjoyment, 
but  for  justice,  which  alone  does  not  perish. 
We  must  therefore  by  all  means  keep  in  mind, 
that  the  hope  of  receiving  in  return  must  be  alto- 
gether absent  from  the  duty  of  showing  mercy  : 
for  the  reward  of  this  work  and  duty  must  be 
expected  from  God  alone ;  for  if  you  should 
expect  it  from  man,  then  that  will  not  be  kind- 
ness, but  the  lending  of  a  benefit  at  interest ; ' 
nor  can  he  seem  to  have  desen^ed  well  who 
affords  that  which  he  does,  not  to  another,  but 
to  himself.  And  yet  the  matter  comes  to  this, 
that  whatever  a  man  has  bestowed  upon  another, 
hoping  for  no  advantage  from  him,  he  really  be- 
stows upon  himself,  for  he  will  receive  a  reward 
from  God.  God  has  also  enjoined,  that  if  at 
any  time  we  make  a  feast,  we  should  invite  to 
the  entertainment  those  who  cannot  invite  us  in 
return,  and  thus  make  us  a  recompense,  so  that 
no  action  of  our  life  should  be  without  the  exer- 
cise of  mercy.  Nor,  however,  let  any  one  think 
that  he  is  debarred  from  intercourse  with  his 
friends  or  kindness  with  his  neighbours.  But 
God  has  made  known  to  us  what  is  our  true  and 
just  work  :  we  ought  thus  to  live  with  our  neigh- 
bours, provided  that  we  know  that  the  one 
manner  of  living  relates  to  man,  the  other  to 
God.^ 

Therefore  hospitality  is  a  principal  virtue,  as 
the  philosophers  also  say ;  but  they  turn  it  aside 
from  true  justice,  and  forcibly  apply  ^  it  to  ad- 
vantage. Cicero  says  :  +  "  Hospitality  was  rightly 
praised  by  Theophrastus.  For  (as  it  appears  to 
me)  it  is  highly  becoming  that  the  houses  of 
illustrious  men  should  be  open  to  illustrious 
guests."  He  has  here  committed  the  same  error 
which  he  then  did,  when  he  said  that  we  must 
bestow  our  bounty  on  "  suitable  "  persons.  For 
the  house  of  a  just  and  wise  man  ought  not  to 
be  open  to  the  illustrious,  but  to  the  lowly  and 
abject.  For  those  illustrious  and  powerful  men 
cannot  be  in  want  of  anything,  since  they  are 
sufticiently  protected  and  honoured  by  their  own 
opulence.  But  nothing  is  to  be  done  by  a  just 
man  except  that  which  is  a  benefit.  But  if  the 
benefit  is  returned,  it  is  destroyed  and  brought 
to  an  end  ;  for  we  cannot  possess  in  its  com- 
pleteness that  for  which  a  price  has  been  paid  to 
us.  Therefore  the  principle  of  justice  is  em- 
ployed about  those  benefits  which  have  remained 
safe  and  uncorrupted  ;  but  they  cannot  thus  re- 


'  Beneficii  fcneratio. 

2  The  meaning  appears  to  be  this:  To  benefit  our  friends  and 
relatives,  relates  to  man,  i.e.,  is  a  merely  human  work;  but  to  benefit 
those  who  cannot  make  a  recompense  is  a  divine  work,  and  its  reward 
is  to  be  expected  from  God. 

3  Rapiunt. 

*  De  Offic,  ii.  18. 


main  by  any  other  means  than  if  they  are  be- 
stowed upon  those  men  who  can  in  no  way  profit 
us.  But  in  receiving  illustrious  men,  he  looked 
to  nothing  else  but  utility ;  nor  did  the  ingenious 
man  conceal  what  advantage  he  hoped  from  it. 
For  he  says  that  he  who  does  that  will  become 
powerful  among  foreigners  by  the  favour  of  the 
leading  men,  whom  he  will  have  bound  to  him- 
self by  the  right  of  hospitality  and  friendship. 
O  by  how  many  arguments  might  the  inconsist- 
ency of  Cicero  be  proved,  if  this  were  my  object ! 
Nor  would  he  be  convicted  so  much  by  my 
words  as  by  his  own.  For  he  also  says,  that  the 
more  any  one  refers  all  his  actions  to  his  own 
advantage,  the  less  he  is  a  good  man.  He  also 
says,  that  it  is  not  the  part  of  a  simple  and  open 
man  to  ingratiate  himself  in  the  favour  of  others,5 
to  pretend  and  allege  anything,  to  appear  to  be 
doing  one  thing  when  he  is  doing  another,  to 
feign  that  he  is  bestowing  upon  another  that 
which  he  is  bestowing  upon  himself;  but  that 
this  is  rather  the  part  of  one  who  is  designing^ 
and  crafty,  deceitful  and  treacherous.  But  how 
could  he  maintain  that  that  ambitious  hospitality 
was  not  evil  intention  ?  7  "  Do  you  run  round 
through  all  the  gates,  that  you  may  invite  to 
your  house  the  chief  men  of  the  nations  and 
cities  as  they  arrive,  that  by  their  means  you 
may  acquire  influence  with  their  citizens  ;  and 
wish  yourself  to  be  called  just,  and  kind,  and 
hospitable,  though  you  are  studying  to  promote 
your  own  advantage  ?  "  But  did  he  not  say  this 
rather  incautiously?  For  what  is  less  suitable 
for  Cicero  ?  But  through  his  ignorance  of  true 
justice  he  knowingly  and  with  foresight  fell  into 
this  snare.  And  that  he  might  be  pardoned  for 
this,  he  testified  that  he  does  not  give  precepts 
with  reference  to  true  justice,  which  he  does  not 
hold,  but  with  reference  to  a  sketch  and  outline 
of  justice.  Therefore  we  must  pardon  this  teacher 
who  uses  sketches  and  outlines,^  nor  must  we 
require  the  truth  from  him  who  admits  that  he 
is  ignorant  of  it. 

The  ransoming  of  captives  is  a  great  and  no- 
ble exercise  of  justice,  of  which  the  same  Tul- 
hus  also  approved.^  "And  this  liberality,"  he 
says,  "  is  serviceable  even  to  the  state,  that  cap- 
tives should  be  ransomed  from  slavery,  and  that 
those  of  slender  resources  should  be  provided 
for.  And  I  greatly  prefer  this  practice  of  liber- 
ality to  lavish  expenditure  on  shows.  This  is 
the  part  of  great  and  eminent  men."  There- 
fore it  is  the  appropriate  work  of  the  just  to 
support  the  poor  and  to  ransom  captives,  since 


5  Ambire. 

'i  Malitiosi  et  astuti. 

7  Malitia,  roguery.  The  word  properly  signifies  some  legal  trick 
by  which  the  ends  of  justice  are  frustrated,  though  the  letter  of  the 
law  is  not  broken. 

'  Umbratico  et  imaginario  praeceptori. 

9  De  OJJicih,  ii.  i8. 


Chap.  XII.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


177 


among  the  unjust  if  any  do  these  things  they 
are  called  great  and  eminent.  For  it  is  de- 
serving of  the  greatest  praise  for  those  to  con- 
fer benefit  from  whom  no  one  expected  such 
conduct.  For  he  who  does  good  to  a  relative, 
or  neighbour,  or  friend,  either  deserves  no  praise, 
or  certainly  no  great  praise,  because  he  is  bound 
to  do  it,  and  he  would  be  impious  and  detesta- 
ble if  he  did  not  do  that  which  both  nature 
itself  and  relationship  require  ;  and  if  he  does 
it,  he  does  it  not  so  much  for  the  sake  of  obtain- 
ing glory  as  of  avoiding  censure.  But  he  who 
does  it  to  a  stranger  and  an  unknown  person,  he 
truly  is  worthy  of  praise,  because  he  was  led  to 
do  it  by  kindness  only.  Justice  therefore  exists 
there,  where  there  is  no  obligation  of  necessity 
for  conferring  a  benefit.  He  ought  not  there- 
fore to  have  preferred  this  duty  of  generosity  to 
expenditure  on  shows  ;  for  this  is  the  part  of  one 
making  a  comparison,  and  of  two  goods  choosing 
that  which  is  the  better.  For  that  profusion  of 
men  throwing  away  their  property  into  the  sea 
is  vain  and  trifling,  and  very  far  removed  from 
all  justice.  Therefore  they  are  not  even  to  be 
called  gifts,'  in  which  no  one  receives  but  he 
who  does  not  deserve  to  receive. 

Nor  is  it  less  a  great  work  of  justice  to  protect 
and  defend  orphans  and  widows  who  are  desti- 
tute and  stand  in  need  of  assistance  ;  and  there- 
fore that  divine  law  prescribes  this  to  all,  since 
all  good  judges  deem  that  it  belongs  to  their 
office  to  favour  them  with  natural  kindness,  and 
to  strive  to  benefit  them.  But  these  works  are 
especially  ours,  since  we  have  received  the  law, 
and  the  words  of  God  Himself  giving  us  instruc- 
tions. For  they  perceive  that  it  is  naturally  just 
to  protect  those  who  need  protection,  but  they 
do  not  perceive  why  it  is  so.  For  God,  to 
whom  everlasting  mercy  belongs,  on  this  account 
commands  that  widows  and  orphans  should  be 
defended  and  cherished,  that  no  one  through 
regard  and  pity  for  his  pledges  ^  should  be  pre- 
vented from  undergoing  death  in  behalf  of  jus- 
tice and  faith,  but  should  encounter  it  with 
promptitude  and  boldness,  since  he  knows  that 
he  leaves  his  beloved  ones  to  the  care  of  God, 
and  that  they  will  never  want  protection.  Also 
to  undertake  the  care  and  support  of  the  sick, 
who  need  some  one  to  assist  them,  is  the  part 
of  the  greatest  kindness,  and  of  great  benefi- 
cence ;  3  and  he  who  shall  do  this  will  both  gain 
a  living  sacrifice  to  God,  and  that  which  he  has 
given  to  another  for  a  time  he  will  himself  re- 
ceive from  God  for  eternity.  The  last  and 
greatest  office  of  piety  is  the  burying  of  stran- 
gers and  the  poor ;  which  subject  those  teachers 


'  Muner.i.     The  same  word  is  used  for  "  shows,"  as  of  gladiators, 
or  contests  of  wild  beasts,  exhibited  to  the  people. 
-  i.e  ,  children. 
3  Operationis. 


of  virtue  and  justice  have  not  touched  upon  at 
all.  For  they  were  unable  to  see  this,  who 
measured  all  their  duties  by  utility.  For  in  the 
other  things  which  have  been  mentioned  above, 
although  they  did  not  keep  the  true  path,  yet, 
since  they  discovered  some  advantage  in  these 
things,  retained  as  it  were  by  a  kind  of  inkling  ■♦ 
of  the  truth,  they  wandered  to  a  less  distance  ; 
but  they  abandoned  this  because  they  were  un- 
able to  see  any  advantage  in  it. 

Moreover,  there  have  not  been  wanting  those 
who  esteemed  burial  as  superfluous,  and  said  that 
it  was  no  evil  to  lie  unburied  and  neglected  ;  but 
their  impious  wisdom  is  rejected  alike  by  the 
whole  human  race,  and  by  the  divine  expressions 
which  command  the  performance  of  the  rite. 5 
But  they  do  not  venture  to  say  that  it  ought 
not  to  be  done,  but  that,  if  it  happens  to  be 
omitted,  no  inconvenience  is  the  result.  There- 
fore in  that  matter  they  discharge  the  office,  not 
so  much  of  those  who  give  precepts,  as  of  those 
who  suggest  consolation,  that  if  this  shall  by 
chance  have  occurred  to  a  wise  man,  he  should 
not  deem  himself  wretched  on  this  account. 
But  we  do  not  speak  of  that  which  ought  to  be 
endured  by  a  wise  man,  but  of  that  which  he 
himself  ought  to  do.  Therefore  we  do  not  now 
inquire  whether  the  whole  system  of  burial  is 
serviceable  or  not ;  but  this,  even  though  it  be 
useless,  as  they  imagine,  must  nevertheless  be 
practised,  even  on  this  account  only,  that  it  ap- 
pears among  men  to  be  done  rightly  and  kindly. 
For  it  is  the  feeling  which  is  inquired  into,  and 
it  is  the  purpose  which  is  weighed.  Therefore 
we  will  not  suffer  the  image  and  workmanship 
of  God  to  lie  exposed  as  a  prey  to  beasts  and 
birds,  but  we  will  restore  it  to  the  earth,  from 
which  it  had  its  origin  ;  and  although  it  be  in  the 
case  of  an  unknown  man,  we  will  fulfil  the  office 
of  relatives,  into  whose  place,  since  they  are 
wanting,  let  kindness  succeed ;  and  wherever 
there  shall  be  need  of  man,  there  we  will  think 
that  our  duty  is  required.^  But  in  what  does  the 
nature  of  justice  more  consist  than  in  our  afford- 
ing to  strangers  through  kindness,  that  wliich  we 
render  to  our  own  relatives  through  affection? 
And  this  kindness  is  much  more  sure  and  just 
when  it  is  now  afforded,  not  to  the  man  who  is 
insensible,  but  to  God  alone,  to  whom  a  just 
work  is  a  most  acceptable  sacrifice.  Some  one 
will  perhaps  say  :  If  I  shall  do  all  these  things,  I 
shall  have  no  possessions.  For  what  if  a  great 
number  of  men  shall  be  in  want,  shall  suffer  cold, 
shall  be  taken  captive,  shall  die,  since  one  who 
acts  thus  must  deprive  himself  of  his  property 
even  in  a  single  day,  shall  I  throw  away  the  es- 


^  Quasi  odore  quodam  veritatis.     The  word  "  odor  ' 
used  to  express  "  n  presentiment"  or  "  sus])icion." 
5   [Gen.  xhx.  29-31;   Mark  xiv.  8,  9.] 
*  [Ennius;  also  in  Cicero,  De  Offic,  i.  cap.  16] 


IS  sometimes 


178 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VI. 


tate  acquired  by  my  own  labour  or  by  that  of  my 
ancestors,  so  that  after  this  I  myself  must  live 
by  the  pity  of  others  ? 

Why  do  you  so  pusillanimously  fear  poverty, 
which'  even  your  philosophers  praise,  and  bear 
witness  that  nothing  is  safer  and  nothing  more 
calm  than  this  ?     That  which  you  fear  is  a  haven 
ac^ainst   anxieties.     Do  you   not   know  to   how 
nTany  dangers,  to  how  many  accidents,  you  are 
exposed  with  these  evil  resources  ?     These  will 
treat  you  well  if  they  shall   pass  without  your 
bloodshed.     But   you   walk    about    laden   with 
booty,  and  you  bear  spoils  which  may  excite  the 
minds'  even  of  your  own  relatives.     Why,  then, 
do  you  hesitate  to  lay  that  out  well  which  per- 
haps a  single  robbery  will  snatch  away  from  you, 
or  a  proscription  suddenly  arising,  or  the  plun- 
dering of  an  enemy?     Why  do  you  fear  to  make 
a  frail  and  perishable  good  everlasting,  or  to  en- 
trust vour  treasures  to  God  as  their  preserver,  in 
which  case  you  need  not  fear  thief  and  robber, 
nor  rust,  nor  tyrant?     He  who  is  rich  towards 
God  can  never  be  poor.'     If  you  esteem  justice 
so  highly,  lay  aside  the  burthens  which  press  you, 
and  follow  k ;    free   yourself  from   fetters   and 
chains,  that  you  may  run  to  God  without  any 
impediment.     It  is  the  part  of  a  great  and  lofty 
mind  to  despise  and  trample  upon  mortal  affairs. 
But  if  you  do  not  comprehend  this  virtue,  that 
you  may  bestow  your  riches  upon  the  altar  ^  of 
God,  in  order  that  you  may  provide  for  yourself 
firmer  possessions  than  these    frail  ones,  I  will 
free  you  from  fear.     All  these  precepts  are  not 
given  to  you  alone,  but  to  all  the  people  who  are 
united  in  mind,  and  hold  together  as  one  man. 
If  you  are  not  adequate  to  the  performance  of 
great  works  alone,  cultivate  justice  with  all  your 
power,  in  such  a  manner,  however,  that  you  may 
excel  others  in  work  as  much  as  you  excel  them 
in  riches.    And  do  not  think  that  you  are  advised 
to   lessen   or  exhaust   your  property;  but   that 
which  you  would  have  expended  on  superfluities, 
turn  to  better  uses.     Devote  to  the  ransoming 
of  captives  that  from  which  you  purchase  beasts  ; 
maintain  the  poor  with  that  from  which  you  feed 
wild  beasts ;  bury  the  innocent  dead  with  that 
from  which   you  provide    men  for  the   sword.^ 
What  does  it  profit  to  enrich  men  of  abandoned 
wickedness,  who  fight  with  beasts,-*  and  to  equip 
them  for  crimes?     Transfer  things  about  to  be 
miserably  thrown  away  to  the  great  sacrifice,  that 
in  return  for  these  true  gifts  you  may  have  an 
everlasting  gift  from  God.     Mercy  has  a  great 
reward  ;  for  God  promises  it,  that  He  will  remit 
all  sins.     If  you  shall  hear,  He  says,  the  prayers 
of  your  suppliant,  I  also  will  hear  yours  ;  if  you 


shall  pity  those  in  distress,  I  also  will  pity  you  in 
your  distress.  But  if  you  shall  not  regard  nor 
assist  them,  I  also  will  bear  a  mind  like  your  own 
against  you,  and  I  will  judge  you  by  your  own 
laws. 5 


I   [i  Tim.  vi.  8-10]  „   .       ■ 

2    In  aram  Dei.     Olhers  read  "  arcam,    the  chest. 
■5  i  e.,  "  gladiators  purchased  from  a  trainer  for  the  gratification  of 

*  Bestiarios :  men  who  fought  with  beasts  in  the  amphitheatre. 


CHAP.     XIII. OF     REPENTANCE,     OF     MERCY,     AND 

THE    FORGIVENESS    OF    SINS. 

As  often,  therefore,  as  you  are  asked  for  aid, 
believe  that  you  are  tried  by  God,  that  it  may 
be  seen  whether  you  are  worthy  of  being  heard. 
Examine  your  own  conscience,  and,  as  far  as 
you  are  able,  heal  your  wounds.     Nor,  however, 
because  offences  are  removed  by  bounty,  think 
that  a  licence  is  given  you   for  sinning.     For 
they  are  done  away  with,  if  you  are  bountiful  to 
God  because  you  have  sinned  ;    for  if  you  sin 
through  reliance  on  your  bounty,  they  are  not 
done  away  with.      For  God   especially  desires 
that  men  shall  be  cleansed  from  their  sins,  and 
therefore   He  commands  them  to  repent.     But 
to  repent  is  nothing  else  than  to   profess  and 
to  affirm  that  one  will  sin  no  more.     Therefore 
they  are  pardoned  who  unawares  and  incautious- 
ly glide  into  sin ;  he  who  sins  wilfully  has  no 
pardon.     Nor,  however,  if  any  one   shall  have 
been  purified  from  all  stain  of  sin,  let  him  think 
that  he  may  abstain  from  the  work  of  bouAty 
because  he  has  no  faults  to  blot  out.     Nay,  in 
truth,  he  is  then  more  bound  to  exercise  jus- 
tice when  he  is  become  just,  so  that  that  which 
he  had  before  done  for  the  healing  of  his  wounds 
he  may  afterwards  do  for  the  praise  and  glory  of 
virtue.     To  this  is  added,  that  no  one  can  be 
without  fault  as  long  as  he  is  burthened  with  a 
covering  of  flesh,  the  infirmity  of  which  is  sub- 
ject to  the  dominion  of  sin  in  a  threefold  man- 
ner —  in  deeds,  in  words,  and  thoughts. 

By  these  steps  justice  advances  to  the  greatest 
height.  The  first  step  of  virtue  is  to  abstain 
from  evil  works  ;  the  second,  to  abstain  also  from 
evil  words  ;  the  third,  to  abstain  even  from  the 
thoughts  of  evil  things.  He  who  ascends  the 
first  step  is  sufficiently  just;  he  who  ascends 
the  second  is  now  of  perfect  virtue,  since  he  of- 
fends neither  in  deeds  nor  in  conversation  ;  ^  he 
who  ascends  the  third  appears  truly  to  have  at- 
tained the  likeness  of  God.  For  it  is  almost 
beyond  the  measure  of  man  not  even  to  admit 
to  the  thought  7  that  which  is  either  bad  in  ac- 
tion or  improper  in  speech.  Therefore  even 
just  men,  who  can  refrain  from  every  unjust 
work,  are  sometimes,  however,  overcome  by 
frailty  itself,  so  that  they  either  speak  evil  in 
anger,  or,  at  the  sight  of  delightful  things,  they 
desire  them  with  silent  thought.  But  if  the 
condition  of  mortality  does  not  suffer  a  man  to 


Matt,  xviii.  21-35.     Exposition  of  vi.  14.] 
Jas.  iii.  2.]  .        J, 

n  cogitationem.     Others  read  '  cogitatione. 


Chap.  XV.] 


THE   DIVINE  INSTITUTES. 


179 


be  pure  from  every  stain,  the  faults  of  the  flesh 
ought  therefore  to  be  done  away  with  by  contin- 
ual bounty.  For  it  is  the  single  work  of  a  man 
who  is  wise,  and  just,  and  worthy  of  life,  to  lay 
out  his  riches  on  justice  alone  ;  for  assuredly  he 
who  is  without  this,  although  he  should  surpass 
Crcesus  or  Crassus  in  riches,  is  to  be  esteemed 
as  poor,  as  naked,  as  a  beggar.  Therefore  we 
must  use  our  efforts  that  we  may  be  clothed  with 
the  garment  of  justice  and  piety,  of  which  no 
one  may  deprive  us,  which  may  furnish  us  with 
an  everlasting  ornament.  For  if  the  worship- 
pers of  gods  adore  senseless  images,  and  bestow 
upon  them  whatever  they  have  which  is  precious, 
though  they  can  neither  make  use  of  them  nor 
give  thanks  because  they  have  received  them, 
how  much  more  just  and  true  is  it  to  reverence  I 
the  living  images  of  God,  that  you  may  gain  the 
favour  of  the  living  God  !  For  as  these  make 
use  of  what  they  have  received,  and  give  thanks, 
so  God,  in  whose  sight  you  shall  have  done  that 
which  is  good,  will  both  approve  of  it  and  re- 
ward your  piety. 

CHAP.  XIV. OF  THE  AFFECTIONS,  AND  THE  OPIN- 
ION OF  THE  STOICS  RESPECTING  THEM  ;  AND 
OF    VIRTUE,    THE    VICES,    AND    MERCY. 

If,  therefore,  mercy  is  a  distinguished  and  ex- 
cellent gift  in  man,  and  that  is  judged  to  be 
very  good  by  the  consent  both  of  the  good  and 
the  evil,  it  appears  that  philosophers  were  far 
distant  from  the  good  of  man,  who  neither  en- 
joined nor  practised  anything  of  this  kind,  but 
always  esteemed  as  a  vice  that  virtue  which 
almost  holds  the  first  place  in  man.  It  pleases 
me  here  to  bring  forward  one  subject  of  phi- 
losophy, that  we  may  more  fully  refute  the 
errors  of  those  who  call  mercy,  desire,  and  fear, 
diseases  of  the  ,soul.  They  indeed  attempt  to 
distinguish  virtues  from  vices,  which  is  truly  a 
very  easy  matter.  For  who  cannot  distinguish 
a  liberal  man  from  one  who  is  prodigal  (as  they 
do),  or  a  frugal  man  from  one  who  is  mean,  or 
a  calm  man  from  one  who  is  slothful,  or  a  cau- 
tious man  from  one  who  is  timid?  Because 
these  things  which  are  good  have  their  limits, 
and  if  they  shall  exceed  these  limits,  fall  into 
vices  ;  so  that  constancy,  unless  it  is  undertaken 
for  the  truth,  becomes  shamelessness.  In  like 
manner,  bravery,  if  it  shall  undergo  certain  dan- 
ger, without  the  compulsion  of  any  necessity,  or 
not  for  an  honourable  cause,  is  changed  into 
rashness.  Freedom  of  speech  also,  if  it  attack 
others  rather  than  oppose  those  who  attack  it, 
is  obstinacy.  Severity  also,  unless  it  restrain 
itself  within  the  befitting  punishments  of  the 
guilty,  becomes  savage  cruelty. 

Therefore  they  say,  that  those  who  appear 
evil  do  not  sin  of  their  own  accord,  or  choose 


evils  by  preference,  but  that,  erring  '  through  the 
appearance  of  good,  they  fall  into  evils,  while 
they  are  ignorant  of  the  distinction  between 
good  things  and  evil.  These  things  are  not  in- 
deed false,  but  they  are  all  referred  to  the  body. 
For  to  be  frugal,  or  constant,  or  cautious,  or 
calm,  or  grave,  or  severe,  are  virtues  indeed,  but 
virtues  which  relate  to  this  short  ^  life.  But  we 
who  despise  this  life  have  other  virtues  set  before 
us,  respecting  which  philosophers  could  not  by 
any  means  even  conjecture.  Therefore  they 
regarded  certain  virtues  as  vices,  and  certain 
vices  as  virtues.  For  the  Stoics  take  away  from 
man  all  the  affections,  by  the  impulse  of  which 
the  soul  is  moved  —  desire,  joy,  fear,  sorrow  : 
the  two  former  of  which  arise  from  good  things, 
either  future  or  present ;  the  latter  from  evil 
things.  In  the  same  manner,  they  call  these 
four  (as  I  said)  diseases,  not  so  much  inserted 
in  us  by  nature  as  undertaken  through  a  per- 
verted opinion ;  and  therefore  they  think  that 
these  can  be  eradicateei,  if  the  false  notion  of 
good  and  evil  things  is  taken  away.  For  if  the 
wise  man  thinks  nothing  good  or  evil,  he  will 
neither  be  inflamed  with  desire,  nor  be  trans- 
ported with  joy,  nor  be  alarmed  with  fear,  nor 
suffer  his  spirits  to  droop  ^  through  sadness. 
We  shall  presently  see  whether  they  effect  that 
which  they  wish,  or  what  it  is  which  they  do 
effect :  in  the  meantime  their  purpose  is  arro- 
gant and  almost  mad,  who  think  that  they  apply 
a  remedy,  and  that  they  are  able  to  strive  in 
opposition  to  the  force  and  system  of  nature. 


CHAP.  XV.  OF   THE    AFFECTIONS,    AND    THE    OPIN- 
ION   OF   THE    PERIPATETICS    RESPECTING   THEM. 

For,  that  these  things  are  natural  and  not 
voluntary,  the  nature  of  all  living  beings  shows, 
which  is  moved  by  all  these  affections.  There- 
fore the  Peripatetics  act  better,  who  say  that  all 
these  cannot  be  taken  from  us,  because  they 
were  born  with  us ;  and  they  endeavour  to  show 
how  providently  and  how  necessarily  God,  or 
nature  (for  so  they  term  it),  armed  us  with 
these  affections  ;  whicli,  however,  because  they 
generally  become  vicious  if  they  are  in  excess, 
can  be  advantageously  regulated  by  man,  —  a 
limit  being  applied,  so  that  there  may  be  left  to 
man  as  much  as  is  sufficient  for  nature.  Not  an 
unwise  disputation,  if,  as  I  said,  all  things  were 
not  referred  to  this  life.  The  Stoics  therefore 
are  mad  who  do  not  regulate  but  cut  them  out, 
and  wish  by  some  means  or  other  to  deprive 
man  of  powers  implanted  in  him  by  nature. 
And  this  is  equivalent  to  a  desire  of  taking  away 
timidity  from  stags,  or  poison  from  serpents,  or 


*  Lapses.     [All  this  shows  the  need  of  an  Augustine.] 

2  Temporarise.     [Admirable  so  far  as  our  author  goes.J 

3  Coutrahetur. 


i8o 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VI. 


rage  from  wild  beasts,  or  gentleness  from  cattle. 
For  those  qualities  wliich  have  been  given  sepa- 
rately to  dumb  animals,  are  altogether  given  to 
man  at  the  same  time.  But  if,  as  physicians 
affirm,  the  affection  of  joy  has  its  seat  in  the 
spleen,"  that  of  anger  in  the  gall,  of  desire  in 
the  liver,  of  fear  in  the  heart,  it  is  easier  to  kill 
the  animal  itself  than  to  tear  anything  from  the 
body ;  for  this  is  to  wish  to  change  the  nature 
of  the  living  creature.  But  the  skilful  men  do 
not  understand  that  when  they  take  away  vices 
from  man,  they  also  take  away  virtue,  for  which 
alone  they  are  making  a  place.  For  if  it  is 
virtue  in  the  midst  of  the  impetuosity  of  anger 
to  restrain  and  check  oneself,  which  they  can- 
not deny,  then  he  who  is  without  anger  is  also 
without  virtue.  If  it  is  virtue  to  control  the 
lust  of  the  body,  he  must  be  free  from  virtue 
who  has  no  lust  which  he  may  regulate.  If 
it  is  virtue  to  curb  the  desire  from  coveting  that 
which  belongs  to  another,  he  certainly  can  have 
no  virtue  who  is  without  that,  to  the  restraining 
of  which  the  exercise  of  virtue  is  applied. 
Where,  therefore,  there  are  no  vices,  there  is  no 
place  even  for  virtue,  as  there  is  no  place  for  vic- 
tory where  there  is  no  adversary.  And  so  it 
comes  to  pass  that  there  can  be  no  good  in  this 
life  without  evil.  An  affection  therefore  is  a 
kind  of  natural  fruitfulness  ^  of  the  powers  of 
the  mind.  For  as  a  field  which  is  naturally 
fruitful  produces  an  abundant  crop  of  briars,^  so 
the  mind  which  is  uncultivated  is  overgrown  with 
vices  flourishing  of  their  own  accord,  as  with 
thorns.  But  when  the  true  cultivator  has  applied 
himself,  immediately  vices  give  way,  and  the 
fruits  of  virtues  spring  up. 

Therefore  God,  when  He  first  made  man,  with 
wonderful  foresight  first  implanted  in  him  these 
emotions  of  the  mind,  that  he  might  be  capable 
of  receiving  virtue,  as  the  earth  is  of  cultivation  ; 
and  He  placed  the  subject-matter  of  vices  in  the 
affections,  and  that  of  virtue  in  vices.  For 
assuredly  virtue  will  have  no  existence,  or  not 
be  in  exercise,  if  those  things  are  wanting  by 
which  its  power  is  either  shovvn  or  exists.  Now 
let  us  see  what  they  have  effected  who  altogether 
removes  vices.  With  regard  to  those  four  affec- 
tions ■♦  which  they  imagine  to  arise  from  the 
opinion  of  things  good  and  evil,  by  the  eradica- 
tion of  which  they  think  that  the  mind  of  the 
wise  man  is  to  be  healed,  since  they  understand 
that  they  are  implanted  by  nature,  and  that  with- 
out these  nothing  can  be  put  in  motion,  nothing 
be  done,  they  put  certain  other  things  into  their 
place  and  room  :  for  desire  they  substitute  in- 
clination, as  though  it  were  not  much  better  to 

'  [After   fifteen   centuries,  physicians   know  as   little   about   the 
spleen  as  ever.     See  Dunglison,  Med.  Diet.,  sub  voce  "  spleen."] 
^   Ubertas  aniinoriim. 

3  Exuberat  in  sentes,  "  luxuriates  into  briars." 
*  [Cap.  xiv.  p.  179,  supra.\ 


desire  a  good  than  to  feel  inclination  for  it; 
they  in  like  manner  substitute  for  joy  gladness, 
and  for  fear  caution.  But  in  the  case  of  the 
fourth  they  are  at  a  loss  for  a  method  of  ex- 
changing the  name.  Therefore  they  have  alto- 
gether taken  away  grief,  that  is,  sadness  and  pain 
of  mind,  which  cannot  possibly  be  done.  For 
who  can  fail  to  be  grieved  if  pestilence  has  deso- 
lated his  country,  or  an  enemy  overthrown  it,  or 
a  tyrant  crushed  its  liberty?  Can  any  one  fail 
to  be  grieved  if  he  has  beheld  the  overthrow  of 
liberty, 5  and  the  banishment  or  most  cruel 
slaughter  of  neighbours,  friends,  or  good  men? 
—  unless  the  mind  of  any  one  should  be  so 
struck  with  astonishment  that  all  sensibility  should 
be  taken  from  him.  Wherefore  they  ought  either 
to  have  taken  away  the  whole,  or  this  defective'' 
and  weak  discussion  ought  to  have  been  com- 
pleted ;  that  is,  something  ought  to  have  been 
substituted  in  the  place  of  grief,  since,  the  former 
ones  having  been  so  arranged,  this  naturally 
followed. 

For  as  we  rejoice  in  good  things  that  are 
present,  so  we  are  vexed  and  grieved  with  evil 
things.  If,  therefore,  they  gave  another  name 
to  joy  because  they  thought  it  vicious,  so  it  was 
befitting  that  another  name  should  be  given  to 
grief  because  they  thought  it  also  vicious.  From 
which  it  appears  that  it  was  not  the  object  itself 
which  was  wanting  to  them,  but  a  word,  through 
want  of  which  they  wished,  contrary  to  what 
nature  allowed,  to  take  away  that  affection  which 
is  the  greatest.  For  I  could  have  refuted  those 
changes  of  names  at  greater  length,  and  have 
shown  that  many  names  are  attached  to  the  same 
objects,  for  the  sake  of  embellishing  the  style 
and  increasing  its  copiousness,  or  at  any  rate 
that  they  do  not  greatly  differ  from  one  another. 
For  both  desire  takes  its  beginning  from  the  in- 
clination, and  caution  arises  from  fear,  and  joy 
is  nothing  else  than  the  expression  of  gladness. 
But  let  us  suppose  that  they  are  different,  as  they 
themselves  will  have  it.  Accordingly  they  will 
say  that  desire  is  continued  and  perpetual  in- 
clination, but  that  joy  is  gladness  bearing  itself 
immoderately  ;  and  that  fear  is  caution  in  excess, 
and  passing  the  limits  of  moderation.  Thus  it 
comes  to  pass,  that  they  do  not  take  away  those 
things  which  they  think  ought  to  be  taken  away, 
but  regulate  them,  since  the  names  only  are 
changed,  the  things  themselves  remain.  They 
therefore  return  unawares  to  that  point  at  which 
the  Peripatetics  arrive  by  argument,  that  vices, 
since  they  cannot  be  taken  away,  are  to  be  regu- 
lated with  moderation.  Therefore  they  err,  be- 
cause they  do  not  succeed  in  effecting  that  which 
they  aim  at,  and  by  a  circuitous  route,  which  is 
long  and  rough,  they  return  to  the  same  path. 


5  [After  Pharsalia.     Note  this  love  of  freedom.] 
^  Curta,  i.e.,  "  maimed." 


Chap.  XVII.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


i8i 


CHAP.    XVI.  —  OF  THE   AFFECTIONS,  AND  THE  REFU- 
TATION   OF   THE    OPINION    OF   THE    PERIPATETICS  , 
CONCERNING   THEM  ;    WHAT    IS    THE    PROPER   USE 
OF  THE   AFFECITONS,  AND  WHAT  IS  A  BAD  USE  OF  : 
THEM.  I 

But  I  think  that  the  Peripatetics  did  not  even 
approach  the  truth,  who  allow  that  they  are  vices, , 
but   regulate   them  with   moderation.      For  we  1 
must  be  free  even  from  moderate  vices;  yea,  1 
rather,  it  ought  to  have  been  at  first  effected 
that  there  should  be  no  vices.     For  nothmg  can 
be  born  vicious ; '  but  if  we  make  a  bad  use  of 
the  affections  they  become  vices,  if  we  use  them 
well   they  become  virtues.      Then   it   must  be 
shown  that  the  causes  of  the  affections,  and  not 
the  affections  themselves,  must  be  moderated. 
We  must  not,  they  say,  rejoice  with  excessive 
joy,  but  moderately  and  temperately.      This  is 
as  though  thev  should  say  that  we  must  not  run 
swiftly,  but  walk  quietly.     But  it  is  possible  that 
he  who  walks  may  err,  and  that  he  who  runs  may 
keep  the  right  path.     What  if  I  show  that  there 
is  a  case  in  which  it  is  vicious  not  only  to  rejoice  1 
moderately,  but  even  in  the  smallest  degree  ;  and 
that  there  is  another  case,  on  the  contrary,  m 
which  even  to  exult  with  transports  of  joy  is  by  j 
no  means  faulty?     What  then,  I  pray,  will  this  | 
mediocrity  profit  us?     I  ask  whether  they  think  j 
that  a  wise  man  ought  to  rejoice  if  he  sees  any  j 
evil  happening   to  his  enemy;    or  whether  he 
ought    to  curb  his  joy,  if  by  the  conquest  of 
enemies,  or  the  overthrow  of  a  tyrant,  liberty 
and  safety  have  been  acquired  by  his  country- 
men.^ 

No  one  doubts  but  that  in  the  former  case  to 
rejoice  a  little,  and  in  the  latter  to  rejoice  too 
little,  is  a  very  great  crime.     We  may  say  the 
same  respecting  the  other  affections.     But,  as  I 
have  said,  the  object  of  wisdom  does  not  consist 
in  the  regulation  of  these,  but  of  tneir  causes, 
since  they  are  acted   upon  from  without;   nor 
was  it  befitting  that  these  themselves  should  be 
restrained  ;  since  they  may  exist  in  a  small  de-  i 
gree  with  l^ie  greatest  criminality,  and  in  the  ! 
greatest   degree  without   any  criminality.      But 
they   ought    to    have    been    assigned    to   fixed 
times,  and  circumstances,  and  places,  that  they 
may  not  be  vices,  when  it  is  permitted  us  to 
make  a  right  use  of  them.     For  as  to  walk  in 
the  right  course  is  good,  but  to  wander  from  it 
is  evil,  so  to  be  moved  by  the  affections  to  that 
which  is  right  is  good,  but  to  that  which  is  cor- 
rupt is  evil.     For  sensual  desire,  if  it  does  not 
wander  from  its  lawful   object,  although  it  be 
ardent,  yet  is  without  fault.     But  if  it  desires  an 
unlawful  object,  although  it  be  moderate,  yet  it 
is  a  great  vice.     Therefore  it  is  not  a  disease  to 


be  angry,  nor  to  desire,  nor  to  be  excited  by 
lust ;  but  to  be  passionate,  to  be  covetous  or 
licentious,  is  a  disease.  For  he  who  is  passionate 
is  angry  even  with  him  with  whom  he  ought  not 
to  be  angry,  or  at  times  when  he  ought  not.  He 
who  is  covetous  desires  even  that  which  is  un- 
necessary. He  who  is  licentious  pursues  even 
that  which  is  forbidden  by  the  laws.  The  whole 
matter  ought  to  have  turned  on  this,  that  since 
'  the  impetuosity  of  these  things  cannot  be  re- 
strained, nor  is  it  right  that  it  should  be,  because 
;  it  is  necessarily  implanted  for  maintaining  the 
i  duties  of  life,  it  might  rather  be  directed  into 
!  the  right  way,  where  it  may  be  possible  even  to 
run  without  stumbling  and  danger. 


CHAP.  XVII. OF  THE  AFFECTIONS  AND  THEIR  USE  ; 

OF   PATIENCE,    AND   THE    CHIEF    GOOD    OF    CHRIS- 
TIANS. 


1  [See  Augustine  against  Pelagius;  another  view.] 

2  [Again  this  love  of  liberty,  but  loosely  said.] 


But  I  have  been  carried  too  far  in  my  desire 
of  refuting  them  ;  since  it  is  my  purpose  to  show 
that  those  things  which  the  philosophers  thought 
to  be  vices,  are  so  far  from  being  vices,  that  they 
are  even  great  virtues.     Of  others,  I  will  take, 
for  the  sake  of  instruction,  those  which  I  think 
to  be  most  closely  related  to  the  subject.     They 
regard  dread  or  fear  as  a  very  great  vice,  and 
think  that  it  is  a  very  great  weakness  of  mind  ; 
the  opposite  to  which  is  bravery  :  and  if  this  ex- 
I  ists  in  a  man,  they  say  that  there  is  no  place  for 
I  fear.    Does  any  one  then  believe  that  it  can  pos- 
I  sibly  happen  that  this  same  fear  is  the  highest 
I  fortitude  ?     By  no  means.     For  nature  does  not 
appear  to  admit  that  anything  should  fall  back 
to  its  contrary.     But  yet  I,  not  by  any  skilful 
conclusion,  as  Socrates  does  in  the  writings  of 
Plato,  who  compels  those  against  whom  he  dis- 
putes to  admit  those  things  which  they  had  de- 
nied, but  in  a  simple  manner,  will  show  that  the 
greatest    fear  is    the    greatest  virtue.      No  one 
doubts  but  that  it  is  the  part  of  a  timid  and 
feeble  mind  either  to  fear  pain,  or  want,  or  exile, 
or  imprisonment,  or  death  ;  and  if  any  one  does 
not  dread  all  these,  he  is  judged  a  man  of  the 
!  greatest  fortitude.     But  he  who  fears  God  is  free 
I  from  the  fear  of  all  these  things.     In  proof  of 
i  which,  there  is  no  need  of  arguments  :  for  the 
I  punishments  inflicted  on  the  worshippers  of  God 
have  been  witnessed  at  all  times,  and  are  still 
'  witnessed  through  the  world,  in  the  tormenting 
1  of  whom  new  and  unusual  tortures  have  been 
devised.     For  the  mind  shrinks  from  the  recol- 
'  lection  of  various  kinds  of  death,  when  the  butch- 
ery of  savage  monsters  has  raged  even  beyond 
death   itself.      But  a  happy   and   unconquered 
])atience  endured  these  execrable  lacerations  of 
their  bodies  without  a  groan.    This  virtue  aflorded 
the  greatest  astonishment  to  all  people  and  prov- 
inces    and    to    the    torturers    themselves,  when 


Ib2 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VI. 


cruelty  was  overcome  by  patience.  But  this 
virtue  was  caused  by  nothing  else  than  the  fear 
of  God.  Therefore  (as  I  said)  fear  is  not  to  be 
uprooted,  as  the  Stoics  maintain,  nor  to  be  re- 
strained, as  the  Peripatetics  wish,  but  to  be  di- 
rected into  the  right  way  ;  and  apprehensions 
are  to  be  taken  away,  but  so  that  this  one  only 
may  be  left :  for  since  this  is  the  only  lawful  and 
true  one,  it  alone  effects  that  all  other  things 
may  not  be  feared.  Desire  also  is  reckoned 
among  vices  ;  but  if  it  desires  those  things  which 
are  of  the  earth,  it  is  a  vice  ;  on  the  other  hand, 
if  it  desires  heavenly  things,  it  is  a  virtue.  For 
he  who  desires  to  obtain  justice,  God,  perpetual 
life,  everlasting  light,  and  all  those  things  which 
God  promises  to  man,  will  despise  these  riches, 
and  honours,  and  commaneis,  and  kingdoms  them- 
selves. 

The  Stoic  will  perhaps  say  that  inclination  is 
necessary  for  the  attainment  of  these  things,  and 
not  desire ;  but,  in  truth,  the  inclination  is  not 
sufficient.  For  many  have  the  inclination  ;  but 
when  pain  has  approached  the  vitals,  inclination 
gives  way,  but  desire  perseveres  :  and  if  it  effects 
that  all  things  which  are  sought  by  others  are 
objects  of  contempt  to  him,  it  is  the  greatest 
virtue,  since  it  is  the  mother  of  self-restraint. 
And  therefore  we  ought  rather  to  effect  this,  that 
we  may  rightly  direct  the  affections,  a  corrupt 
use  of  which  is  vice.  For  these  excitements  of 
the  mind  resemble  a  harnessed  chariot,  in  the 
right  management  of  which  the  chief  duty  of  the 
driver  is  to  know  the  way ;  and  if  he  shall  keep 
to  this,  with  whatever  swiftness  he  may  go,  he 
will  not  strike  against  an  obstacle.  But  if  he 
shall  wander  from  the  course,  although  he  may 
go  calmly  and  gently,  he  will  either  be  shaken 
over  rough  places,  or  will  glide  over  precipices, 
or  at  any  rate  will  be  carried  where  he  does  not 
need  to  go.  So  that  chariot  of  life  which  is  led 
by  the  affections  as  though  by  swift  horses,  if  it 
keeps  the  right  way,  will  discharge  its  duty. 
Dread,  therefore,  and  desire,  if  they  are  cast 
down  to  the  earth,  will  become  vices,  but  they 
will  be  virtues  if  they  are  referred  to  divine 
things.  On  the  other  hand,  they  esteem  parsi- 
mony as  a  virtue ;  which,  if  it  is  eagerness  for 
possessing,  cannot  be  a  virtue,  because  it  is  alto- 
gether employed  in  the  increase  or  preservation 
of  earthly  goods.  But  we  do  not  refer  the  chief 
good  to  the  body,  but  we  measure  every  duty  by 
the  preservation  of  the  soul  only.  But  if,  as  I 
have  before  taught,  we  must  by  no  means  spare 
our  property  that  we  may  preserve  kindness  and 
justice,  it  is  not  a  virtue  to  be  frugal ;  which 
name  beguiles  and  deceives  under  the  appearance 
of  virtue.  For  frugality  is,  it  is  true,  the  abstain- 
ing from  pleasures  ;  but  in  this  respect  it  is  a 
vice,  because  it  arises  from  the  love  of  possess- 
in",  whereas    we    ought   both    to    abstain   from 


pleasures,  and  by  no  means  to  withhold  money. 
For  to  use  money  sparingly,  that  is,  moderately, 
is  a  kind  of  weakness  of  mind,  either  of  one 
fearing  lest  he  should  be  in  want,  or  of  one  de- 
spairing of  being  able  to  recover  it,  or  of  one 
incapable  of  the  contempt  of  earthly  things. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  they  call  him  who  is 
not  sparing  of  his  property  prodigal.  For  thus 
they  distinguish  between  the  liberal  man  and  the 
prodigal  :  that  he  is  liberal  who  bestows  on  de- 
serving objects,  and  on  proper  occasions,  and  in 
sufficient  quantities  ;  but  that  he  is  prodigal  who 
lavishes  on  undeserving  objects,  and  when  there 
is  no  need,  and  without  any  regard  to  his  property. 

What  then?  shall  we  call  him  prodigal  who 
through  pity  gives  food  to  the  needy?  But  it 
makes  a  great  difference,  whether  on  account 
of  lust  you  bestow  your  money  on  harlots,  or 
on  account  of  benevolence  on  the  wretched ; 
whether  profligates,  gamesters,  and  pimps  squan- 
der your  money,  or  you  bestow  it  on  piety  and 
God  ;  whether  you  expend  it  upon  your  own 
appetite,'  or  lay  it  up  in  the  treasury  of  justice. 
As,  therefore,  it  is  a  vice  to  lay  it  out  badly,  so 
it  is  a  virtue  to  lay  it  out  well.  If  it  is  a  virtue 
not  to  be  sparing  of  riches,  which  can  be  replaced, 
that  you  may  su])port  the  life  of  man,  which 
cannot  be  replaced ;  then  parsimony  is  a  vice. 
Therefore  I  can  call  them  by  no  other  name 
than  mad,  who  deprive  man,  a  mild  and  sociable 
animal,  of  his  name  ;  who,  having  uprooted  the 
affections,  in  which  humanity  altogether  consists, 
wish  to  bring  him  to  an  immoveable  insensibility 
of  mind,  while  they  desire  to  free  the  soul  from 
perturbations,  and,  as  they  themselves  say,  to 
render  it  calm  and  tranquil ;  which  is  not  only 
impossible,  because  its  force  and  nature  consist 
in  motion,  but  it  ought  not  even  to  be  so.  For 
as  water  which  is  always  still  and  motionless  is 
unwholesome  and  more  muddy,  so  the  soul  which 
is  unmoved  and  torpid  is  useless  even  to  itself: 
nor  will  it  be  able  to  maintain  life  itself;  for  it 
will  neither  do  nor  think  anything,  since  thought 
itself  is  nothing  less  than  agitation  of  the  mind. 
In  fine,  they  who  assert  this  immoveableness  of 
the  soul  wish  to  deprive  the  soul  of  life  ;  for  life 
is  full  of  activity,  but  death  is  quiet.  They  also 
rightly  esteem  some  things  as  virtues,  but  they 
do  not  maintain  their  due  proportion.^ 

Constancy  is  a  virtue  ;  not  that  we  resist  those 
who  injure  us,  for  we  must  yield  to  these  ;  and 
why  this  ought  to  be  done  I  will  show  pres- 
ently :  but  that  when  men  command  us  to  act  in 
opposition  to  the  law  of  God,  and  in  oppo- 
sition to  justice,  we  should  be  deterred  by  no 
threats  or  punishments  from  preferring  the  com- 
mand of  God  to  the  command  of  man.    Likewise 


'  Ventri  ac  guise  ingeras. 

2  Sed  earum   modum   non   tenent.      [Augustine's   anthropology 
better.] 


Chap.  XVIII.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


i8- 


it  is  a  virtue  to  despise  death  :  not  that  we 
seek  it,  and  of  our  own  accord  inflict  it  upon 
ourselves,  as  many  and  distinguished  philoso- 
phers have  often  done,  which  is  a  wicked  and 
impious  thing ;  but  that  when  compelled  to 
desert  God,  and  to  betray  our  faith,  we  should 
prefer  to  undergo  death,  and  should  defend  our 
liberty  against  the  foolish  and  senseless  violence 
of  those  who  cannot  govern  themselves,  and  with 
fortitude  of  spirit  we  should  challenge  all  the 
threats  and  terrors  of  the  world.  Thus  with  lofty 
and  invincible  mind  we  trample  upon  those  things 
which  others  fear  —  pain  and  death.  This  is 
virtue  ;  this  is  true  constancy  —  to  be  maintained 
and  preserved  in  this  one  thing  alone,  that  no 
terror  and  no  violence  may  be  able  to  turn  us 
away  from  God.  Therefore  that  is  a  true  senti- 
ment of  Cicero  : '  "  No  one,"  he  says,  "  can  be 
just  who  fears  death,  or  pain,  or  exile,  or  want." 
Also  of  Seneca,  who  says,  in  his  books  of  moral 
philosophy :  "  This  is  that  virtuous  man,  not 
distinguished  by  a  diadem  or  purple,  or  the 
attendance  of  lictors,  but  in  no  respect  inferior, 
who,  when  he  sees  death  at  hand,  is  not  so  dis- 
turbed as  though  he  saw  a  fresh  object ;  who, 
whether  torments  are  to  be  suffered  by  his  whole 
body,  or  a  flame  is  to  be  seized  by  his  mouth, 
or  his  hands  are  to  be  stretched  out  on  the 
cross,2  does  not  inquire  what  he  suffers,  but  how 
well."  But  he  who  worships  God  suffers  these 
things  without  fear.  Therefore  he  is  just.  By 
these  things  it  is  effected,  that  he  cannot  know 
or  maintain  at  all  either  the  virtues  or  the  exact 
limits  of  the  virtues,  whoever  is  estranged  from 
the  religion  of  the  one  God. 

CHAP.    XVIII. OF    SOME    COMMANDS   OF    GOD,    AND 

OF    PATIENCE. 

But  let  us  leave  the  philosophers,  who  either 
know  nothing  at  all,  and  hold  forth  this  very 
ignorance  as  the  greatest  knowledge  ;  or  who, 
inasmuch  as  they  think  they  know  that  of  which 
they  are  ignorant,  are  absurdly  and  arrogantly 
foolish.  Let  us  therefore  (that  we  may  return 
to  our  purpose),  to  whom  alone  the  truth  has 
been  revealed  by  God,  and  wisdom  has  been 
sent  from  heaven,  practise  those  things  which 
God  who  enlightens  us  commands  :  let  us  sustain 
and  endure  the  labours  of  life,  by  mutual  assist- 
ance towards  each  other ;  nor,  however,  if  we 
shall  have  done  any  good  work,  let  us  aim  at 
glory  from  it.  For  God  admonishes  us  that  the 
doer  of  justice  ought  not  to  be  boastful,  lest  he 
should  appear  to  have  discharged  the  duties  of 
benevolence,  not  so  much  from  a  desire  of  obey- 
ing the  divine  commands,  as  of  pleasing  men, 
and  should  already  have   the   reward   of  glory 


][  De  Offic.,  ii.  ii 
*  Per  patibulum. 


which  he  has  aimed  at,  and  should  not  receive 
the  recompense  of  that  heavenly  and  divine  re- 
ward. The  other  things  which  the  worshipper 
of  God  ought  to  observe  are  easy,  when  these 
virtues  are  comprehended,  that  no  one  should 
ever  speak  falsely  for  the  sake  of  deceiving  or 
injuring.  For  it  is  unlawful  for  him  who  culti- 
vates truth  to  be  deceitful  in  anything,  and  to 
depart  from  the  truth  itself  which  he  follows.  In 
this  path  of  justice  and  all  the  virtues  there  is  no 
place  for  falsehood.  Therefore  the  true  and  just 
traveller  will  not  use  the  saying  of  Lucilius  :  ^  — 

"  It  is  not  for  me  to  speak  falsely  to  a  man  who  is  a 
friend  and  acquaintance ;  " 

but  he  will  think  that  it  is  not  his  part  to  speak 
falsely  even  to  an  enemy  and  a  stranger ;  nor 
will  he  at  any  time  so  act,  that  his  tongue, 
which  is  the  interpreter  of  his  mind,  should  be 
at  variance  with  his  feeling  and  thought.  If 
he  shall  have  lent  any  money,  he  will  not  receive 
interest,  that  the  benefit  may  be  unimpaired 
which  succours  necessity,  and  that  he  may  en- 
tirely abstain  from  the  property  of  another.  For 
in  this  kind  of  duty  he  ought  to  be  content  with 
that  which  is  his  own ;  since  it  is  his  duty  in 
other  respects  not  to  be  sparing  of  his  property, 
in  order  that  he  may  do  good;  but  to  receive 
more  than  he  has  given  is  unjust.  And  he  who 
does  this  lies  in  wait  in  some  manner,  that  he 
may  gain  booty  from  the  necessity  of  another. 

But  the  just  man  will  omit  no  opportunity  of 
doing  anything  mercifully  :  nor  will  he  pollute 
himself  with  gain  of  this  kind  ;  but  he  will  so  act 
that  without  any  loss  to  himself,  that  which  he 
lends  may  be  reckoned  among  his  good  works. 
He  must  not  receive  a  gift  from  a  poor  man  ;  so 
that  if  he  himself  has  aflbrded  anything,  it  may 
be  good,  inasmuch  as  it  is  gratuitous.  If  any 
one  reviles,  he  must  answer  him  with  a  bless- 
ing ;  '<  he  himself  must  never  revile,  that  no  evil 
word  may  proceed  out  of  the  mouth  of  a  man 
who  reverences  the  good  Word. 5  Moreover, 
he  must  also  diligently  take  care,  lest  by  any 
fault  of  his  he  should  at  any  time  make  an 
enemy ;  and  if  any  one  should  be  so  shameless 
as  to  inflict  injury  on  a  good  and  just  man,  he 
must  bear  it  with  calmness  and  moderation,  and 
not  take  upon  himself  his  revenge,  but  reserve 
it  for  the  judgment  of  God.''  He  must  at  all 
times  and  in  ah  places  guard  innocence.  And 
this  precept  is  not  limited  to  this,  that  he  should 
not  himself  inflict  injury,  but  that  he  should  not 
avenge  it  when  inflicted  on  himself.  For  there 
sits  on  the  judgment-seat  a  very  great  and  im- 
partial Judge,  the  observer  and  witness  of  all. 
Let  him  prefer  Him    to  man ;    let  him  rather 


3  [Hoinini  amico  ac  familiari  non  est  mentiri  nieum.] 
^  IVIatt.  V.  44;    Luke  vi.  2S;    Rom.  xii.  14. 
5  i.e..  Jesus  Christ  the  Scm  of  God  =  the  Word  of  God. 
''  Rom.  xii.  19;   Heb.  x.  30. 


iS4 


THE    DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VI. 


choose  that  He  should  pronounce  judgment 
respecting  his  cause,  whose  sentence  no  one  can 
escape,  either  by  the  advocacy  of  any  one  or  by 
favour.  Thus  it  comes  to  pass,  that  a  just  man 
is  an  object  of  contempt  to  all ;  and  because  it 
will  be  thought  that  he  is  unable  to  defend  him- 
self, he  will  be  regarded  as  slothful  and  inactive  ; 
but  if  any  one  shall  have  avenged  himself  upon 
his  enemy,  he  is  judged  a  man  of  spirit  and 
activity  —  all  honour  and  reverence  him.  And 
although  the  good  man  has  it  in  his  power  to 
profit  many,  yet  they  look  up  to  him  who  is  able 
to  injure,  rather  than  to  him  who  is  able  to  profit. 
But  the  depravity  of  men  will  not  be  able  to  cor- 
rupt the  just  man,  so  that  he  will  not  endeavour 
to  obey  God  ;  and  he  would  prefer  to  be  despised, 
provided  that  he  may  always  discharge  the  duty 
of  a  good  man,  and  never  of  a  bad  man.  Cicero 
says  in  those  same  books  respecting  Ot^ces  : 
"  But  if  any  one  should  wish  to  unravel  this  in- 
distinct conception  of  his  soul,'  let  him  at  once 
teach  himself  that  he  is  a  good  man  who  profits 
those  whom  he  can,  and  injures  no  one  -  unless 
provoked  by  injury." 

Oh  how  he  marred  a  simple  and  true  senti- 
ment by  the  addition  of  two  words  !  For  what 
need  was  there  of  adding  these  words,  "  unless 
provoked  by  injury?"  that  he  might  append 
vice  as  a  most  disgraceful  tail  to  a  good  man, 
and  might*  represent  him  as  without  patience, 
which  is  the  greatest  of  all  the  virtues.  He  said 
that  a  good  man  would  inflict  injuries  if  he  were 
provoked :  now  he  must  necessarily  lose  the 
name  of  a  good  man  from  this  very  circum- 
stance, if  he  shall  inflict  injury.  For  it  is  not 
less  the  part  of  a  bad  man  to  return  an  injury 
than  to  inflict  it.  For  from  what  source  do  con- 
tests, from  what  source  do  fightings  and  conten- 
tions, arise  among  men,  except  that  impatience 
opposed  to  injustice  often  excites  great  tempests? 
But  if  you  meet  injustice  with  patience,  than 
which  virtue  nothing  can  be  found  more  true, 
nothing  more  worthy  of  a  man,  it  will  immedi- 
ately be  extinguished,  as  though  you  should  pour 
water  upon  a  fire.  But  if  that  injustice  which 
])rovokes  opposition  has  met  with  impatience 
equaP  to  itself,  as  though  overspread  with  oil, 
it  will  excite  so  great  a  conflagration,  that  no 
stream  can  extinguish  it,  but  only  the  sliedding 
of  blood.  Great,  therefore,  is  the  advantage 
of  patience,  of  which  the  wise  man  has  de- 
prived the  good  man.  For  this  alone  causes 
that  no  evil  happens ;  and  if  it  should  be  given 
to  all,  there  will  be  no  wickedness  and  no  fraud 
in  the  affairs  of  men.  What,  therefore,  can  be 
so  calamitous  to  a  good  man,  so  opposed  to  his 


'  Animi  sui  complicitam  notionem  evolvere. 
^  [Nisi  lacessitus  injuria.] 

3  Comparem.     Injustice  and  impatience  are  here  represented  as  a 
pair  of  gladiators  v/ell  matched  against  each  other. 


character,  as  to  let  loose  the  reins  to  anger,  which 
deprives  liim  not  only  of  the  title  of  a  good  man, 
but  even  of  a  man  ;  since  to  injure  another,  as 
he  himself  most  truly  says,  is  not  in  accordance 
with  the  nature  of  man?  For  if  you  provoke 
cattle  or  horses,'*  they  turn  against  you  either 
with  their  hoof  or  their  horn ;  and  serpents 
and  wild  beasts,  unless  you  pursue  them  that 
you  may  kill  them,  give  no  trouble.  And  to 
return  to  examples  of  men,  even  the  inexpe- 
rienced and  the  foolish,  if  at  any  time  they 
receive  an  injury,  are  led  by  a  blind  and  irra- 
tional fury,  and  endeavour  to  retaliate  upon  those 
who  injure  them.  In  what  respect,  then,  does 
the  wise  and  good  man  differ  from  the  evil  and 
foolish,  except  that  he  has  invincible  patience, 
of  which  the  foolish  are  destitute  ;  except  that 
he  knows  how  to  govern  himself,  and  to  mitigate 
his  anger,  which  those,  because  they  are  without 
virtue,  are  unable  to  curb?  But  this  circum- 
stance manifestly  deceived  him,  because,  when 
inquiry  is  made  respecting  virtue,  he  thought 
that  it  is  the  part  of  virtue  to  conquer  in  every 
kind  of  contention.  Nor  was  he  able  in  any 
way  to  see,  that  a  man  who  gives  way  to  grief 
and  anger,  and  who  indulges  these  affections, 
against  which  he  ought  rather  to  struggle,  and 
who  rushes  wherever  injustice  shall  have  called 
hira,  does  not  fulfil  the  duty  of  virtue.  For  he 
who  endeavours  to  return  an  injury,  desires  to 
imitate  that  very  person  by  whom  he  has  been 
injured.  Thus  he  who  imitates  a  bad  man  can 
by  no  means  be  good. 

Therefore  by  two  words  he  has  taken  away 
from  the  good  and  wise  man  two  of  the  greatest 
virtues,  innocence  and  patience.  But,  as  Sallus- 
tius  relates  was  said  by  Appius,  because  he  him- 
self practised  that  canine  5  eloquence,  he  wished 
man  also  to  live  after  the  manner  of  a  dog,  so  as, 
when  attacked,  to  bite  in  return.  And  to  show 
how  pernicious  this  repayment  of  insult  is,  and 
what  carnage  it  is  accustomed  to  produce,  from 
what  can  a  more  befitting  example  be  sought, 
than  from  the  most  melanchol}-  disaster  of  the 
teacher  himself,  who,  while  he  desired  to  obey 
these  precepts  of  the  philosophers,  destroyed 
himself?  For  if,  when  attacked  with  injury,  he 
had  preserved  patience  —  if  he  had  learned 
that  it  is  the  part  of  a  good  man  to  dissemble 
and  to  endure  insult,  and  his  impatience,  vanity, 
and  madness  had  not  poured  forth  those  noble 
orations,  inscribed  with  a  name  derived  from 
another  source,^  he  would  never,  by  his  head 
affixed  to  them,  have  polluted  the  rostra  on 
which  he  had  formerly  distinguished  himself,  nor 
would  that  proscription  have  utterly  destroyed 


*  Pecudes,  including  horses  and  cattle. 

5  Caninam,  i.e.,  resembling  a  dog,  cutting. 

*  The  allusion  is  to  the  Pliiiippics  of  Cicero,  a  title  borrowed 
from  Demosthenes. 


Chap.  XIX.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


185 


the  state.  Therefore  it  is  not  the  part  of  a 
wise  and  good  man  to  wish  to  contend,  and  to 
commit  himself  to  danger,  since  to  conquer  is 
not  in  our  power,  and  every  contest  is  doubtful ; 
but  it  is  the  part  of  a  wise  and  e.xcellent  man 
not  to  wish  to  remove  his  adversary,  which  can- 
not be  done  without  guilt  and  danger,  but  to  put 
an  end  to  the  contest  itself,  which  may  be  done 
with  advantage  and  with  justice.  Therefore  pa- 
tience is  to  be  regarded  as  a  very  great  virtue  ; 
and  that  the  just  man  might  obtain  this,  God 
willed,  as  has  been  before  said,  that  he  should  be 
despised  as  sluggish.  For  unless  he  shall  have 
been  insulted,  it  will  not  be  known  what  forti- 
tude he  has  in  restraining  himself.  Now  if,  when 
provoked  by  injury,  he  has  begun  to  follow  up 
his  assailant  with  violence,  he  is  overcome.  But 
if  he  shall  have  repressed  that  emotion  by  rea- 
soning, he  altogether  has  command  over  him- 
self: he  is  able  to  rule  himself.  And  this  re- 
straining •  of  oneself  is  rightly  named  patience, 
which  single  virtue  is  opposed  to  all  vices  and 
affections.  This  recalls  the  disturbed  and  waver- 
ing mind  to  its  tranquillity ;  this  mitigates,  this 
restores  a  man  to  himself.  Therefore,  since  it  is 
impossible  and  useless  to  resist  nature,  so  that 
we  are  not  excited  at  all ;  before,  however,  the 
emotion  bursts  forth  to  the  infliction  of  injury, 
as  far^  as  is  possible  let  it  be  calmed  ^  in  time. 
God  has  enjoined  us  not  to  let  the  sun  go  down 
upon  our  wrath, +  lest  he  should  depart  as  a  wit- 
ness of  our  madness.  Finally,  Marcus  Tullius, 
in  opposition  to  his  own  precept,  concerning 
which  I  have  lately  spoken,  gave  the  greatest 
praises  to  the  forgetting  of  injuries.  "  I  enter- 
tain hopes,"  he  says,  "  O  Csesar,  who  art  accus- 
tomed to  forget  nothing  except  injuries."  5  But 
if  he  thus  acted  —  a  man  most  widely  removed 
not  only  from  heavenly,  but  also  from  public  and 
civil  justice  —  how  much  more  ought  we  to  do 
this,  who  are,  as  it  were,  candidates  for  immor- 
tality ? 

CH.\P.  XIX. OF  THE  AFFECTIONS  AND  THEIR  USE  ; 

AND    OF   THE    THREE    FURIES. 

When  the  Stoics  attempt  to  uproot  the  affec- 
tions from  man  as  diseases,  they  are  opposed  by 
the  Peripatetics,  who  not  only  retain,  but  also 
defend  them,  and  say  that  there  is  nothing  in 
man  which  is  not  produced  in  him  with  great 
reason  and  foresight.  They  say  this  indeed 
rightly,  if  they  know  the  true  limits  of  each  sub- 
ject. Accordingly  they  say  that  this  very  affec- 
tion of  anger  is  the  whetstone  of  virtue,  as  though 
no  one  could  fight  bravely  against  enemies  unless 

'  Sustentalio  siii. 

-  Quoad  fieri  potest.     Others  read,  "quod  fieri  potest." 

3  Maturius  sopiatur. 

*  Eph.  iv.  26. 

^  Cicero,  I^fo  Ligar.,  12. 


he  were  excited  by  anger  ;  by  which  they  plainly 
show  that  they  neither  know  what  virtue  is,  nor 
why  God  gave  anger  to  man.  And  if  this  was 
given  to  us  for  this  purpose,  that  we  may  employ 
it  for  the  slaying  of  men,  what  is  to  be  thought 
more  savage  than  man,  what  more  resembling 
the  wild  beasts,  than  that  animal  which  God 
formed  for  communion  and  innocence  ?  There 
are,  then,  three  affections  which  drive  men  head- 
long to  all  crimes:  (i)  anger,  (2)  desire,  and 
(3)  lust.^  On  which  account  the  poets  have 
said  that  there  are  three  furies  which  harass  the 
minds  of  men  :  anger  longs  for  revenge,  desire 
for  riches,  lust  for  pleasures.  But  God  has  ap- 
pointed fixed  limits  to  all  of  these ;  and  if  they 
pass  these  limits  and  begin  to  be  too  great,  they 
must  necessarily  pervert  their  nature,  and  be 
changed  into  diseases  and  vices.  And  it  is  a 
matter  of  no  great  labour  to -show  what  these 
limits  are. 7  Cupidity^  is  given  us  for  providing 
those  things  which  are  necessary  for  life  ;  con- 
cupiscence,9  for  the  procreation  of  offspring ; 
the  affection  of  indignation,'"  for  restraining  the 
faults  of  those  who  are  in  our  power,  that  is,  in 
order  that  tender  age  may  be  formed  by  a  se- 
j  verer  discipline  to  integrity  and  justice  :  for  if 
I  this  time  of  life  is  not  restrained  by  fear,"  licence 
I  will  produce  boldness,  and  this  will  break  out 
into  every  disgraceful  and  daring  action.  There- 
fore, as  it  is  both  just  and  necessary  to  employ 
anger  towards  the  young,  so  it  is  both  pernicious 
and  impious  to  use  it  towards  those  of  our  own 
age.  It  is  impious,  because  humanity  is  injured  ; 
pernicious,  because  if  they  oppose,  it  is  neces- 
sary either  to  destroy  them  or  to  perish.  But 
that  this  which  I  have  spoken  of  is  the  reason 
why  the  affection  of  anger  has  been  given  to 
man,  may  be  understood  from  the  precepts  of 
God  Himself,  who  commands  that  we  should 
not  be  angry  with  those  who  revile  and  injure  us, 
but  that  we  should  always  have  our  hands  over 
the  young  ;  that  is,  that  when  they  err,  we  should 
correct  them  with  continual  stripes,'^  lest  by  use- 
less love  and  excessive  indulgence  they  should 
be  trained  to  evil  and  nourished  to  vices.  But 
those  who  are  inexperienced  in  affairs  and  igno- 
rant of  reason,  have  expelled  those  affections 
which  have  been  given  to  man  for  good  uses, 
and  they  wander  more  widely  than  reason  de- 


*  [Rather,  indignation,  cupidity,  and  concupiscence,  answering  to 
our  author's  "  ira,  cupiditas,  libido  "  The  difference  involved  in  this 
choice  of  words,  I  shall  h,ive  occasion  to  point  out.] 

7  [Here  he  treats  the  "  three  furies"  as  not  in  themselves  vices, 
but  implanted  for  good  purpo.ses,  and  becoming  "  diseases"  only  when 
they  pass  the  limits  he  now  defines.  Hence,  while  indignation  is 
7'iriuP7is  anger,  it  is  not  a  disease;  cnpidity,  while  amounting  to 
honest  thrift,  is  not  evil;  and  concitpiiceHce,  until  it  becomes  "  evil 
concupiscence  "  (fTri^ujiiai'  xaKiji',  Col.  iii.  5) ,  is  but  natural  appetite^ 
working  to  good  ends.] 

8  Desire.     [See  note  6,  supra.^ 

9  Lust. 
'°  Anger. 

"   (Qua;,  nisi  in  metu  cohibetur.] 

"  \Assiduis  verberibus.  This  might  be  rendered  "  careful  punish- 
ments."] 


i86 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VI. 


mands.  From  this  cause  they  live  unjustly  and 
impiously.  They  employ  anger  against  their 
equals  in  age  :  hence  disagreements,  hence  ban- 
ishments, hence  wars  have  arisen  contrary  to 
justice.  They  use  desire  for  the  amassing  of 
riches  :  hence  frauds,  hence  robberies,  hence  all 
kinds  of  crimes  have  originated.  They  use  lust 
only  for  the  enjoyment  of  pleasures  :  hence  de- 
baucheries, hence  adulteries,  hence  all  corrup- 
tions have  proceeded.  Whoever,  therefore,  has 
reduced  those  affections  within  their  proper 
limits,  which  they  who  are  ignorant  of  God  can- 
not do,  he  is  patient,  he  is  brave,  he  is  just.' 

CHAP.  XX.  —  OF  THE  SENSES,  AND  THEIR  PLEAS- 
URES IN  THE  BRUTES  AND  IN  MAN  ;  AND  OF 
PLEASURES    OF   THE    EYES,    AND    SPECTACLES. 

It  remains  that  I  should  speak  against  the 
pleasures  of  the  fTve  senses,  and  this  briefly,  for 
the  measure  of  the  book  itself  now  demands 
moderation  ;  all  of  which,  since  they  are  vicious 
and  deadly,  ought  to  be  overcome  and  subdued 
by  virtue,  or,  as  I  said  a  little  before  respecting 
the  affections,  be  recalled  to  their  proper  office. 
The  other  animals  have  no  pleasure,  except  the 
one  only  which  relates  to  generation.  Therefore 
they  use  their  senses  for  the  necessity  of  their 
nature  :  they  see,  in  order  that  they  may  seek 
those  things  which  are  necessary  for  the  preser- 
vation of  life  ;  they  hear  one  another,  and  dis- 
tinguish one  another,  that  they  may  be  able  to 
assemble  together ;  they  either  discover  from 
the  smell,  or  perceive  from  the  taste,  the  things 
which  are  useful  for  food  ;  they  refuse  and  reject 
the  things  which  are  useless,  they  measure  the 
business  of  eating  and  drinking  by  the  fulness  of 
their  stomach.  But  the  foresight  of  the  most 
skilful  Creator  gave  to  man  pleasure  without 
limit,  and  liable  to  fall  into  vice,  because  He  set 
before  him  virtue,  which  might  always  be  at  vari- 
ance with  pleasure,  as  with  a  domestic  enemy. 
Cicero  says,  in  the  Cato  Major :  ^  "  In  truth,  de- 
baucheries, and  adulteries,  and  disgraceful  ac- 
tions are  excited  by  no  other  enticements  than 
those  of  pleasure.  And  since  nature  or  some 
God  has  given  to  man  nothing  more  excellent 
than  the  mind,  nothing  is  so  hostile  to  this  di- 
vine benefit  and  gift  as  pleasure.  For  when  lust 
bears  sway  there  is  no  place  for  temperance,  nor 
can  virtue  have  any  existence  when  pleasure 
reigns  supreme."  But,  on  the  other  hand,  God 
gave  virtue  on  this  account,  that  it  might  subdue 
and  conquer  pleasure,  and  that,  when  it  passed 
the  boundaries  assigned  to  it,  it  might  restrain  it 
within  the  prescribed  limits,  lest  it  should  soothe 


'  [Quod  ignorantes  Deum  facere  non  possum.  In  a  later  aee 
Lactamius  might  have  been  charged  with  Senn-Pclagiain'siii,  many 
of  his  expressions  about  human  nature  being  unstudied.  But  1  note 
this  passage,  as,  like  many  others,  proving  that  he  recognises  the  need 
of  divine  grace.] 

2  C.  12. 


and  captivate  man  with  enjoyments,  render  him 
subject  to  its  control,  and  punish  him  with  ever- 
lasting death. 

The  pleasure  arising  from  the  eyes  is  various 
and  manifold,  which  is  derived  from  the  sight 
of  objects  which  are  pleasant  in  intercourse  with 
men,  or  in  nature  or  workmanship.  The  phi- 
losophers rightly  took  this  away.  For  they  say 
that  it  is  much  more  excellent  and  worthy  of 
man  to  look  upon  the  heaven  ^  rather  than 
carved  works,  and  to  admire  this  most  beautiful 
work  adorned  with  the  lights  of  the  stars  shining 
through,'*  as  with  flowers,  than  to  admire  things 
painted  and  moulded,  and  varied  with  jewels. 
But  when  they  have  eloquently  exhorted  us  to 
despise  earthly  things,  and  have  urged  us  to  look 
up  to  the  heaven,  nevertheless  they  do  not  despise 
these  public  spectacles.  Therefore  they  are  both 
delighted  with  these,  and  are  gladly  present  at 
them  ;  though,  since  they  are  the  greatest  incite- 
ment to  vices,  and  have  a  most  powerful  ten- 
dency to  corrupt  our  minds,  they  ought  to  be 
taken  away  from  us ;  for  they  not  only  contrib- 
ute in  no  respect  to  a  happy  life,  but  even  inflict 
the  greatest  injury.  For  he  who  reckons  it  a 
pleasure,  that  a  man,  though  justly  condemned, 
should  be  slain  in  his  sight,  j^ollutes  his  con- 
science as  much  as  if  he  should  become  a  spec- 
tator and  a  sharer  of  a  homicide  which  is 
secretly  committed.s  And  yet  they  call  these 
sports  in  which  human  blood  is  shed.  So  far 
has  the  feeling  of  humanity  departed  from  the 
men,  that  when  they  destroy  the  lives  of  men, 
they  think  that  they  are  amusing  themselves 
with  sport,  being  more  guilty  than  all  those 
whose  blood-shedding  they  esteem  a  pleasure. 
I  ask  now  whether  they  can  be  just  and  pious 
men,  who,  when  they  see  men  placed  under  the 
stroke  of  death,  and  entreating  mercy,  not  only 
suffer  them  to  be  put  to  death,  but  also  demand 
it,  and  give  cruel  and  inhuman  votes  for  their 
death,  not  being  satiated  with  wounds  nor  con- 
tented with  bloodshed.  Moreover,  they  order 
them,  even  though  wounded  and  prostrate,  to 
be  attacked  again,  and  their  carcases  to  be 
wasted  ^  with  blows,  that  no  one  may  delude 
them  by  a  pretended  death.  They  are  even 
angry  with  the  combatants,  unless  one  of  the 
two  is  quickly  slain  ;  and  as  though  they  thirsted 
for  human  blood,  they  hate  delays.  They  de- 
mand that  other  and  fresh  combatants  should  be 
given  to  them,  that  they  may  satisfy  their  eyes 


3  Coelum  potitis  qu.am  coelata.  There  appears  to  be  an  allusion 
to  the  supposed  derivation  of  "  coelum  "  from  "  ccelando." 

4  [Intermicantibus  astrorum  luminibus.  It  does  not  seem  to  me 
that  the  learned  translator  does  full  justice  here  to  our  author's  idea. 
"  Adorned  with  the  twinkling  lights  of  the  stars  "  would  be  an  admis- 
sible rendering.] 

5  [It  is  unbecoming  for  a  Christian,  unless  as  an  officer  of  the 
law  or  a  minister  of  mercy,  to  be  a  spectator  of  any  e.xecution  of 
criminals.     Blessed  growth  of  Christian  morals.] 

6  Dissipari.  [A  very  graphic  description  of  the  brutal  shows  of 
the  arena,  which  were  abolished  by  the  first  Christian  emperor,  pe»- 
haps  influenced  by  these  very  pages.] 


Chap.  XX.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


187 


as  soon  as  possible.  Being  imbued  with  this 
practice,  they  have  lost  their  humanity.  There- 
fore they  do  not  spare  even  the  innocent,  but 
practise  upon  all  that  which  they  have  learned 
in  the  slaughter  of  the  wicked.  It  is  not  there- 
fore befitting  that  those  who  strive  to  keep  to 
the  path  of  justice  should  be  companions  and 
sharers  in  this  public  homicide.  For  when  God 
forbids  us  to  kill.  He  not  only  prohibits  us  from 
open  violence,'  which  is  not  even  allowed  by 
the  public  laws,  but  He  warns  us  against  the 
commission  of  those  things  which  are  esteemed 
lawful  among  men.  Thus  it  will  be  neither  law- 
ful for  a  just  man  to  engage  in  warfare,  since  his 
warfare  is  justice  itself,  nor  to  accuse  any  one  of 
a  capital  charge,  because  it  makes  no  difference 
whether  you  put  a  man  to  death  by  word,  or 
rather  by  the  sword,  since  it  is  the  act  of  put- 
ting to  death  itself^  which  is  prohibited.  There- 
fore, with  regard  to  this  precept  of  God,  there 
ought  to  be  no  exception  at  all ;  but  that  it  is 
always  unlawful  to  put  to  death  a  man,  whom 
God  willed  to  be  a  sacred  animal.^ 

Therefore  let  no  one  imagine  that  even  this  is 
allowed,  to  strangle  "♦  newly-born  children,  which 
is  the  greatest  impiety ;  for  God  breathes  into 
their  souls  for  life,  and  not  for  death.  But  men, 
that  there  may  be  no  crime  with  which  they  may 
not  pollute  their  hands,  deprive  souls  as  yet  in- 
nocent and  simple  of  the  light  which  they  them- 
selves have  not  given.  Can  any  one,  indeed, 
expect  that  they  would  abstain  from  the  blood  of 
others  who  do  not  abstain  even  from  their  own  ? 
But  these  are  without  any  controversy  wicked  and 
unjust.  What  are  they  whom  a  false  piety  s  com- 
pels to  expose  their  children?  Can  they  be  con- 
sidered innocent  who  expose  their  own  otTspring''' 
as  a  prey  to  dogs,  and  as  far  as  it  depends  upon 
themselves,  kill  them  in  a  more  cruel  manner 
than  if  they  had  strangled  them?  Who  can 
doubt  that  he  is  impious  who  gives  occasion  ^ 
for  the  pity  of  others?  For,  although  that  which 
he  has  wished  should  befall  the  child  —  namely, 
that  it  should  be  brought  up  —  he  has  certainly 
consigned  his  own  offspring  either  to  servitude 
or  to  the  brothel  ?  But  who  does  not  understand, 
who  is  ignorant  what  things  may  happen,  or  are 
accustomed  to  happen,  in  the  case  of  each  sex, 


'  Lactrocinari. 

^  i.e.,  without  reference  to  the  manner  in  which  death  is  inflicted. 
[  Lactantius  goes  further  here  than  the  Scriptures  seem  to  warrant,  if 
more  than  private  warfare  be  in  his  mind.  The  influence  of  Ter- 
tuMian  is  visible  here.  See  Elucidation  II.  p.  76,  and  cap.  xi.  p.  99, 
vol.  iii.,  this  series.] 

^  [Sanctum  animal.  See  p.  56,  sufra.  But  the  primal  l.aw  on 
this  very  subject  contains  a  sanction  which  our  author  seems  to  forget. 
Piecause  he  is  an  animal  of  such  sacred  disunity,  therefore  "whoso 
sheddeth  man's  blood,"  etc.  (Gen.  ix.  6).  The  impunity  of  Cain  had 
led  to  bloodshed  (Gen.  vi.  11),  to  which  as  a  necessary  remedy  this 
sanction  was  prescribed.] 

■•  Oblidere. 

S  They  thought  it  less  criminal  to  expose  children  than  to  strangle 
them. 

*  Sanguinem  suum. 

'  i.e.,  by  exposing  them,  that  others  may  through  compassion 
bring  them  up. 


even  through  error?  For  this  is  shown  by  the 
example  of  CEdipus  alone,  confused  with  twofold 
guilt.  It  is  therefore  as  wicked  to  expose  as  it 
is  to  kill.  But  truly  parricides  complain  of  the 
scantiness  of  their  means,  and  allege  that  they 
have  not  enough  for  bringing  up  more  children  ; 
as  though,  in  truth,  their  means  were  in  the  power 
of  those  who  possess  them,  or  God  did  not  daily 
make  the  rich  i^oor,  and  the  poor  rich.  Where- 
fore, if  any  one  on  account  of  poverty  shall  be 
unable  to  bring  up  children,  it  is  better  to  abstain 
from  marriage  '^  than  with  wicked  hands  to  mar 
the  work  of  God. 

If,  then,  it  is  in  no  way  permitted  to  commit 
homicide,  it  is  not  allowed  us  to  be  present  at 
all,'>  lest  any  bloodshed  should  overspread  the 
conscience,  since  that  blood  is  offered  for  the 
gratification  of  the  people.  And  I  am  inclined 
to  think  that  the  corrupting  influence  of  the  stage 
is  still  more  contaminating.'"  For  the  subject 
of  comedies  are  the  dishonouring  of  virgins,  or 
the  loves  of  harlots  ;  and  the  more  eloquent  they 
are  who  have  composed  the  accounts  of  these 
disgraceful  actions,  the  more  do  they  persuade 
by  the  elegance  of  their  sentiments ;  and  har- 
monious and  polished  verses  more  readily  remain 
fixed  in  the  memory  of  the  hearers.  In  like 
manner,  the  stories  of  the  tragedians  place  before 
the  eyes  the  parricides  and  incests  of  wicked 
kings,  and  represent  tragic  "  crimes.  And  what 
other  effect  do  the  i'mmodest  gestures  of  the 
players  produce,  but  both  teach  and  excite  lusts  ? 
whose  ener\ated  bodies,  rendered  effeminate  after 
the  gait  and  dress  of  women,  imitate  "^  unchaste 
women  by  their  disgraceful  gestures.  Why  should 
I  speak  of  the  actors  of  mimcs,^'^  who  hold  forth 
instruction  in  corrupting  influences,  who  teach 
adulteries  while  they  feign  them,  and  by  pre- 
tended actions  train  to  those  which  are  true  ? 
What  can  young  men  or  virgins  do,  when  they 
see  that  these  things  are  practised  without  shame, 
and  willingly  beheld  by  all?  They  are  plainly 
admonished  of  what  they  can  do,  and  are  in- 
flamed with  lust,  which  is  especially  excited  by 
seeing ;  and  every  one  according  to  his  sex 
forms  '•*  himself  in  these  representations.  And 
they  approve  of  these  things,  while  they  laugh 
at  them,  and  with  vices  clinging  to  them,  they 
return  more  corrupted  to  their  ajjartments  ;  and 
not  boys  only,  who  ought  not  to  be  inured  to 
vices  prematurely,  but  also  old  men,  whom  it 
does  not  become  at  their  acre  to  sin. 


8  Ab  uxoris  congressione. 

9  i.e.,  at  the  shows  of  gladiators. 

■°  [How  seriously  this  warning  should  be  considered  in  our  days, 
when  American  theatricals  have  become  so  generally  licentious  be- 
yond all  bounds,  I  beg  permission  to  suggest.  See  Elucidation  I.  p. 
595,  vol.  v.;  also  Ibid.,  pp.  277,  575,  this  series.] 

"  Cothurnata  scelera. 

'-  Mentiuntur. 

'^  The  mintiis  was  a  species  of  dramatic  representation,  contain- 
ing scenes  from  common  life,  which  were  expressed  by  gesture  and 
mimicry  more  than  by  <lialogue. 

'*  Praifigurat,  not  a  word  of  cl.issical  usage. 


i88 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VI, 


What  else  does  the  practice  of  the  Circensian 
games  contain  but  levity,  vanity,  and  madness? 
P'or  their  souls  are  hurried  away  to  mad  excite- 
ment with  as  great  impetuosity  as  that  with  which 
the  chariot  races  are  there  carried  on  ;  so  that 
they  who  come  for  the  sake  of  beholding  the 
spectacle  now  themselves  exhibit  more  of  a  spec- 
tacle, when  they  begin  to  utter  exclamations,  to 
be  thrown  into  transports,  and  to  leap  from 
their  seats.  Therefore  all  spectacles  ought  to  be 
avoided,  not  only  that  no  vice  may  settle  in  our 
breasts,  which  ought  to  be  .tranquil  and  peaceful ; 
but  that  the  habitual  indulgence  of  any  pleasure 
may  not  soothe  and  captivate  us,  and  turn  us 
aside  from  God  and  from  good  works.'  For  the 
celebrations  of  the  games  are  festivals  in  honour 
of  the  gods,  inasmuch  as  they  were  instituted  on 
account  of  their  birthdays,  or  the  dedication  of 
new  temples.  And  at  first  the  huntings,  which 
are  called  shows,  were  in  honour  of  Saturnus, 
and  the  scenic  games  in  honour  of  Liber,  but 
the  Circensian  in  honour  of  Neptune.  By  de- 
grees, however,  the  same  honour  began  to  be 
paid  also  to  the  other  gods,  and  separate  games 
were  dedicated  to  their  names,  as  Sisinnius  Capito 
teaches  in  his  book  on  the  games.  Therefore, 
if  any  one  is  present  at  the  spectacles  to  which 
men  assemble  for  the  sake  of  religion,  he  has 
departed  from  the  worship  of  God,  and  has  be- 
taken himself  to  those  deities  whose  birthdays 
and  festivals  he  has  celebrated.^ 

CHAP.     XXI.  OF     THE    PLEASURES    OF    THE    EARS, 

AXD    OF    SACRED    LITERATURE. 

Pleasure  of  the  ears  is  received  from  the  sweet- 
ness of  voices  and  strains,  which  indeed  is  as 
productive  of  vice  as  that  delight  of  the  eyes  of 
which  we  have  spoken.  For  who  would  not  deem 
him  luxurious  and  worthless  who  should  have 
scenic  arts  at  his  house  ?  But  it  makes  no  dif- 
ference whether  you  practise  luxury  alone  at 
home,  or  with  the  people  in  the  theatre.  But 
we  have  already  spoken  of  spectacles  :  ^  there 
remains  one  thing  which  is  to  be  overcome  by 
us,  that  we  be  not  captivated  by  those  things 
which  penetrate  to  the  innermost  perception. 
For  all  those  things  which  are  unconnected  with 
words,  that  is,  i)leasant  sounds  of  the  air  and  of 
strings,  may  be  easily  disregarded,  because  they 
do  not  adhere  to  us,  and  cannot  be  written. 
But  a  well-composed  poem,  and  a  speech  be-  j 
gulling  with  its  sweetness,  captivate  the  minds  of  | 
men,  and  impel  them  in  what  direction  they 
please.  Hence,  when  learned  men  have  applied 
themselves  to  the  religion  of  God,  unless  they 
have  been  instructed  ^  by  some  skilful  teacher, 

'  [See  Tertullian,  vol.  lii   cap.  25,  p. 89,  this  series.] 
^  [See  p   27,  supra;  also  vol.  vi.  pp.  487,  48S.] 
3  [See  p.  187,  siiprn.\ 

■*  Fundati,  having  the  foundation  well  laid,  trained.  Some  read, 
"  Ab  aliquo  imperito  doctore  fundati."  I 


they  do  not  believe.  For,  being  accustomed  to 
sweet  and  polished  speeches  or  poems,  they  de- 
spise the  simple  and  common  language  of  the 
sacred  writings  as  mean.  For  they  seek  that 
which  may  soothe  the  senses.  But  whatever  is 
pleasant  to  the  ear  effects  persuasion,  and  while 
it  delights  fixes  itself  deeply  within  the  breast. 
Is  God,  therefore,  the  contriver  both  of  the  mind, 
and  of  the  voice,  and  of  the  tongue,  unable  to 
speak  eloquently?  Yea,  rather,  with  the  greatest 
foresight.  He  wished  those  things  which  are  di- 
vine to  be  without  adornment,  that  all  might  un- 
derstand the  things  which  He  Himself  spoke  to 
all. 

Therefore  he  who  is  anxious  for  the  truth,  who 
does  not  wish  to  deceive  himself,  must  lay  aside 
hurtful  and  injurious  pleasures,  which  would  bind 
the  mind  to  themselves,  as  pleasant  food  does 
the  body  :  true  things  must  be  preferred  to  false, 
eternal  things  to  those  which  are  of  short  dura- 
tion, useful  things  to  those  which  are  pleasant. 
Let  nothing  be  pleasing  to  the  sight  but  that  which 
you  see  to  be  done  with  piety  and  justice  ;  let 
nothing  be  agreeable  to  the  hearing  but  that  which 
nourishes  the  soul  and  makes  you  a  better  man. 
And  especially  this  sense  ought  not  to  be  dis- 
torted to  vice,  since  it  is  given  to  us  for  this  pur- 
pose, that  we  might  gain  the  knowledge  of  God. 
Therefore,  if  it  be  a  pleasure  to  hear  melodies 
and  songs,  let  it  be  pleasant  to  sing  and  hear  the 
praises  of  God.  This  is  true  pleasure,  which  is 
the  attendant  and  companion  of  virtue.  This  is 
not  frail  and  brief,  as  those  which  they  desire, 
who,  like  cattle,  are  slaves  to  the  body  ;  but  last- 
ing, and  affording  delight  without  any  intermis- 
sion. And  if  any  one  shall  pass  its  limits,  and 
shall  seek  nothing  else  from  pleasure  but  pleasure 
itself,  he  designs  yi^r  himself  death  ;  for  as  there 
is  perpetual  life  m  virtue,  so  there  is  death  in 
pleasure.  For  he  who  shall  choose  temporal 
things  will  be  without  things  eternal ;  he  who 
shall  prefer  earthly  things  will  not  have  heavenly 
things. 

CHAP.    XXII. OF   THE    PLEASURES    OF    TASTE    AND 

SMELL. 

But  with  regard  to  the  pleasures  of  taste  and 
smell,  which  two  senses  relate  only  to  the  body, 
there  is  nothing  to  be  discussed  by  us  ;  unless  by 
chance  any  one  requires  us  to  say  that  it  is  dis- 
graceful to  a  wise  and  good  man  if  he  is  the 
slave  of  his  appetite,  if  he  walks  along  besmeared 
with  unguents  and  crowned  with  flowers  :  and  he 
who  does  these  things  is  plainly  foolish  and  sense- 
less, and  is  worthless,  and  one  whom  not  even 
a  notion  of  virtue  has  reached.  Perhaps  some 
one  will  say,  Why,  then,  have  these  things  been 
made,  except  that  we  may  enjoy  them  ?  How- 
ever, it  has  often  been  said  that  there  would 
have  been  no  virtue  unless  it  had  things  which  it 


Chap.  XXIII.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


189 


might  overpower.  Therefore  God  made  all 
things  to  supply  a  contest  between  two  things. 
Those  enticements  of  pleasures,  then,  are  the 
instruments  of  that  whose  only  business  it  is  to 
subdue  virtue,  and  to  shut  out  justice  from  men. 
With  these  soothing  influences  and  enjoyments 
it  captivates  their  souls ;  for  it  knows  that  pleas- 
ure is  the  contriver  of  death.  For  as  God  calls 
man  to  life  only  through  virtue  and  labour,  so  the 
other  calls  us  to  death  by  delights  and  pleasures  ; 
and  as  men  arrive  at  real  good  through  deceitful 
evils,  so  they  arrive  at  real  evil  through  deceitful 
goods.  Therefore  those  enjoyments  are  to  be 
guarded  against,  as  snares  or  nets,  lest,  captivated 
by  the  softness  of  enjoyments,  we  should  be 
brought  under  the  dominion  of  death  with  the 
body  itself,  to  which  we  have  enslaved  ourselves. 

CHAP.  XXIII.' DE  TACTUS  VOLUPTATE  ET  LIBIDINE, 

ATQUE    DE    MATRIMONIO    ET    CONTINENTIA. 

Venio  nunc  ad  eam,  quae  percipitur  ex  tactu, 
voluptatem  :  qui  sensus  est  quidem  totius  cor- 
poris. Sed  ego  non  de  ornamentis,  aut  vesti- 
bus,  sed  de  sola  libidine  dicendum  mihi  puto ; 
quae  maxime  coercenda  est,  quia  maxime  nocet. 
Cum  excogitasset  Deus  duorum  sexuum  ratio- 
nem,  attribuit  iis,  ut  se  invicem  appeterent,  et 
conjunctione  gauderent.  Itaque  ardentissimam 
cupiditatem  cunctorum  animantium  corporibus 
admiscuit,  ut  in  hos  affectus  avidissime  ruerent, 
eaque  ratione  propagari  et  multiplicari  genera 
possent.  Qua^  cupiditas  et  appetentia  in  hom- 
ine  vehementior  et  acrior  invenitur ;  vel  quia 
hominum  multitudinem  voluit  esse  majorem,  vel 
quoniam  virtutem  soli  homini  dedit,  ut  esset 
laus  et  gloria  in  coercendis  voluptatibus,  et  ab- 
stinentia  sui.  Scit  ergo  adversarius  ille  noster, 
quanta  sit  vis  hujus  cupiditatis,  quam  quidam 
necessitatem  dicere  maluerunt ;  eamque  a  recto 
et  bono,  ad  malum  et  pravum  transfert.  Illicita 
enim  desideria  immittit,  ut  aliena  contaminent, 
quibus  habere  propria  sine  delicto  licet.  Obji- 
cit  quippe  oculis  irritabiles  formas,  suggeritque 
fomenta,  et  vitiis  pabulum  subministrat :  tum  in- 
timis  visceribus  stimulos  omnes  conturbat  et 
commovet,  et  naturalem  ilium  incitat  attjue  in- 
flammat  ardorem,  donee  irretitum  hominem 
implicatumque  decipiat.  Ac  ne  quis  esset,  qui 
pcenarum  metvi  abstineret  alieno,  lupanaria 
(juoque  constituit ;  et  ])udorem  infelicium  muli- 
erum  publicavit,  ut  ludibrio  haberet  tam  eos  qui 
faciunt,  quam  quas  pati  necesse  est. 

His  obsccenitatibus  aninias,  ad  sanctitatem 
genitas,  velut  in  cceni  gurgite  demersit,  pudorem 
extinxit,  pudicitiam  profligavit.  Idem  etiam 
mares  maribus  admiscuit ;  et  nefandos  coitus 
contra  naturam  contraque  institutum  Dei  machi- 

'  It  has  been  judged  advisable  to  give  this  chapter  in  the  original 
Latin.      [Compare  Clement,  vol.  ii.  p.  iisy,  notes  j,  7,  this  acries.J 


natus  est :  sic  imbuit  homines,  et  armavit  ad 
nefas  omne.  Quid  enim  potest  esse  sanctum 
iis,  qui  ?etatem  imbecillam  et  prsesidio  indigen- 
tem,  libidini  sua^  depopulandam  foedandamque 
substraverint  ?  Non  potest  hsec  res  pro  magni- 
tudine  sceleris  enarrari.  Nihil  amplius  istos  ap- 
pellare  possum,  quam  impios  et  parricidas,  quibus 
non  sufficit  sexus  a  Deo  datus,  nisi  etiam  suum 
'  profane  ac  petulanter  illudant.  Hgec  tamen 
apud  illos  levia,  et  quasi  honesta  sunt.  Quid 
dicam  de  iis,  qui  abominandam  non  libidinem, 
sed  insaniam  potius  exercent  !  Piget  dicere  : 
sed  quid  his  fore  credamus,  quos  non  piget  fa- 
cere  ?  et  tamen  dicendum  est,  quia  fit.  De  istis 
loquor,  quorum  teterrima  libido  et  execrabihs 
:  furor  ne  capiti  quidem  parcit.  Quibus  hoc 
verbis,  aut  qua  indignatione  tantum  nefas  prose- 
quar?  Vincit  officium  lingua  sceleris  magni- 
tudo.  Cum  igitur  libido  h^ec  edat  opera,  et 
hrec  facinora  designet,  armandi  adversus  eam 
virtute  maxima  sumus.  Quisquis  affectus  illos 
fraenare  non  potest,  cohibeat  eos  intra  preescrip- 
tum  legitimi  tori,  ut  et  illud,  quod  avide  expetat, 
consequatur,  et  tamen  in  peccatum  non  incidat. 
Nam  quid  sibi  homines  perditi  volunt?  Nempe 
honesta  opera  voluptas  sequitur :  si  ipsam  per 
se  appetunt,  justa  et  legitima  frui  licet. 

Quod  si  aliqua  necessitas  prohibebit  tum  vero 
maxima  adhibenda  virtus  erit,  ut  cupiditati  con- 
tinentia  reluctetur.  Nee  tantum  alienis,  qu?e 
attingere  non  licet,  verum  etiam  publicis  vul- 
gatisque  corporibus  ai)stinendum,  Deus  pra^cepit  ; 
docetque  nos,  cum  duo  inter  se  corpora  fuerint 
copulata,  unum  corpus  efficere.  Ita  qui  se  coeno 
immerserit,  coeno  sit  oblitus  necesse  est ;  et  cor- 
pus quidem  cito  ablui  potest :  mens  autem  con- 
tagione  impudici  corporis  inquinata  non  potest, 
nisi  et  longo  tempore,  et  multis  bonis  operibus, 
ab  ea  quae  inhasserit  colluvione  purgari.  Opor- 
tet  ergo  sibi  quemque  proponere,  duorum  sexu- 
um conjunctionem  generandi  causa  datam  esse 
viventibus,  eamque  legem  his  affectibus  positam, 
ut  successionem  parent.  Sicut  autem  dedit  no- 
bis oculos  Deus,  non  ut  spectemus,  voluptatem- 
que  capiamus,  sed  ut  videamus  propter  eos 
actus,  qui  pertinent  ad  vitae  necessitatem,  ita 
genitalem  corporis  partem,  quod  nomen  ipsum 
docet,  nulla  alia  causa  nisi  efficiendie  sobolis  ac- 
cepimus.  Huic  divinae  legi  summa  devotione 
parendum  est.  Sint  omnes,  qui  se  discipulos 
Dei  profitebuntur,  ita  morati  et  instituti,  ut  im- 
perare  sibi  possint.  Nam  qui  voluptatibus  indul- 
gent, qui  libidini  obsequuntur,  ii  animam  suam 
corpori  mancipant,  ad  mortemque  condemnant : 
quia  se  corpori  addixerunt,  in  quod  habet  mors 
potestatem.  Unusquisque  igitur,  quantum  po- 
test, formet  se  ad  verecundiam,  pudorem  colat, 
castitatem  conscientia  et  mente  tueatr.r ;  ncc 
tantum  legibus  ])ul)licis  pareat :  sed  sit  su])ra 
omnes   leges,  qui  legem  Dei  sequitur.     Quibus 


190 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VI. 


bonis  si  assueverit,  jam  pudebit  eum  ad  deteriora 
desciscere :  modb  placeant  recta  et  honesta, 
quae  melioribus  jucundiora  sunt  quam  prava  et 
inhonesta  pejoribus. 

Nondum  omnia  castitatis  officia  exsecutus 
sum  :  quam  Deus  non  modo  intra  privates  parie- 
tes,  sed  etiam  prcescripto  lectuli  terminat ;  ut 
cum  quis  habeat  uxorem,  neque  servam,  neque 
liberam  habere  insuper  velit,  sed  niatrimonio 
fidem  servet.  Non  enim,  sicut  juris  publici 
ratio  est,  sola  mulier  adultera  est,  quae  habet 
alium,  maritus  autem,  etiam  si  plures  habeat,  a 
crimine  adulterii  solutus  est.  Sed  divina  lex  ita 
duos  in  matrimonium,  quod  est  in  corpus  unum, 
pari  jure  conjungit,  ut  adulter  habeatur,  quis- 
quis  compagem  corporis  in  diversa  distraxerit. 
Nee  ob  aliam  causam  Deus,  cum  caeteras  ani- 
mantes  suscepto  ftjetu  maribus  repugnare  voluis- 
set,  solam  omnium  mulierem  patientem  viri 
fecit ;  scilicet  ne  fcjeminis  repugnantibus,  libido 
cogeret  viros  aliud  appetere,  eoque  facto,  cas- 
titatis gloriam  non  tenerent.'  Sed  neque  mulier 
virtutem  pudicitioe  caperet,  si  peccare  non  pos- 
set. Nam  quis  mutum  animal  pudicum  esse 
dixerit,  qu5d  suscepto  fuetu  mari  repugnat? 
Quod  ideo  facit,  quia  necesse  est  in  dolorem 
atque  in  periculum  veniat,  si  admiserit.  Nulla 
igitur  laus  est,  non  facere  quod  facere  non  possis. 
Ideo  autem  pudicitia  in  homine  laudatur,  quia 
non  naturalis  est,  sed  voluntaria.  Servanda  igi- 
tur fides  ab  utroque  alteri  est :  immo  exemplo 
continentiae  docenda  uxor,  ut  se  caste  gerat. 
Iniquum  est  enim,  ut  id  exigas,  quod  praestare 
ipse  non  possis.  Quae  iniquitas  effecit  profecto, 
ut  essent  adulteria,  foeminis  aegre  ferentibus 
prffistare  se  fidem  non  exhibentibus  mutuam 
charitatem.  Denique  nulla  est  tam  perditi  pu- 
doris  adultera,  qudi  non  hanc  causam  vitiis  suis 
praetendat ;  injuriam  se  peccando  non  facere, 
sed  referre.  Quod  optime  Quintilianus  expres- 
sit :  Homo,  inquit,  neque  alieni  matrimonii  ab- 
stinens,  neque  sui  custos,  quae  inter  se  natura 
connexa  sunt.  Nam  neque  maritus  circa  cor- 
rumpendas  ahorum  conjuges  occupatus  potest 
vacare  domestics  sanctitati ;  et  uxor,  cum  in 
tale  incidit  matrimonium,  exemplo  ipso  conci- 
tata,  aut  imitari  se  putat,  aut  vindicari. 

Cavendum  igitur,  ne  occasionem  vitiis  nostra 
intemperantia  demus :  sed  assuescant  invicem 
mores  duorum,  et  jugum  paribus  animis  ferant. 
Nos  ipsos  in  altero  cogitemus.  Nam  fere  in  hoc 
justitiai  summa  consistit,  ut  non  facias  alteri, 
quidquid  ipse  ab  altero  pati  nolis.  Haec  sunt 
quae  ad  continentiam  praecipiuntur  a  Deo.  Sed 
tamen  ne  quis  divina  praecepta  circumscribere  se 
putet  posse,  adduntur  ilia,  ut  omnis  calumnia, 
et  occasio    fraudis  removeatur,  adulterum  esse, 


'  [Non  bene  conveniunt  igilur  legibus  divinis  quse  supradicta  sunt 
auctore  nostro  (vide  p  143,  apud  n.  2)  sed  haec  verba  de  nature 
muliebri  minime  imperita,  esse  videntur.] 


qui  a  marito  dimissam  duxerit,  et  eum  qui  prae- 
ter  crimen  adulterii  uxorem  dimiserit,  ut  alteram 
ducat ;  dissociari  enim  corpus  et  distrahi  Deus 
noluit.  Praeterea  non  tantum  adulterium  esse 
vitandum,  sed  etiam  cogitationem  ;  ne  quis  aspi- 
ciat  alienam,  et  animo  concupiscat :  adulteram 
enim  fieri  mentem,  si  vel  imaginem  voluptatis 
sibi  ipsa  depinxerit.  Mens  est  enim  profecto 
quai  peccat ;  qu^e  immoderatae  libidinis  fructum 
cogitatione  complectitur ;  in  hac  crimen  est,  in 
hac  omne  delictum.  Nam  etsi  corpus  nulla  sit 
labe  maculatum,  non  constat  tamen  pudicitiae 
ratio,  si  animus  incestus  est ;  nee  illibata  casti- 
tas  videri  potest,  ubi  conscientiam  cupiditas  in- 
quinavit.  Nee  vero  aliquis  existimet,  difficile 
esse  fraenos  imponere  voluptati,  eamque  vagam 
et  errantem  castitatis  pudicitiaeque  limitibus  in- 
cludere,  cum  propositum  sit  hominibus  etiam 
vincere,  ac  plurimi  beatam  atque  incorruptam 
corporis  integritatem  retinuerint,  raultique  sint, 
qui  hoc  coelesti  genere  vitae  felicissime  perfru- 
antur.  Quod  t^uidem  Deus  non  ita  fieri  prae- 
cepit,  tanquam  astringat,  quia  generari  homines 
oportet ;  sed  tanquam  sinat.  Scit  enim,  quan- 
tam  his  affectibus  imposuerit  necessitatem.  Si 
quis  hoc,  inquit,  facere  potuerit,  habebit  eximiam 
incomparabilemque  mercedem.  Quod  conti- 
nentiae  genus  quasi  fastigium  est,  omniumque 
consummatio  virtutum.  Ad  quam  si  quis  eniti 
atque  eluctari  potuerit.  hunc  servum  dominus, 
hunc  discipulum  magister  agnoscet ;  hie  terram 
triumphabit,  hie  erit  consimilis  Deo,  qui  virtu- 
tem Dei  cepit.  Haec  quidem  difficilia  videntur  ; 
sed  de  eo  loquimur,  cui  calcatis  omnibus  ter- 
renis,  iter  in  coelum  paratur.  Nam  quia  virtus 
in  Dei  agnitione  consistit,  omnia  gravia  sunt, 
clum  ignores  ;  ubi  cognoveris,  facilia  :  per  ipsas 
difficultates  nobis  exeundum  est,  qui  ad  sum- 
mum  bonum  tendimus. 

CHAP.    XXIV, OF    REPENTANCE,    OF    PARDON,    AND 

THE    COMMANDS    OF    GOD. 

Nor,  however,  let  any  one  be  disheartened,  or 
despair  concerning  himself,  if,  overcome  by  pas- 
sion, or  niipelled  by  desire,  or  deceived  by  error, 
or  compelled  by  force,  he  has  turned  aside  to  the 
v^^ay  of  unrighteousness.  For  it  is  possible  for 
him  to  be  brought  back,  and  to  be  set  free,  if 
he  repents  of  his  actions,  and,  turning  to  better 
things,  makes  satisfaction  to  God.  Cicero,  in- 
deed, thought  that  this  was  impossible,  whose 
words  in  the  third  book  of  the  Academics  ^  are  : 
"  But  if,  as  in  the  case  of  those  who  have  gone 
astray  on  a  journey,  it  were  permitted  those  who 
have  followed  a  devious  course  to  correct  their 
error  by  re])entance,  it  would  be  more  easy  to 
amend  rashness."  It  is  altogether  permitted 
them.     For  if  we    think  that    our  children  are 


2  [From  a  lost  book.] 


Chap.  XXIV.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


191 


corrected  when  we  perceive  that  they  repent  of 
their  faults,  and  though  we  have  disinherited  and 
cast  them  off,  we  again  receive,  cherish,  and  em- 
brace them,  why  should  we  despair  that  the 
mercy  of  God  our  Father  may  again  be  appeased 
by  repentance  ?  Therefore  He  who  is  at  once 
the  Lord  and  most  indulgent  Parent  promises 
that  He  will  remit  the  sins  of  the  penitent,  and 
that  He  will  blot  out  all  the  iniquities  of  him  who 
shall  begin  afresh  to  practise  righteousness.  For 
as  the  uprightness  of  his  past  life  is  of  no  avail 
to  him  who  lives  badly,  because  the  subsequent 
wickedness  has  destroyed  his  works  of  righteous- 
ness, so  former  sins  do  not  stand  in  the  way  of 
him  who  has  amended  his  life,  because  the  sub- 
sequent righteousness  has  effaced  the  stain  of  his 
former  life.  For  he  who  repents  of  that  which 
he  has  done,  understands  his  former  error ;  and 
on  this  account  the  Greeks  better  and  more  sig- 
nificantly speak  of  metanoia,^  which  we  may 
speak  of  in  Latin  as  a  return  to  a  right  under- 
standing.^ For  he  returns  to  a  right  under- 
standing, and  recovers  his  mind  as  it  were  from 
madness,  who  is  grieved  for  his  error ;  and  he 
reproves  himself  of  madness,  and  confirms  his 
mind  to  a  better  course  of  life  :  then  he  espe- 
cially guards  against  this  very  thing,  that  he  may 
not  again  be  led  into  the  sanie  snares.  In  short, 
even  the  dumb  animals,  when  they  are  ensnared 
by  fraud,  if  by  any  means  they  have  extricated 
themselves  so  as  to  escape,  become  more  cautious 
for  the  future,  and  always  avoid  all  those  things 
in  which  they  have  perceived  wiles  and  snares. 
Thus  repentance  makes  a  man  cautious  and  dili- 
gent to  avoid  the  faults  into  which  he  has  once 
fallen  through  deceit. 

For  no  one  can  be  so  prudent  and  so  circum- 
spect as  not  at  some  time  to  slip  ;  and  therefore 
God,  knowing  our  weakness,  of  His  compassion  ^ 
has  opened  a  harbour  of  refuge  for  man,  that  the 
medicine  of  repentance  might  aid  this  necessity 
to  which  our  frailty  is  liable. +  Therefore,  if  any 
one  has  erred,  let  him  retrace  his  step,  and  as 
soon  as  possible  recover  and  reform  himself. 

"But  upward  to  retrace  the  way, 
And  pass  into  the  light  of  day, 
Then  comes  the  stress  of  labour." ' 

For  when  men  have  tasted  sweet  pleasures  to 
their  destruction,^'  they  can  scarcely  be  separated 
from  them  :  they  would  more  easily  follow  right 
things  if  they  had  not  tasted  their  attractions. 
But  if  they  tear  themselves  away  from  this  ])er- 
nicious  slavery,  all  their  error  will  be    forgiven 

'  /lieroi-oia.  The  word  properly  denotes  a  change  of  mind,  result- 
ing in  a  change  of  conduct. 

-  Resiplscentiam.      (  Note  the  admitted  superiority  of  the  Greek.] 

3  Pro  pictatc  sua.  Augustine  {De  Civitnte  Dei,  x.  1)  explains  the 
use  of  this  expression  as  applied  to  God. 

*  [Concerning  the  "  planks  after  shipwreck,"  see  Tertiillian,  pp. 
659  and  666,  vol.  iii.,  this  series  j 

5  Virg.,  .■■Eiiciti,  vi.  128. 

6  Male. 


them,  if  they  shall  have  corrected  their  error  by  , 
a  better  life.  And  let  not  any  one  imagine  that 
he  is  a  gainer  if  he  shall  have  no  witness  of  his 
fault :  for  all  things  are  known  to  Him  in  whose 
sight  we  live  ;  and  if  we  are  able  to  conceal  any- 
thing from  all  men,  we  cannot  conceal  it  from 
God,  to  whom  nothing  can  be  hidden,  nothing 
secret.  Seneca  closed  his  exhortations  with  an 
admirable  sentiment :  "  There  is,"  he  says,"  some 
great  deity,  and  greater  than  can  be  imagined  ; 
and  for  him  we  endeavour  to  live.  Let  us  ap- 
prove ourselves  to  him.  For  it  is  of  no  avail 
that  conscience  is  confirmed  ;  we  lie  open  to  the 
sight  of  God."  What  can  be  spoken  with  greater 
truth  by  him  who  knew  God,  than  has  been  said 
by  a  man  who  is  ignorant  of  true  religion  ?  For 
he  both  expressed  the  majesty  of  God,  by  saying 
that  it  is  too  great  for  the  reflecting  powers  of 
the  human  mind  to  receive  ;  and  he  touched  up- 
on the  very  fountain  of  truth,  by  perceiving  that 
the  life  of  men  is  not  superfluous,''  as  the  Epicu- 
reans will  have  it,  but  that  they  make  it  their  en- 
deavour to  live  to  God,  if  indeed  they  live  with 
justice  and  piely.  He  might  have  been  a  true 
worshipper  of  God,  if  any  one  had  pointed  out 
to  him  God  ;  **  and  he  might  assuredly  have  de- 
spised Zeno,  and  his  teacher  Sotion,  if  he  had 
obtained  a  true  guide  of  wisdom.  Let  us  ap- 
prove ourselves  to  him,  he  says.  A  speech  truly 
heavenly,  had  it  not  been  preceded  by  a  confes- 
sion of  ignorance.  It  is  of  no  avail  that  con- 
science is  confined  ;  we  lie  open  to  the  sight  of 
God.  There  is  then  no  room  for  falsehood,  none 
for  dissimulation  ;  for  the  eyes  of  men  are  re- 
moved by  walls,  but  the  divine  power  of  God 
cannot  be  removed  by  the  inward  parts  from 
looking  through  and  knowing  the  entire  man. 
The  same  writer  says,  in  the  first  book  of  the 
same  work  :  "  What  are  you  doing?  what  are  you 
contriving?  what  are  you  hiding?  Your  guardian 
follows  you  ;  one  is  withdrawn  from  you  by  for- 
eign travel,  another  by  death,  another  by  infirm 
health  ;  this  one  adheres  to  you,  and  you  can 
never  be  without  him.  Why  do  you  choose  a 
secret  place,  and  remove  the  witness?  Suppose 
that  you  have  succeeded  in  escaping  the  notice 
of  all,  foolish  man  '  What  does  it  profit  you  not 
to  have  a  witness,'^  if  you  have  the  witness  of  your 
own  conscience? 

And  Tully  speaks  in  a  manner  no  less  remark- 
able concerning  conscience  and  God  :  "  Let  him 


7  Supervacuam,  i.e.,  useless,  without  an  object.      [P.  171,  n.  2.] 

8  [May  1  be  pardoned  for  asking  my  reader  to  refer  to  TJie  Titsk 
of  the  poet  Cowper  (book  ii.):  ".411  truth  is  from  the  sempiternal 
source."  etc.  The  concluding  lines  illustrate  the  kindly  judgment  of 
our  author  :  — 

"  How  oft,  when  Paul  has  served  us  with  a  text. 
Has  Epictetus,  Plato,  Tully,  preached  ! 
Men  that,  if  now  alive,  would  sit  content 
And  humble  learners  of  a  Saviour's  worth, 
Pre.Tch  it  who  might.     .Such  was  their  love  of  truth, 
Their  thirst  of  knowledge,  and  their  candour  too." 
But  turn  to  our  author's  last  sentence  in  cap.  17,  p.  1S3,  s:i/>ra.'\ 

9  Consciuiii. 


192 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VI. 


remember,"  he  says,  "  that  he  has  God  as  a  wit- 
ness, that  is,  as  I  judge,  his  own  mind,  than  which 
God  has  given  nothing  more  divine  to  man."  ' 
Likewise,  in  speaking  of  the  just  and  good  man, 
he  says  :  "  Therefore  such  a  man  will  not  dare, 
not  merely  tJ  do,  but  even  to  think,  anything 
which  he  would  not  dare  to  proclaim."  There- 
lore  let  us  cleanse  our  conscience,  which  is  open 
to  the  eyes  of  God  ;  and,  as  the  same  writer  says, 
"  let  us  always  so  live  as  to  remember  that  we 
shall  have  to  give  an  account ;  "  ^  and  let  us 
re::kon  that  we  are  looked  upon  at  every  moment, 
not,  as  he  said,  in  some  theatre  of  the  world  by 
men,  but  from  above  by  Him  who  is  about  to  be 
both  the  judge  and  also  the  witness,  to  whom, 
when  He  demands  an  account  of  our  life,  it  will 
not  be  permitted  any  one  to  deny  his  actions. 
Therefore  it  is  better  either  to  flee  from  con- 
science, or  ourselves  to  open  our  mind  of  our 
own  accord,  and  tearing  open  our  wounds  to 
pour  forth  destruction  ;  which  wounds  no  one 
else  can  heal  but  He  alone  who  made  the  lame 
to  walk,  restored  sight  to  the  blind,  cleansed  the 
polluted  limbs,  and  raised  the  dead.  He  will 
quench  the  ardour  of  desires,  He  will  root  out 
lusts,  He  will  remove  envy.  He  will  mitigate 
anger.  He  will  give  true  and  lasting  health. 
This  remedy  should  be  sought  by  all,  inasmuch 
as  the  soul  is  harassed  by  greater  danger  than 
the  body,  and  a  cure  should  be  applied  as  soon 
as  possible  to  secret  diseases.  For  if  any  one 
has  his  eyesight  clear,  all  his  limbs  perfect,  and 
his  entire  body  in  the  most  vigorous  health, 
nevertheless  I  should  not  call  him  sound  if  he  is 
carried  away  by  anger,  swollen  and  puffed  up  with 
pride,  the  slave  of  lust,  and  burning  with  desires  ; 
but  I  should  rather  call  him  sound  who  does  not 
raise  his  eyes  to  the  prosperity  of  another,  who 
does  not  admire  riches,  who  looks  upon  another's 
wife  with  chaste  eye,  who  covets  nothing  at  all, 
does  not  desire  that  which  is  another's,  envies 
no  one,  disdains  no  one  ;  who  is  lowly,  merciful, 
bountiful,  mild,  courteous :  peace  perpetually 
dwells  in  his  mind. 

Ths-t  man  is  sound,  he  is  just,  he  is  perfect. 
Whoever,  therefore,  has  obeyed  all  these  heav- 
enly precepts,  he  is  a  worshipper  of  the  true 
God,  whose  sacrifices  are  gentleness  of  spirit,  and 
an  innocent  life,  and  good  actions.  And  he 
who  exhibits  all  these  qualities  offers  a  sacrifice 
as  often  as  he  performs  any  good  and  pious 
action.  For  God  does  not  desire  the  sacrifice 
of  a  dumb  animal,  nor  of  death  and  blood,  but 
of  man  and  life.  And  to  this  sacrifice  there  is 
neither  need  of  sacred  boughs,  nor  of  purifica- 
tions,^   nor  of   sods  of   turf,  which    things  are 


1  De  Offic.,  ill.  10. 

2  Ibid  ,  iii    19. 

3  Februis,  a  word  used  in  the  Sabine  language  for  purgations. 
Others  read  "  fibris,"  entrails,  offered  in  sacrifice. 


plainly  most  vain,  but  of  those  things  which  are 
put  forth  from  the  innermost  breast.  Therefore, 
upon  the  altar  of  God,  which  is  truly  very  great,^ 
and  which  is  placed  in  the  heart  of  man,  and 
cannot  be  defiled  with  blood,  there  is  placed 
righteousness,  patience,  faith,  innocence,  chastity, 
and  abstinence.  This  is  the  truest  ceremony, 
this  is  that  law  of  God,  as  it  is  called  by  Cicero, 
illustrious  and  divine,  which  always  commands 
things  which  are  right  and  honourable,  and  for- 
bids things  which  are  wrong  and  disgraceful ; 
and  he  who  obeys  this  most  holy  and  certain 
law  cannot  fail  to  live  justly  and  lawfully.  And 
I  have  laid  down  a  few  chief  points  of  this  law, 
since  I  promised  that  I  would  speak  only  of 
those  things  which  completed  the  character  5  of 
virtue  and  righteousness.  If  any  one  shall  wish 
to  comprise  all  the  other  parts,  let  him  seek 
them  from  the  fountain  itself,  from  which  that 
stream  flowed  to  us. 

CHAP.  XXV. OF    SACRIFICE,  AND   OF   AN   OFFERING 

WORTHY  OF  GOD,  AND  OF  THE  FORM  OF  PRAISING 
GOD. 

Now  let  US  speak  briefly  concerning  sacrifice 
itself.  "  Ivory,"  says  Plato,  "  is  not  a  pure  offer- 
ing to  God."  What  then?  Are  embroidered 
and  costly  textures?  Nay,  rather  nothing  is  a 
pure  offering  to  God  which  can  be  corrupted  or 
taken  away  secretly.  But  as  he  saw  this,  that 
nothing  which  was  taken  from  a  dead  body  ought 
to  be  offered  to  a  living  being,  why  did  he  not 
see  that  a  corporeal  offering  ought  not  to  be 
presented  to  an  incorporeal  being?  How  much 
better  and  more  truly  does  Seneca  speak  :  "  Will 
you  think  of  God  as  great  and  placid,  and  a 
friend  to  be  reverenced  with  gentle  majesty,  and 
always  at  hand  ?  not  to  be  worshipped  with  the 
immolation  of  victims  and  with  much  blood  — 
for  what  pleasure  arises  from  the  slaughter  of 
innocent  animals?  —  but  with  a  pure  mind  and 
with  a  good  and  honourable  purpose.  Temples 
are  not  to  be  built  to  Him  with  stones  piled  up 
on  high  ;  He  is  to  be  consecrated  by  each  man 
in  his  own  breast."  Therefore,  if  any  one  thinks 
that  garments,  and  jewels,  and  other  things  which 
are  esteemed  precious,  are  valued  by  God,  he  is 
altogether  ignorant  of  what  God  is,  since  he 
thinks  that  those  things  are  pleasing  to  Him 
which  even  a  man  would  be  justly  praised  for 
despising.  What,  then,  is  pure,  what  is  worthy 
of  God,  but  that  which  He  Himself  has  de- 
manded in  that  divine  law  of  His? 

There  are  two  things  which  ought  to  be  offered, 
the  gift'"  and  the  sacrifice;   the  gift  as  a  per- 

■*  There  is  an  alhision  to  the  altar  of  Hercules,  called  "  ara 
maxima."     [Christian  philosophy  is  heard  at  last  among  Latins.] 

S  Qu:e  sumnuim  fastiuium  imponereiit.  The  phrase  properly 
means  to  complete  a  building  by  raising  the  pediment  or  gable. 
Hepce  its  figurative  use.     [See  cap  2,  p.  164.] 

^^  Douum,  a  free-will  offering  or  gift.     Sec  Ex.  xxv.  a. 


Chap.  XXV.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


193 


petual  offering,  the  sacrifice  for  a  time.  But 
with  those  who  by  no  means  understand  the 
nature  of  the  Divine  Being,  a  gift  is  anything 
which  is  wrought  of  gold  or  silver ;  likewise 
anything  which  is  woven  of  purple  and  silk  :  a 
sacrifice  is  a  victim,  and  as  many  things  as  are 
burnt  upon  the  altar.  But  God  does  not  make 
use  either  of  the  one  or  the  other,  because  He 
is  free  from  corruption,  and  that  is  altogether 
corruptible.  Therefore,  in  each  case,  that  which 
is  incorporeal  must  be  offered  to  God,  for  He 
accepts  this.  His  offering  is  innocency  of  soul ; 
His  sacrifice  praise  and  a  hymn.'  For  if  God  is 
not  seen,  He  ought  therefore  to  be  worshipped 
with  things  which  are  not  seen.  Therefore  no 
other  religion  is  true  but  that  which  consists  of 
virtue  and  justice.  But  in  what  manner  God 
deals  with  the  justice  of  man  is  easily  understood. 
For  if  man  shall  be  just,  having  received  im- 
mortality, he  will  serve  God  for  ever.  But  that 
men  are  not  born  except  for  justice,  both  the 
ancient  philosophers  and  even  Cicero  suspects. 
For,  discussing  the  Laws,^  he  says  :  "  But  of  all 
things  which  are  discussed  by  learned  men, 
nothing  assuredly  is  of  greater  importance  than 
that  it  should  be  entirely  understood  that  we  are 
bom  to  justice."  We  ought  therefore  to  hold  forth 
and  offer  to  God  that  alone  for  the  receiving  of 
which  He  Himself  produced  us.  But  how  true 
this  twofold  kind  of  sacrifice  is,  Trismegistus 
Hermes  is  a  befitting  witness,  who  agrees  with 
us,  that  is,  with  the  prophets,  whom  we  follow, 
as  much  in  fact  as  in  words.  He  thus  spoke 
concerning  justice  :  "  Adore  and  worship  this 
word,  O  son."  But  the  worship  of  God  consists 
of  one  thing,  not  to  be  wicked.  Also  in  that 
perfect  discourse,  when  he  heard  Asclepius  in- 
quiring from  his  son  whether  it  pleased  him  that 
incense  and  other  odours  for  divine  sacrifice 
were  offered  to  his  father,  exclaimed  :  "  Speak 
words  of  good  omen,  O  Asclepius.  For  it  is 
the  greatest  impiety  to  entertain  any  such  thought 
concerning  that  being  of  pre-eminent  goodness. 


'   [i.e.,   "the  Eucharist,"   as  a  sacrifice   of  praise  and   thanks- 
giving.    And  mark  what  follows,  note  3,  i>i/ra.] 
2  [Nos  ad  justitiam  esse  natos.J 


For  these  things,  and  things  resembling  these, 
are  not  adapted  to  Him.  For  He  is  full  of  all 
things,  as  many  as  exist,  and  He  has  need  of 
nothing  at  all.  But  let  us  give  Flim  thanks,  and 
adore  Him.  For  His  sacrifice  consists  only  of 
blessing."     And  he  spoke  rightly. ^ 

For  we  ought  to  sacrifice  to  God  in  word ; 
inasmuch  as  God  is  the  Word,  as  He  Himself 
confessed.  Therefore  the  chief  ceremonial  in 
the  worship  of  God  is  praise  from  the  mouth  of 
a  just  man  directed  towards  God.3  That  this, 
however,  may  be  accepted  by  God,  there  is  need 
of  humility,  and  fear,  and  devotion  in  the  great- 
est degree,  lest  any  one  should  chance  to  place 
confidence  in  his  integrity  and  innocence,  and 
thus  incur  the  charge  of  pride  and  arrogance, 
and  by  this  deed  lose  the  recompense^  of  his 
virtue.  But  that  he  may  obtain  the  favour  of 
God,  and  be  free  from  every  stain,  let  him  always 
implore  the  mercy  of  God,  and  pray  for  nothing 
else  but  pardon  for  his  sins,  even  though  he  has 
none.'*  If  he  desires  anything  else,  there  is  no 
need  of  expressing  it  in  word  to  one  who  knows 
what  we  wish  ;  if  anything  good  shall  happen  to 
him,  let  him  give  thanks  ;  if  any  evil,  let  him 
make  amends,^  and  let  him  confess  that  the  evil 
has  happened  to  him  on  account  of  his  faults ; 
and  even  in  evils  let  him  nothing  less  give  thanks, 
and  make  amends  in  good  things,  that  he  may 
be  the  same  at  all  times,  and  be  firm,  and  un- 
changeable, and  unshaken.  And  let  him  not 
suppose  that  this  is  to  be  done  by  him  only  in 
the  temple,  but  at  home,  and  even  in  his  very 
bed.  In  short,  let  him  always  have  God  with 
himself,  consecrated  in  his  heart,  inasmuch  as 
he  himself  is  a  temple  of  God.  But  if  he  has 
served  God,  his  Father  and  Lord,  with  this  assi- 
duity, obedience,  and  devotion,  justice  is  com- 
plete and  perfect ;  and  he  who  shall  keep  this, 
as  we  before  testified,  has  obeyed  God,  and  has 
satisfied  the  obligations  of  religion  and  his  own 
duty. 


3  [Ps.  1.  23.] 

*  i.e.,  no  known  sins.  Thus  the  Psalmist  prays:  "Cleanse  thou 
me  from  my  secret  faults."  [So  St.  Paul,  i  Cor.  iv.  4,  where  ihe 
archaic  "  by  "  =  adversus.] 

5  Satisfaciat,  "  let  him  make  satisfaction  by  fruits  worthy  of  repent- 
ance." 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 
BOOK    VII. 


OF    A    HAPPY    LIFE. 


CHAP.   I. OF   THE   WORLD,   AND   THOSE   WHO   ARE 

ABOUT   TO    BELIEVE,  AND   THOSE  WHO    ARE    NOT  ; 
AND    IN    THIS   THE    CENSURE   OF    THE    FAITHLESS. 

It  is  well:  the  foundations  are  laid,  as  the 
illustrious  orator  says.     But  we  have  not  only 
laid  the  foundations,  which  might  be  firm  and 
suitable  for  the  support  of  the  work ;  but  we 
have  raised  the  entire  edifice,  with  great  and 
strong  buildings,  almost  to  the  summit.     There 
remains,  a  matter  which  is  much  easier,  either 
to  cover  or  adorn  it ;  without  which,  however,  i 
the  former  works  are  both  useless  and  displeas- 1 
ing.     For  of  what  avail  is  it,  either  to  be  freed  i 
from  false  religions  '  or  to  understand  the  true  ^  j 
one  ?     Of  what  avail,  either  to  see  the  vanity  of 
false  wisdom,^  or  to  know  what  is  trueP^      Of 
what  avail  is  it,  I  say,  to  defend  that  heavenly 
justice? 5     Of  what  avail  to  hold   the  worship 
of  God^  with   great   difficulties,  which   is  the 
greatest  virtue,  unless  the  divine  reward  of  ever- 
lasting blessedness  attends  it?    Of  which  subject 
we  must  speak  in  this  book,  lest  all  that  is  gone 
before  should  appear  vain  and  unprofitable  :  if 
we  should  leave  this,  on  account  of  which  they 
were  undertaken,  in  uncertainty,  lest  any  one 
should  by  chance  think  that  such  great  labours 
are  undertaken  in  vain ;  while  he  distrusts  their 
heavenly  reward,  which  God  has  appointed  for 
him  who  shall  have  despised  the  present  sweet 
enjoyments  of  earth  in  comparison  of  solitary 
and  unrewarded  ^  virtue.    Let  us  satisfy  this  part 
of  our  subject  also,  both  by  the  testimonies  of 
the  sacred  writings  and  also  by  probable  argu- 
ments, that  it  may  be  equally  manifest  that  future 
things  are  to  be  preferred  to  those  which  are 
present ;  heavenly  things  to  earthly  ;  and  eternal 
things  to  those  which  are  temporal :  since  the 


1  The  subject  of  the  first  and  second  books. 

2  The  subject  of  the  sixth  book. 

3  The  subject  of  the  third  book. 

*  The  subject  of  the  fourth  book, 
s  The  subject  of  the  fifth  book. 
f>  Nuda. 

194 


rewards  of  vices  are  temporal,  those  of  virtues 
are  eternal. 

I  will  therefore  set  forth  the  system  of  the 
world,  that  it  may  easily  be  understood  both  when 
and  how  it  was  made  by  God ;  which  Plato,  who 
discoursed  about  the  making  of  the  world,  could 
neither  know  nor  explain,  inasmuch  as  he  was  ig- 
norant of  the  heavenly  mystery,  which  is  not 
learned  except  by  the  teaching  of  prophets  and 
God ;  and  therefore  he  said  that  it  was  created 
I  for  eternity.     Whereas  the  case  is  far  difi'erent, 
since  whatever  is  of  a  solid  and  heavy  body,  as 
I  it  received  a  beginning  at  some  time,  so  it  must 
I  needs  have  an  end.     For  Aristotle,  when  he  did 
i  not  see  how  so  great  a  magnitude  of  things  could 
'  perish,  and  wished  to  escape  this  objection,7  said 
that  the  world  always  had  existed,  and  always 
would  exist.     He  did  not  at  all  see,  that  what- 
ever material  thing  exists   must  at  some   time 
have  had  a  beginning,  and  that  nothing  can  ex- 
ist at  all  unless  it  had  a  beginning.     For  when 
we  see  that  earth,  and  water,  and  fire  perish,  are 
consumed,  and  extinguished,  which  are  clearly 
parts  of  the  world,  it  is  understood  that  that  is 
altogether   mortal   the   members   of  which   are 
mortal.     Thus  it  comes  to  pass,  that  whatever  is 
liable  to  destruction  must  have  been  produced. 
But  everything  which  comes  within  the  sight  of 
the  eyes  must  of  necessity  be  material,  and  capa- 
ble  of  dissolution.     Therefore   Epicurus  alone, 
following   the   authority   of  Democritus,   spoke 
truly  in  diis  matter,  who  said  that  it  had  a  be- 
ginning at  some  time,  and  that  it  would  at  some 
time  perish.     Nor,  however,  was  he  able  to  as- 
sign any  reason,  either  through  what  causes  or 
at^vhat  time  this  work  of  such  magnitude  should 
be  destroyed.     But  since  God  has  revealed  this 
to  us,  and  we  do  not  arrive  at  it  by  conjectures, 
but  by  instruction  from  heaven,  we  will  carefully 
teach  it,  that  it  may  at  length  be  evident  to 
those  who  are  desirous  of  the  truth,  that  the 


?  Praescriptionem. 


Chap.  II.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


195 


philosophers  did  not  see  nor  comprehend  the 
truth ;  but  that  they  had  so  shght  a  knowledge ' 
of  it,  that  they  by  no  means  perceived  from 
what  source  that  fragrance  ^  of  wisdom,  which 
was  so  pleasant  and  agreeable,  breathed  upon  j 
them. 

In  the  meantime,  I  think  it  necessary  to  ad- 
monish those  who  are  about  to  read  this,  that 
depraved  and  vicious  minds,  since  the  acuteness 
of  their  mind  is  blunted  by  earthly  passions,  which 
weigh  down  all  the  perceptions  and  render  them 
weak,  will  either  altogether  fail  to  understand 
these  things  which  we  relate,  or,  even  if  they  shall 
understand  them,  they  will  dissemble  and  be  un- 
willing for  them  to  be  true  :  because  they  are 
drawn  away  by  vices,  and  they  knowingly  favour 
their  own  evils,  by  the  pleasantness  of  which 
they  are  captivated,  and  they  desert  the  way  of 
virtue,  by  the  bitterness  of  which  they  are  of- 
fended. For  they  who  are  inflamed  with  avarice 
and  a  certain  insatiable  thirst  for  riches  —  be- 
cause, when  they  have  sold  or  squandered  the 
things  in  which  they  delight,  they  are  unable  to 
live  in  a  simple  style  —  undoubtedly  prefer  that 
by  which  they  are  compelled  to  renounce  their 
eager  desires.  Also,  they  who,  urged  on  by  the 
incitements  of  lusts,  as  the  poet  says,^ 

"  Rush  into  madness  and  fire," 

say  that  we  bring  forward  things  plainly  incred- 
ible ;  because  the  precepts  about  self-restraint 
wound  their  ears,  which  restrain  them  from  their 
pleasures,  to  which  they  have  given  •*  up  their 
soul,  together  with  their  body.  But  those  who, 
swollen  with  ambition  or  inflamed  with  the  love 
of  power,  have  bestowed  all  their  efforts  on  the 
acquisition  of  honours,  will  not,  even  if  we  should 
bear  the  sun  himself  in  our  hands,  believe  that 
teaching  which  commands  them  to  despise  all 
power  and  honour,  and  to  live  in  humility,  and 
in  such  humility  that  they  may  be  able  to  receive 
an  injury,  and  if  they  have  received  one,  be  un- 
willing to  return  it.  These  are  the  men  who  cry 
out  5  in  any  way  against  the  truth  with  closed 
eyes.  But  they  who  are  or  shall  be  of  sound 
mind,  that  is,  not  so  immersed  in  vices  as  to  be 
incurable,  will  both  believe  these  things,  and  will 
readily  ap])roach  them  ;  and  whatever  things  we 
say,  they  will  appear  to  them  open,  and  plain, 
and  simple,  and  that  which  is  chiefly  necessary, 
true  and  unassailable. 

No  one  favours  virtue  but  he  who  is  able  to 
follow  it ;  but  it  is  not  easy  for  all  to  follow  it : 
they  can  do  so  whom  poverty  and  want  have  ex- 
ercised, and  made  capable  of  virtue.  For  if  the 
endurance  of  evils  is  virtue,  it  follows  that  they 


'  Ita  leviter  odoratos. 

z  Odor. 

3  Virg.,  Georg.,  iii.  244. 

*  Adjiidicaverunt. 

S  Latrant. 


are  not  capable  of  virtue  who  have  always  lived 
in  the  enjoyment  of  good  things ;  because  they 
have  never  experienced  evils,  nor  can  they  en- 
dure them,  through  their  long-continued  use  and 
desire  of  good  things,  which  alone  they  know. 
Thus  it  comes  to  pass  that  the  poor  and  humble, 
who  are  unencumbered,  more  readily  believe 
God  than  the  rich,  who  are  entangled  with  many 
hindrances ;  ^  yea,  rather,  in  chains  and  fetters 
they  are  enslaved  to  the  nod  of  desire,  their  mis- 
tress, which  has  ensnared  them  with  inextricable 
bonds  ;  nor  are  they  able  to  look  up  to  heaven, 
since  their  mind  is  bent  down  to  the  earth,  and 
fixed  on  the  ground.  But  the  way  of  virtue  does 
not  admit  those  carrying  great  burthens.  The 
path  is  very  narrow  by  which  justice  leads  man 
to  heaven  ;  no  one  can  keep  this  unless  he  is  un- 
encumbered and  lightly  equipped.  For  those 
wealthy  men,  who  are  loaded  with  many  and 
great  burthens,  proceed  along  the  way  of  death, 
which  is  very  broad,  since  destruction  rules  with 
extended  sway.  The  precepts  which  God  gives 
for  justice,  and  the  things  which  we  bring  forward 
under  the  teaching  of  God  respecting  virtue  and 
the  truth,  are  bitter  and  as  poisons  to  these. 
And  if  they  shall  dare  to  oppose  these  things, 
they  must  own  themselves  to  be  enemies  of 
virtue  and  justice.  I  will  now  come  to  the  re- 
maining part  of  the  subject,  that  an  end  may  be 
put  to  the  work.  But  this  remains,  that  we 
should  treat  of  the  judgment  of  God,  which  will 
then  be  established  when  our  Lord  shall  return 
to  the  earth  to  render  to  every  one  either  a  re- 
ward or  punishment,  according  to  his  desert. 
Therefore,  as  we  spoke  in  the  fourth  book  con- 
cerning His  first  advent,^  so  in  this  book  we  will 
relate  His  second  advent,  which  the  Jews  also 
both  confess  and  hope  for;  but  in  vain,  since 
He  must  return  to  the  confusion^  of  those  for 
whose  call  He  had  before  come.  For  they  who 
impiously  treated  Him  with  violence  in  His  hu- 
miliation, will  experience  Him  in  His  power  as  a 
conqueror ;  and,  God  requiting  them,  they  will 
suffer  all  those  things  which  they  read  and  do 
not  understand ;  inasmuch  as,  being  polluted 
with  all  sins,  and  moreover  sprinkled  with  the 
blood  of  the  Holy  One,  they  were  devoted  to 
eternal  punishment  by  that  very  One  on  whom 
they  laid  wicked  hands.  But  we  shall  have  a 
separate  subject  against  the  Jews,  in  which  we 
shall  convict  them  of  error  and  guilt, 

CHAP.  II. OF  THE   ERROR   OF  THE   PHILOSOPHERS, 

AND     OF     THE     DIVINE     WISDOM,     AND     OF     THE 
GOLDEN    AGE. 

Now  let  us  instruct  those  who  are  ignorant  of 
the  truth.     It  has   been  so   determined  by  the 


*  Tmpedimentis. 

'  [See  p.  108,  suf>ra.'\ 

*  Ad  confundendos.     Others  read  "  consolandos." 


196 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VII. 


arrangement  of  the  Most  High  God,  that  this 
unrighteous  age,  having  run  the  course '  of  its 
appointed  times,  should  come  to  an  end  ;  and  all 
wickedness  being  immediately  extinguished,  and 
the  souls  of  the  righteous  being  recalled  to  a 
happy  life,  a  quiet,  tranquil,  peaceful,  in  short, 
golden  age,  as  the  poets  call  it,  should  flourish, 
under  the  rule  of  God  Himself.  This  was  espe- 
cially the  cause  of  all  the  errors  of  the  philoso- 
phers, that  they  did  not  comprehend  the  system 
of  the  world,  which  comprises  the  whole  of  wis- 
dom. But  it  cannot  be  comprehended  by  our 
own  perception  and  innate  intelligence,  which 
they  wished  to  do  by  themselves  without  a 
teacher.  Therefore  they  fell  into  various  and 
ofttimes  contradictory  opinions,  out  of  which 
they  had  no  way  of  escape, 

And  they  remained  fixed  in  the  same  mire, 
as  the  comic  writer  ^  says,  since  their  conclusion 
does  not  correspond  with  their  assumptions  ;  ^  in- 
asmuch as  they  had  assumed  things  to  be  true 
which  could  not  be  affirmed,  and  proved  with- 
out the  knowledge  of  the  truth  and  of  heavenly 
things.  And  this  knowledge,  as  I  have  often 
said  already,  cannot  exist  in  a  man  unless  it  is 
derived  from  the  teaching  of  God.  For  if  a 
man  is  able  to  understand  divine  things,  he  will 
be  able  also  to  perform  them  ;  for  to  understand 
is,  as  it  were,  to  follow  in  their  track.  But  he  is 
not  able  to  do  the  things  which  God  does,  be- 
cause he  is  clothed  with  a  mortal  body ;  there- 
fore he  cannot  even  understand  those  things 
which  God  does.  And  whether  this  is  possible 
is  easy  for  every  one  to  measure,  from  the  im- 
mensity of  the  divine  actions  and  works.  For  if 
you  will  contemplate  the  world,  with  all  the  things 
which  it  contains,  you  will  assuredly  understand 
how  much  the  work  of  God  surpasses  the  works 
of  men.  Thus,  as  great  as  is  the  difference  be- 
tween divine  and  human  works,  so  great  must 
be  the  distance  between  the  wisdom  of  God  and 
man.  For  because  God  is  incorruptible  and  im- 
mortal, and  therefore  perfect  because  He  is 
everlasting.  His  wisdom  also  is  perfect,  as  He 
Himself  is  ;  nor  can  anything  oppose  it,  because 
God  Himself  is  subject  to  nothing. 

But  because  man  is  subject  to  passion,  his 
wisdom  also  is  subject  to  error ;  and  as  many 
things  hinder  the  life  of  man,  so  that  it  cannot 
be  perpetual,  so  also  his  wisdom  must  be  hin- 
dered by  many  things  :  so  that  it  is  not  perfect 
in  entirely  perceiving  the  truth.  Therefore  there 
is  no  human  wisdom,  if  it  strives  by  itself  to 
attain  to  the  conception  and  knowledge  of  the 
truth ;  inasmuch  as  the  mind  of  man,  being 
bound  up  with  a  frail  body,  and  enclosed  in  a 

'  Decurso  temporum  spatio.  A  metaphor  taken  from  the  chariot 
course;  spatium  being  used  for  the  length  of  the  course,  between  the 
ntetce,  or  goals. 

^  Ten,  Phorm.,  v.  2. 

3  Assiunptio:  often  used  for  the  minor  proposition  in  a  syllogism. 


dark  abode,  is  neither  able  to  wander  at  large, 
nor  clearly  to  perceive  the  truth,  the  knowledge 
of  which  belongs  to  the  divine  nature.  For  His 
works  are  known  to  God  alone.  But  man  can- 
not attain  this  knowledge  by  reflection  or  dispu- 
tation, but  by  learning  and  hearing  from  Him 
who  alone  is  able  to  know  and  to  teach.  There- 
fore Marcus  Tullius,''  borrowing  from  Plato  the 
sentiment  of  Socrates,  who  said  that  the  time 
had  come  for  himself  to  depart  from  life,  but 
that  they  before  whom  he  was  pleading  his 
cause  were  still  alive,  says  :  Which  is  better  is 
known  to  the  inmiortal  gods  ;  but  I  think  that 
no  man  knows.  Wherefore  all  the  sects  of  phi- 
losophers must  be  far  removed  from  the  truth, 
because  they  who  established  them  were  men ; 
nor  can  those  things  have  any  foundation  or 
firmness  which  are  unsupported  by  any  utter- 
ances of  divine  voices. 

CHAP.  III. OF  NATURE,  AND  OF  THE  WORLD  ;    AND 

A    CENSURE    OF   THE    STOICS    AND    EPICUREANS. 

And  since  we  are  speaking  of  the  errors  of 
philosophers,  the  Stoics  divide  nature  into  two 
parts  —  the  one  which  effects,  the  other  which 
affords  itself  tractable  for  action.  They  say 
that  in  the  former  is  contained  all  the  power  of 
perception,  in  the  latter  the  material,  and  that 
the  one  cannot  act  without  the  other.  How 
can  that  which  handles  and  that  which  is  han- 
dled be  one  and  the  same  thing?  If  any  one 
should  say  that  the  potter  is  the  same  as  the 
clay,  or  that  the  clay  is  the  same  as  the  potter, 
would  he  not  plainly  appear  to  be  mad  ?  But 
these  men  comprehend  under  the  one  name  of 
nature  two  things  which  are  most  widely  differ- 
ent, God  and  the  world,  the  Maker  and  the 
work  ;  and  say  that  the  one  can  do  nothing  with- 
out the  other,  as  though  God  were  mixed  up  in 
nature  with  the  world.  For  sometimes  they  so 
mix  them  together,  that  God  Himself  is  the 
mind  of  the  world,  and  that  the  world  is  the 
body  of  God ;  as  though  the  world  and  God 
began  to  exist  at  the  same  time,  and  God  did 
not  Himself  make  the  world.  And  they  them- 
selves also  confess  this  at  other  times,  when  they 
say  that  it  was  made  for  the  sake  of  men,  and 
that  God  could,  if  He  willed  it,  exist  without 
the  world,  inasmuch  as  God  is  the  divine  and 
eternal  miiid,  separate  and  free  from  a  body. 
And  since  they  were  unable  to  understand  His 
power  and  majesty,  they  mixed  Him  5  with  the 
world,  that  is,  with  His  own  work.  Whence  is 
that  saying  of  Virgil :  ^  — 

"A  spirit  whose  celestial  flame 
Glows  in  each  member  of  the  frame, 
And  stirs  the  mighty  whole." 

^  Tusc.  Disp.,  i.  41. 

5  Eum.     Others  read  "  earn,"  referring  it  to  "  majestatem." 

*  yEncid,  vi.  726. 


Chap.  III.] 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


197 


What,  then,  becomes  of  their  own  saying,  that 
the  world  was  both  made  and  is  governed  by  the 
divine  providence  ?  For  if  He  made  the  world, 
it  follows  that  He  existed  without  the  world  ; 
if  He  governs  it,  it  is  plain  that  it  is  not  as  the 
mind  governs  the  body,  but  as  a  master  rules 
the  house,  as  a  pilot  the  ship,  as  a  charioteer  the 
chariot.  Nor,  however,  are  they  mixed  with 
those  things  which  they  govern.  For  if  all  these 
things  which  we  see  are  members  of  God,  then 
God  is  rendered  insensible  by  them,  since  the 
members  are  without  sensibility,  and  mortal, 
since  we  see  that  the  members  are  mortal. 

I  can  enumerate  how  often  lands  shaken  by 
sudden  motions  '  have  either  opened  or  sunk 
down  precipitously  ;  how  often  cities  and  islands 
have  been  overwhelmed  by  waves,  and  gone  into 
the  deep  ;  marshes  have  inundated  fruitful  plains, 
rivers  and  pools  have  been  dried  up ;  ^  moun- 
tains also  have  either  fallen  precipitously,  or 
have  been  levelled  with  plains.  Many  districts, 
and  the  foundations  of  many  mountains,  are 
laid  waste  by  latent  and  internal  fire.  And  this 
is  not  enough,  if  God  does  not  spare  His  own 
members,  unless  it  is  permitted  man  also  to 
have  some  power  over  the  body  of  God.  Seas 
are  built  up,  mountains  are  cut  down,  and  the 
innermost  bowels  of  the  earth  are  dug  out  to 
draw  forth  riches.  Why,  should  I  say  that  we 
cannot  even  plough  without  lacerating  the  di- 
vine body?  So  that  we  are  at  once  wicked  and 
impious  in  doing  violence  to  the  members  of 
God.  Does  God,  then,  suffer  His  body  to  be 
harassed,  and  endure  to  weaken  Himself,  or  per- 
mit this  to  be  done  by  man?  Unless  by  chance 
that  divine  intelligence  which  is  mixed  with  the 
world,  and  with  all  parts  of  the  world,  abandoned 
the  first  outer  aspect  ^  of  the  earth,  and  plunged 
itself  into  the  lowest  depths,  that  it  might  be 
sensible  of  no  pain  from  continual  laceration. 
But  if  this  is  trifling  and  absurd,  then  they 
themselves  were  as  devoid  of  intelligence  as 
those  are  who  have  not  perceived  that  the  divine 
spirit  is  everywhere  diffused,  and  that  all  things 
are  held  together  by  it,  not  however  in  such  a 
manner  that  God,  who  is  incorruptible,  should 
Himself  be  mixed  with  heavy  and  corruptible 
elements.  Therefore  that  is  more  correct  which 
they  derived  from  Plato,  that  the  world  was 
made  by  God,  and  is  also  governed  by  His 
providence.  It  was  therefore  befitting  that 
Plato,  and  those  who  held  the  same  opinion, 
should  teach  and  explain  what  was  the  cause, 
what  the  reason,  for  the  contriving  of  so  great  a 
work  ;  why  or  for  the  sake  of  whom  He  made  it. 

But  the  Stoics  also  say  the  world  was  made 
for  the  sake  of  men.     I  hear.     But  Epicurus  is 


'  i.e.,  earthquakes. 

-  Siccaverunt:  rarely  used  in  a  neuter  sense. 

*  Primam  terrs  faciem:  as  opposed  to  the  inner  depths. 


ignorant  on  what  account  or  who  made  men 
themselves.  For  Lucretius,  when  he  said  that 
the  world  was  not  made  by  the  gods,  thus  spoke  :  "* 

"  To  say,  again,  that  for  the  sake  of  men  they  have 
willed  to  set  hi  order  the  glorious  nature  of  the 
world  "  — 

then  he  introduced  :  — 

"  Is  sheer  folly.  For  what  advantage  can  our  gratitude 
bestow  on  immortal  and  blessed  beings,  that  for  our 
sake  they  should  take  in  hand  to  administer  aught.'" 

And  with  good  reason.  For  they  brought  forward 
no  reason  why  the  human  race  was  created  or 
established  by  God.  It  is  our  business  to  set 
forth  the  mystery  of  the  world  and  man,  of 
which  they,  being  destitute,  were  able  neither  to 
reach  nor  see  the  shrine  of  truth.  Therefore, 
as  I  said  a  little  before,  when  they  had  assumed 
that  which  was  true,  that  is,  that  the  world  was 
made  by  God,  and  was  made  for  the  sake  of 
men,  yet,  since  their  argument  failed  them  in 
the  consequences,  they  were  unable  to  defend 
that  which  they  had  assumed.  In  fine,  Plato, 
that  he  might  not  make  the  work  of  God  weak 
and  subject  to  ruin,  said  that  it  would  remain 
for  ever.  If  it  was  made  for  the  sake  of  men, 
and  so  made  as  to  be  eternal,  why  then  are  not 
they  on  whose  account  it  was  made  eternal?  If 
they  are  mortal  on  account  of  whom  it  was 
made,  it  must  also  itself  be  mortal  and  subject 
to  dissolution,  for  it  is  not  of  more  value  than 
those  for  whose  sake  it  was  made.  But  if  his 
argument  s  were  consistent,  he  would  understand 
that  it  must  perish  because  it  was  made,  and 
that  nothing  can  remain  for  ever  except  that 
which  cannot  be  touched. 

But  he  who  says  that  it  was  not  made  for  the 
sake  of  men  has  no  argument.  For  if  he  says 
that  the  Creator  contrived  these  works  of  such 
magnitude  on  His  own  account,  why  then  were 
we  produced?  Why  do  we  enjoy  the  world 
itself?  what  means  the  creation  of  the  human 
race,  and  of  the  other  living  creatures?  why  do 
we  intercept  the  advantages  of  others?  why,  in 
short,  do  we  grow,  decrease,  and  perish?  What 
reason  is  implied  in  our  production  itself?  what 
in  our  perpetual  succession?  Doubtless  God 
wished  us  to  be  seen,  and  to  frame,  as  it  were, 
impressions  ^  with  various  representations  of 
Himself,  with  which  He  might  delight  Himself. 
Nevertheless,  if  it  were  so.  He  would  esteem 
living  creatures  as  His  care,  and  especially  man, 
to  whose  command  He  made  all  things  subject. 
But  with  regard  to  those  who  say  that  the  world 
always  existed  :  I  omit  that  point,  that  itself 
cannot  exist  without  some  beginning,  from  which 
they  are  unable  to  extricate  themselves  ;  but  I 


*  De  Rer.  Nat.,  v.  157-166. 
5  QuM  si  ratio  ei  qu.idraret. 
^  Little  images,  sigilla. 


198 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VII. 


say  this,  if  the  world  always  existed,  it  can  have 
no  systematic  arrangement.'  For  what  could 
arrangement  have  effected  in  that  which  never 
had  a  beginning?  For  before  anything  is  done 
or  arranged,  there  is  need  of  counsel  that  it  may 
be  determined  how  it  should  be  done  ;  nor  can 
anything  be  done  without  the  foresight  of  a 
settled  plan.  Therefore  the  plan  precedes  every 
work.  Therefore  that  which  has  not  been  made 
has  no  plan.  But  the  world  has  a  plan  by  which 
it  both  exists  and  is  governed  ;  therefore  also  it 
was  made  :  if  it  was  made,  it  will  also  be  de- 
stroyed. Let  them  therefore  assign  a  reason, 
if  they  can,  why  it  was  either  made  in  the  begin- 
ning or  will  hereafter  be  destroyed. 

And  because  Epicurus  or  Democritus  was  un- 
able to  teach  this,  he  said  that  it  was  produced 
of  its  own  accord,  the  seeds  ^  coming  together 
in  all  directions  ;  and  that  when  these  are  again 
resolved,  discord  and  destruction  will  follow. 
Therefore  he  perverted  ^  that  which  he  had  cor- 
rectly seen,  and  by  his  ignorance  of  system  en- 
tirely overthrew  the  whole  system,  and  reduced 
the  world,  and  all  things  which  are  done  in  it,  to 
the  likeness  of  a  most  trifling  dream,  if  no  plan 
exists  in  human  affairs.  But  since  the  world  and 
all  its  parts,  as  we  see,  are  governed  by  a  won- 
derful plan  ;  since  the  framing  of  the  heaven, 
and  the  course  of  the  stars  and  of  the  heavenly 
bodies,  which  is  harmonious  ■»  even  in  variety 
itself,  the  constant  and  wonderful  arrangement 
of  the  seasons,  the  varied  fruitfulness  of  the 
lands,  the  level  plains,  the  defences  and  heap- 
ings  up  of  mountains,  the  verdure  and  pro- 
ductiveness of  the  woods,  the  most  salubrious 
bursting  forth  of  fountains,  the  seasonable  over- 
flowings of  rivers,  the  rich  and  abundant  flow- 
ing =  in  of  the  sea,  the  opposite  and  useful 
breathing  "^  of  the  winds,  and  all  things,  are 
fixed  with  the  greatest  regularity  :  who  is  so  blind 
as  to  think  that  they  were  made  without  a 
cause,  in  which  a  wonderful  disposition  of  most 
provident  arrangement  shines  forth?  If,  there- 
fore, nothing  at  all  exists  nor  is  done  without  a 
cause  ;  if  the  providence  of  the  Supreme  God 
is  manifest  from  the  disposition  of  things,  His 
excellency  from  their  greatness,  and  His  power 
from  their  government :  therefore  they  are  dull 
and  mad  who  have  said  that  there  is  no  provi- 
dence. I  should  not  disapprove  if  they  denied 
the  existence  of  gods  with  this  object,  that  they 
might  affirm  the  existence  of  one ;  but  when 
they  did  it  with  this  intent,  that  they  might  say 
that  there  is  none,  he  who  does  not  think  that 
they  were  senseless  is  himself  senseless. 


'  Rationem. 

2  i.e.,  atoms. 

3  Corriipit. 

*  ^qualis. 

5   Interfusio. 

*  Aspiratio. 


CHAP.  IV. THAT  ALL   THINGS  WERE    CREATED   FOR 

SOME  USE,  EVEN  THOSE  THINGS  WHICH  APPEAR 
EVIL  ;  ON  WHAT  ACCOUNT  MAN  ENJOYS  REASON 
IN    SO    FRAIL   A    BODY. 

But  we  have  spoken  sufficiently  on  the  subject 
of  providence  in  the  first  book.  For  if  it  has 
any  existence,  as  appears  from  the  wonderful 
nature  of  its  works,  it  must  be  that  the  same 
providence  created  man  and  the  other  animals. 
Let  us  therefore  see  what  reason  there  was  foi 
the  creation  of  the  human  race,  since  it  is  evi- 
dent, as  the  Stoics  say,  that  the  world  was  made 
for  the  sake  of  men,  although  they  make  no  slight 
error  in  this  very  matter,  in  saying  it  was  not 
made  for  the  sake  of  man,  but  of  men.  For 
the  naming  of  one  individual  comprehends  the 
wliole  human  race.  But  this  arises  from  the  fact 
that  they  are  ignorant  that  one  man  only  was 
made  by  God,  and  they  think  that  men  were  pro- 
duced in  all  lands  and  fields  like  mushrooms. 
But  Hermes  was  not  ignorant  that  man  was  both 
made  by  God  and  after  the  likeness  of  God. 
But  I  return  to  my  subject.  There  is  nothing,  as 
I  imagine,  which  was  made  on  its  own  account ; 
but  whatever  is  made  at  all  must  necessarily  be 
made  for  some  purpose.  For  who  is  there  either 
so  senseless  or  so  unconcerned  as  to  attempt  to 
do  anything  at  random,  from  which  he  expects 
no  utility,  no  advantage  ?  He  who  builds  a  house 
does  not  build  it  merely  for  this  purpose,  that  it 
may  be  a  house,  but  that  it  may  be  inhabited. 
He  who  builds  a  ship  does  not  bestow  his  labour 
on  this  account,  only  that  the  ship  may  be  visi- 
ble, but  that  men  may  sail  in  it.  Likewise  he 
who  designs  and  forms  any  vessel  does  not  do 
it  on  this  account,  that  he  may  only  appear  to 
have  done  it,  but  that  the  vessel  when  made  may 
contain  something  necessary  for  use.  In  like 
manner,  other  things,  whatever  are  made,  are 
plainly  not  made  superfluously,  but  for  some 
useful  purposes. 

It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  the  world  was  made 
by  God,  not  on  account  of  the  world  itself;  for 
since  it  is  v/ithout  sensibility,  it  neither  needs 
the  warmth  of  the  sun,  or  light,  or  the  breath 
of  the  winds,  or  the  moisture  of  showers,  or  the 
nourishment  of  fruits.  But  it  cannot  even  be 
said  that  God  made  the  world  for  His  own  sake, 
since  He  can  exist  without  the  world,  as  He  did 
before  it  was  made ;  and  God  Himself  does  not 
make  use  of  all  those  things  which  are  contained 
in  it,  and  which  are  produced.  It  is  evident, 
therefore,  that  the  world  was  constructed  for  the 
sake  of  living  beings,  since  living  beings  enjoy 
those  things  of  which  it  consists  ;  and  that  these 
may  live  and  exist,  all  things  necessary  for  them 
are  supplied  at  fixed  times.  Again,  that  the 
other  living  beings  were  made  for  the  sake  of 
man,  is  plain  from  this,  that  they  are  subservient 


Chap.  V.] 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


199 


to  man,  and  were  given  for  his  protection  and 
service  ;  since,  whether  they  are  of  the  earth  or 
of  the  water,  they  do  not  perceive  the  system 
of  the  world  as  man  does.  We  must  here  reply 
to  the  philosophers,  and  especially  to  Cicero, 
who  says  :  "  Why  should  God,  when  He  made 
all  things  on  our  account,  make  so  large  a  quan- 
tity of  snakes  and  vipers  ?  why  should  He  scat- 
ter so  many  pernicious  things  by  land  and  by 
sea?"  A  very  wide  subject  for  discussion,  but 
it  must  be  briefly  touched  upon,  as  in  passing. 
Since  man  is  formed  of  different  and  opposing 
elements,  soul  and  body,  that  is,  heaven  and 
earth,  that  which  is  slight  and  that  which  is  per- 
ceptible to  the  senses,  that  which  is  eternal  and 
that  which  is  temporal,  that  which  has  sensibility 
and  that  which  is  senseless,  that  which  is  en- 
dued with  light  and  that  which  is  dark,  reason 
itself  and  necessity  require  that  both  good  and 
evil  things  should  be  set  before  man  —  good 
things  which  he  may  use,  and  evil  things  which 
he  may  guard  against  and  avoid. 

For  wisdom  has  been  given  to  him  on  this 
account,  that,  knowing  the  nature  of  good  and 
evil  things,  he  may  exercise  the  force  of  his  rea- 
son in  seeking  the  good  and  avoiding  the  evil. 
For  because  wisdom  was  not  given  to  the  other 
animals,  they  were  both  defended  with  natural 
clothing  and  were  armed  ;  but  in  the  place  of 
all  these  He  gave  to  man  that  which  was  most 
excellent,  reason  only.  Therefore  He  formed 
him  naked  and  unarmed,  that  wisdom  might  be 
both  his  defence  and  covering.  He  placed  his 
defence  and  ornament  not  without,  but  within  ; 
not  in  the  body,  but  in  the  heart.  Unless,  there- 
fore, there  were  evils  which  he  might  guard 
against,  and  which  he  might  distinguish  from 
good  and  useful  things,  wisdom  was  not  neces- 
sary for  him.  Therefore  let  Marcus  Tullius  know 
that  reason  was  either  given  to  man  that  he  might 
take  fishes  on  account  of  his  own  use,  and  avoid 
snakes  and  vipers  for  the  sake  of  his  own  safety ; 
or  that  good  and  evil  things  were  set  before  him 
on  this  account,  because  he  had  received  wis- 
dom, the  whole  force  of  which  is  occupied  in 
distinguishing  things  good  and  evil.'  Great, 
therefore,  and  right,  and  admirable  is  the  force, 
and  reason,  and  power  of  man,  for  whose  sake 
God  made  the  world  itself  and  all  things,  as 
many  as  exist,  and  gave  him  so  much  honour 
that  He  set  him  over  all  things,  since  he  alone 
could  admire  the  works  of  God.  Most  excel- 
lently, therefore,  does  our  Asclepiades,^  in  dis- 
cussing the  providence  of  the  Supreme  God  in 


'  [The  parables  of  nature  are  admirably  expounded  by  Jones  of 
Nayland.  Sec  his  Zoologica  Etliica,  his  Book  p/  Nature,  and  his 
Moral  Character  of  the  Monkey,  vols,  iii.,  xi.,  and  xii.,  Works, 
London,  i8ot.] 

-  Asclepiades  was  a  Christian  writer,  and  contemporary  of  Lac- 
tantius,  to  whom  he  wrote  a  book  on  the  providence  of  God.  [Ac- 
cording  to  Eusebius,  a  bishop  of  this  name  presided  at  Antioch  from 
A.D.  214  to  22o;  but  this  is  evidently  another.] 


that  book  which  he  wrote  to  me,  say  :  "And  on 
this  account  any  one  may  with  good  reason  think 
that  the  divine  providence  gave  the  place  nearest 
to  itself  to  him  who  was  able  to  understand  its 
arrangement.  For  that  is  the  sun  :  who  so  be- 
holds it  as  to  understand  why  it  is  the  sun,  and 
what  amount  of  influence  it  has  upon  the  other 
parts  of  the  system?  this  is  the  heaven,  who 
looks  up  to  it?  this  is  the  earth,  who  inhabits 
it?  this  is  the  sea,  who  sails  upon  it?  this  is  fire, 
who  makes  use  of  it?  "  Therefore  the  Supreme 
God  did  not  arrange  these  things  on  account  of 
Himself,  because  He  stands  in  need  of  nothing, 
but  on  account  of  man,  who  might  fitly  make 
use  of  them. 

CHAP.  V. OF  THE  CREATION  OF  MAN,  AND  OF 

THE  ARRANGEMENT  OF  THE  WORLD,  AND  OF  THE 
CHIEF  GOOD. 

Let  US  now  assign  the  reason  why  He  made 
man  himself.  For  if  the  philosophers  had  known 
this,  they  would  either  have  maintained  those 
things  which  they  had  found  to  be  true,  or  would 
not  have  fallen  into  the  greatest  errors.  For  this 
is  the  chief  thing ;  this  is  the  point  on  which 
everything  turns.  And  if  any  one  does  not  pos- 
sess this,  the  truth  altogether  glides  away  from 
him.  It  is  this,  in  short,  which  causes  them  to 
be  inconsistent  with  reason ;  ^  for  if  this  had 
shone  upon  them,  if  they  had  known  all  the 
mystery*  of  man,  the  Academy  would  never 
have  been  in  entire  opposition  5  to  their  disputa- 
tions, and  to  all  philosophy.  As,  therefore,  God 
did  not  make  the  world  for  His  own  sake,  be- 
cause He  does  not  stand  in  need  of  its  advan- 
tages, but  for  the  sake  of  man,  who  has  the  use 
of  it,  so  also  He  made  man  himself  for  His  own 
sake.  What  advantage  is  there  to  God  in  man, 
says  Epicurus,  that  He  should  make  him  for  His 
own  sake  ?  Truly,  that  there  might  be  one  who 
might  understand  His  works  ;  who  might  be  able 
both  to  admire  with  his  understanding,  and  to 
express  with  his  voice,  the  foresight  displayed  in 
their  arrangement,  the  order  of  their  creation, 
the  power  exerted  in  their  completion.  And  the 
sum  of  all  these  things  is,  that  he  should  worship 
God.''  For  he  who  understands  these  things 
worships  Him  ;  he  follows  Him  with  due  ven- 
eration as  the  Maker  of  all  things,  He  as  his 
true  Father,  who  measures  the  excellence  of 
His  majesty  according  to  the  invention,  the 
commencement,  and  completion  of  His  works. 


3  Illis  non  quadrare  rationem. 

<  Sacramentum. 

5  De  transverso  jugulasset.  The  Academics,  affirming  that  noth- 
ing was  certain,  opposed  the  tenets  of  the  other  philosophers,  who 
maintained  their  own  opinions  respectively. 

*>  [The  law  of  his  being  is  stated  in  Bacon's  words:  "  Homo 
naturre  minister  et  interfires,"  No7'.  Org.,  i.  i.  It  is  his  duty  to 
comprehend  what  he  expounds,  and  to  lend  his  voice  to  nature  in 
the  worship  of  God.  See  the  Ptnedicite,  or  "  Song  of  the  Three 
Children,"  in  the  apocryphal  Bible. j 


200 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VII. 


What  more  evident  argument  can  be  brought 
forward  that  God  both  made  the  world  for  the 
sake  of  man,  and  man  for  His  own  sake,  than 
that  he  alone  of  all  living  creatures  has  been  so 
formed  that  his  eyes  are  directed  towards  heaven, 
his  face  looking  towards  God,  his  countenance 
is  in  fellowship  with  his  Parent,  so  that  God  ap- 
pears, as  it  were,  with  outstretched  hand  to  have 
raised  man  from  the  ground,  and  to  have  elevated 
him  to  the  contemplation  of  Himself.  "  What, 
then,"  he  says,  "  does  the  worship  paid  by  man 
confer  on  God,  who  is  blessed,  and  in  want  of 
nothing?  Or  if  He  gave  such  honour  to  man 
as  to  create  the  world  for  his  sake,  to  furnish 
him  with  wisdom,  to  make  him  lord  of  all  things 
living,  and  to  love  him  as  a  son,  why  did  He 
make  him  subject  to  death  and  decay?  why  did 
He  expose  the  object  of  His  love  to  all  evils? 
when  it  was  befitting  that  man  should  be  happy, 
as  though  closely  connected  with  God,  and  ever- 
lasting as  He  is,  to  the  worship  and  contempla- 
tion of  whom  he  was  formed." 

Although  we  have  taught  these  things  for  the 
most  part  in  a  scattered  manner  in  the  former 
books,  nevertheless,  since  the  subject  now  spe- 
cially requires  it,  because  we  have  undertaken  to 
discuss  the  subject  of  a  happy  life,  these  things 
are  to  be  explained  by  us  more  carefully  and 
fully,  that  the  arrangement  made  by  God,  and 
His  work  and  will,  may  be  known.  Though  He 
was  always  able  by  His  own  immortal  Spirit  to 
produce  innumerable  souls,  as  He  produced  the 
angels,  to  whom  there  exists  immortality  without 
any  danger  and  fear  of  evils,  yet  He  devised  an 
unspeakable  work,  in  what  manner  He  might 
create  an  infinite  multitude  of  souls,  which  being 
at  first  united  with  frail  and  feeble  bodies,  He 
might  place  in  the  midst  between  good  and  evil, 
that  He  might  set  virtue  before  them  composed 
as  they  were  of  both  natures ;  that  they  might 
not  attain  to  immortality  by  a  delicate  and  easy 
course  of  life,  but  might  arrive  at  that  unspeak- 
able reward  of  eternal  life  with  the  utmost  dif- 
ficulty and  great  labours.  Therefore,  that  He 
might  clothe  them  with  limbs  which  were  heavy 
and  liable  to  injury,'  since  they  were  unable  to 
exist  in  the  middle  void,  the  weight  and  gravity 
of  the  body  sinking  downwards.  He  determined 
that  an  abode  and  dwelling-place  should  first  be 
built  for  them.  And  thus  with  unspeakable 
energy  and  power  He  contrived  the  surpassing 
works  of  the  world  ;  and  having  suspended  the 
light  elements  on  high,  and  depressed  the  heavy 
ones  to  the  depths  below,  He  strengthened  the 
heavenly  things,  and  established  the  earthly.  It 
is  not  necessary  at  present  to  follow  out  each 
point  separately,  since  we  discussed  them  all 
together  in  the  second  book. 

'  Vexabilibus. 


Therefore  He  placed  in  the  heaven  lights, 
whose  regularity,  and  brightness,  and  motion, 
were  most  suitably  proportioned  to  the  advan- 
tage of  living  beings.  Moreover,  He  gave  to 
the  earth,  which  He  designed  as  their  dwelling- 
place,  fruitfulness  for  bringing  forth  and  producing 
various  ^  things,  that  by  the  abundance  of  fruits 
and  green  herbs  it  might  supply  nourishment 
according  to  the  nature  and  requirements  of 
each  kind.  Then,  when  He  had  completed  all 
things  which  belonged  to  the  condition  of  the 
world.  He  formed  man  from  the  earth  itself, 
which  He  prepared  for  him  from  the  beginning 
as  a  habitation ;  that  is.  He  clothed  and  covered 
his  spirit  with  an  earthly  body,  that,  being  com- 
pacted of  different  and  opposing  materials,  he 
might  be  susceptible  of  good  and  evil ;  and  as 
the  earth  itself  is  fruitful  for  the  bringing  forth 
of  grain,  so  the  body  of  man,  which  was  taken 
from  the  earth,  received  the  power  of  producing 
offspring,  that,  inasmuch  as  he  was  formed  of  a 
fragile  substance,  and  could  not  exist  for  ever, 
when  the  space  of  his  temporal  life  was  past,  he 
might  depart,  and  by  a  perpetual  succession  re- 
new that  which  he  bore,  which  was  frail  and 
feeble.  Why,  then,  did  He  make  him  frail  and 
mortal,  when  He  had  built  the  world  for  his 
sake?  First  of  all,  that  an  infinite  number  of 
living  beings  might  be  produced,  and  that  He 
might  fill  all  the  earth  with  a  multitude  ;  in  the 
next  place,  that  He  might  set  before  man  virtue, 
that  is,  endurance  of  evils  and  labours,  by  which 
he  might  be  able  to  gain  the  reward  of  immor- 
tality. For  since  man  consists  of  two  parts,  body 
and  soul,  of  which  the  one  is  earthly,  the  other 
heavenly,  two  lives  have  been  assigned  to  man : 
the  one  temporal,  which  is  appointed  for  the 
body ;  the  other  everlasting,  which  belongs  to 
the  soul.  We  received  the  former  at  our  birth ; 
we  attain  to  the  latter  by  striving,  that  immor- 
tality might  not  exist  to  man  without  any  diffi- 
culty. That  earthly  one  is  as  the  body,  and 
therefore  has  an  end  ;  but  this  heavenly  one  is 
as  the  soul,  and  therefore  has  no  limit.  We  re- 
ceived the  first  when  we  were  ignorant  of  it,  this 
second  knowingly ;  for  it  is  given  to  virtue,  not 
to  nature,  because  God  wished  that  we  should 
procure  life  for  ourselves  in  life. 

For  this  reason  He  has  given  us  this  present 
life,  that  we  may  either  lose  that  true  and  eter- 
nal life  by  our  vices,  or  win  it  ^  by  virtue.  The 
chief  good  is  not  contained  in  this  bodily  life, 
since,  as  it  was  given  to  us  by  divine  necessity, 
so  it  will  again  be  destroyed  by  divine  necessity. 
Thus  that  which  has  an  end  does  not  contain 
the  chief  good.  But  the  chief  good  is  contained 
in  that  spiritual  life  which  we  acquire  by  our- 
selves, because  it  cannot  contain  evil,  or  have 


Varia.     Others  read,  "  fa;cunditatem  variam  generandi." 
Mereamur. 


Chap.  V.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


20I 


an  end  ;  lo  which  subject  nature  and  the  system 
of  the  body  afford  an  argument.  For  other 
animals  inchne  towards  the  ground,  because 
they  are  earthly,  and  are  incapable  of  immortal- 
ity, which  is  from  heaven ;  but  man  is  upright 
and  looks  towards  heaven,'  because  immortality 
is  proposed  to  him  ;  which,  however,  does  not 
come,  unless  it  is  given  to  man  by  God.  For 
otherwise  there  would  be  no  difference  between 
the  just  and  the  unjust,  since  every  man  who  is 
born  would  become  immortal.  Immortality, 
then,  is  not  the  consequence  ^  of  nature,  but  the 
reward  and  recompense  of  virtue.  Lastly,  man 
does  not  immediately  upon  his  birth  walk  up- 
right, but  at  first  on  all  fours,^  because  the  nature 
of  his  body  and  of  this  present  life  is  common 
to  us  with  the  dumb  animals ;  afterwards,  when 
his  strength  is  confirmed,  he  raises  himself,  and 
his  tongue  is  loosened  so  that  he  speaks  plainly, 
and  he  ceases  to  be  a  dumb  animal.  And  this 
argument  teaches  that  man  is  born  mortal ;  but 
that  he  afterwards  becomes  immortal,  when  he 
begins  to  live  in  conformity  with  the  wilH  of 
God,  that  is,  to  follow  righteousness, '  which  is 
comprised  in  the  worship  of  God,  since  God 
raised  man  to  a  view  of  the  heaven  and  of  Him- 
self. And  this  takes  place  when  man,  purified 
in  the  heavenly  laver,  lays  aside  "^  his  infancy  to- 
gether with  all  the  pollution  of  his  past  life, 
and  having  received  an  increase  of  divine  vig- 
our, becomes  a  perfect  and  complete  man. 

Therefore,  because  God  has  set  forth  virtue 
before  man,  although  the  soul  and  the  body  are 
connected  together,  yet  they  are  contrary,  and 
oppose  one  another.  The  things  which  are 
good  for  the  soul  are  evil  to  the  body,  that  is, 
the  avoiding  of  riches,  the  prohibiting  of  pleas- 
ures, the  contempt  of  pain  and  death.  In  like 
manner,  the  things  which  are  good  for  the  body 
are  evil  to  the  soul,  that  is,  desire  and  lust,  by 
which  riches  are  desired,  and  the  enjoyments  of 
various  pleasures,  by  which  the  soul  is  weak- 
ened and  destroyed. 7  Therefore  it  is  necessary 
that  the  just  and  wise  man  should  be  engaged 

'   [Our  author  never  wearies  of  this  reference  to  Ovid's  beautiful 
verses.     Compare  Cowper  {Task,  book  v.)  as  follows:  — 
"  Brutes  graze  the  mountain-top  with  faces  prone 
And  eyes  intent  upon  the  scanty  herb 
It  yields  them;  or,  recumbent  on  its  brow. 
Ruminate  heedless  of  the  scene  outspread 
Beneath,  beyond,  and  stretching  far  away 
From  inland  regions  to  the  distant  main. 
Not  so  the  mind  that  has  been  touched  from  heaven. 

.     .     .     She  often  holds, 
With  those  fair  ministers  of  light  to  man 
That  nightly  fill  the  skies  with  silent  pomp, 
Sweet  conference,"  etc.] 
^  Sequela. 
3  Quadrupes. 
•♦  Ex  Deo. 

5  [Justitiam  sequi.  I  have  substituted  righteousness  for  the 
translator'sy«jj;/(-<?  here  (see  c.  25.  p.  i^d.  su/>ra).  Coleridge  remarks 
on  the  weakness  of  the  latter  word.  It  may  be,  our  author  is  quoting 
St.  Paul  (i  Tim.  vi.  11  and  2  Tim.  ii.),  sectare  justitiam,  "follow 
after  righteousness."] 
*  Exponit. 
7  Enervatus  exstinguitur. 


in  all  evils,  since  fortitude  is  victorious  over 
evils ;  but  the  unjust  in  riches,  in  honours,  in 
power.  For  these  goods  relate  to  the  body,  and 
are  earthly ;  and  these  men  also  lead  an  earthly 
life,  nor  are  they  able  to  attain  to  immortality, 
because  they  have  given  themselves  up  to  pleas- 
ures which  are  the  enemies  of  virtue.  There- 
fore this  temporal  life  ought  to  be  subject  to 
that  eternal  life,  as  the  body  is  to  the  soul. 
Whoever,  then,  prefers  the  life  of  the  soul  must 
despise  the  life  of  the  body ;  nor  will  he  in  any 
other  way  be  able  to  strive  after  that  which  is 
highest,  unless  he  shall  have  despised  the  things 
which  are  lowest.  But  he  who  shall  have  em- 
braced the  life  of  the  body,  and  shall  have  turned 
his  desires  downwards  ^  to  the  earth,  is  unable 
to  attain  to  that  higher  life.  But  he  who  pre- 
fers to  live  well  for  eternity,  will  live  badly  9  for 
a  time,  and  will  be  subjected  to  all  troubles  and 
labours  as  long  as  he  shall  be  on  earth,  that  he 
may  have  divine  and  heavenly  consolation.  And 
he  who  shall  prefer  to  live  well  '°  for  a  time,  will 
live  ill  to  eternity  ;  for  he  will  be  condemned  by 
the  sentence  of  God  to  eternal  punishment,  be- 
cause he  has  preferred  earthly  to  heavenly  goods. 
On  this  account,  therefore,  God  seeks  to  be 
worshipped,  and  to  be  honoured  by  man  as  a 
Father,  that  he  may  have  virtue  and  wisdom, 
which  alone  produce  immortality.  For  because 
no  other  but  Himself  is  able  to  confer  that 
immortality,  since  He  alone  possesses  it,  He 
will  grant "  to  the  j^iety  of  the  man,  with  which 
he  has  honoured  God,  this  reward,  to  be  blessed 
to  all  eternity,  and  to  be  for  ever  in  the  presence 
of  God  and  in  the  society  of  God. 

N.B.  —  The  following  paragraphs  to  the  end  of  the 
cha]5ter  are  wanting  in  many  MSS.,  and  it  is  very 
doubtful  whether  they  were  written  by  Lactaniius. 

Nor  can  any  one  shelter  himself  under  the 
pretext  that  the  fault  belongs  to  Him  who  made 
both  good  and  evil.  For  why  did  He  will  that 
evil  should  exist  if  He  hated  it?  Why  did  He 
not  make  good  only,  that  no  one  might  sin,  no 
one  commit  evil?  Although  I  have  explained 
this  in  almost  all  the  former  books,  and  have 
touched  upon  it,  though  slightly,  above,  yet  it 
must  be  mentioned  repeatedly,  because  the 
whole  matter  turns  on  this  point.  For  there 
could  be  no  virtue  unless  •  He  had  made  con- 
trary things ;  nor  can  the  power  of  good  be  at 
all  manifest,  except  from  a  comparison  with  evil. 
Thus  evil  is  nothing  else  but  the  explanation  of 
good.  Therefore  if  evil  is  taken  away,  good 
must  also  be  taken  away.     If  you  shall  cut  off 


^  In  terram  dejecerit. 

9  i.e.,  "  in  discomfort,"  liable  to  the  evils  of  this  life. 

'°  i.e.,  in  comfort  and  luxury.  On  the  whole  passage  see  John 
xii.  25:  "  He  that  loveth  his  life  shall  lose  it;  and  he  that  hateth  his 
life  in  this  world,  shall  keep  it  unto  life  eternal." 

''  Afficiet.     Ot.hers  read  "  alTicil." 


202 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VII. 


your  left  hand  or  foot,  your  body  will  not  be 
entire,  nor  will  life  itself  remain  the  same.  Thus, 
for  the  due  adjustment  of  the  framework  of  the 
body,  the  left  members  are  most  suitably  joined 
with  the  right.  In  like  manner,  if  you  make 
chessmen  '  all  alike,  no  one  will  play.  If  you 
shall  give  one  colour  ^  only  to  the  circus,  no  one 
will  think  it  worth  while  to  be  a  spectator,  all 
the  pleasure  of  the  Circensian  games  being 
taken  away.  For  he  who  .first  instituted  the 
games  was  a  favourer  of  one  colour ;  but  he 
introduced  another  as  a  rival,  that  there  might 
be  a  contest,  and  some  partisanship  ^  in  the  spec- 
tacle. Thus  God,  when  He  was  fixing  that 
which  was  good,  and  giving  virtue,  appointed 
also  their  contraries,  with  which  they  might 
contend.  If  an  enemy  and  a  fight  be  wanting, 
there  is  no  victory.  Take  away  a  contest,  and 
even  virtue  is  nothing.  How  many  are  the 
mutual  contests  of  men,  and  with  what  various 
arts  are  they  carried  on  !  No  one,  however, 
would  be  regarded  as  surpassing  in  bravery, 
swiftness,  or  excellence,  if  he  had  no  adversary 
with  whom  he  might  contend.  And  where  vic- 
tory is  wanting,  there  also  glory  and  the  reward 
of  victory  must  be  absent  together  with  it. 
Therefore,  that  he  might  strengthen  virtue  itself 
by  continual  exercise,  and  might  make  it  perfect 
from  its  conflict  with  evils,  He  gave  both  to- 
gether, because  each  of  the  two  without  the 
other  is  unable  to  retain  its  force.  Therefore 
there  is  diversity,  on  which  the  whole  system  of 
truth  depends. 

It  does  not  escape  my  notice  what  may  here 
be  urged  in  opposition  by  more  skilful  persons. 
If  good  cannot  exist  without  evil,  how  do  you 
say  that,  before  he  had  offended  God,  the  first 
man  lived  in  the  exercise  of  good  only,  or  that 
he  will  hereafter  live  in  the  exercise  of  good 
only?  This  (juestion  is  to  be  examined  by  us, 
for  in  the  former  books  I  omitted  it,  that  I 
might  here  fill  up  the  subject.  We  have  said 
above  that  the  nature  of  man  is  made  up  of 
opposing  elements ;  for  the  body,  because  it  is 
earth,  is  capable  of  being  grasped,  of  temporary 
duration,  senseless,  and  dark.  But  the  soul, 
because  it  is  from  heaven,  is  unsubstantial,''  ever- 
lasting, endued  with  sensibility,  and  full  of  lus- 
tre ;  5  and  because  these  qualities  are  opposed 
to  one  another,  it  follows  of  necessity  that  man 


'  Calculi,  called  also  "  latrunculi."  There  were  two  sets,  the  one 
white,  the  other  red  or  black. 

2  The  chariot-drivers  in  the  contests  of  the  circus  were  distin- 
guished by  different  colours.  Originally  there  were  but  two  factions 
or  parties,  the  white  and  the  red;  afterwards  they  were  increased  to 
four,  the  green  and  the  azure  being  added.  Domitian  increased  the 
number  to  six,  but  this  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  usual  practice. 

3  Gratia.  Thus  Pliny,  "  Tanta  gratia,  tanta  auctoritas  in  un^ 
vilissima  tunic^."  Cf  Juv. ,.?«/.,  xi.  195.  Gibbon  thus  describes  the 
scene:  "  The  spectators  remained  in  eager  attention,  their  eyes  fixed 
on  the  charioteers,  their  minds  agitated  with  hope  and  fear  for  the 
success  of  the  colour  which  they  favoured." 

*  Tenuis. 
S  lUustris. 


is  subject  to  good  and  evil.  Good  is  ascribed 
to  the  soul,  because  it  is  incapable  of  dissolu- 
tion ;  evil  to  the  body,  because  it  is  frail.  Since, 
therefore,  the  body  and  the  soul  are  connected 
and  united  together,  the  good  and  the  evil  must 
necessarily  hold  together  ;  nor  can  they  be  sepa- 
rated from  one  another,  unless  when  they  (the 
body  and  soul)  are  separated.  Finally,  the 
knowledge  of  good  and  of  evil  was  given  at 
the  same  time  to  the  first  man  ;  and  when  he 
understood  this,  he  was  immediately  driven  from 
the  holy  place  in  which  there  is  no  evil ;  for 
when  he  was  conversant  with  that  which  was 
good  only,  he  was  ignorant  that  this  itself  was 
good.  But  after  that  he  had  received  the 
knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  it  was  now  unlaw- 
ful for  him  to  remain  in  that  place  of  happiness, 
and  he  was  banished  to  this  common  world, 
that  he  might  at  once  experience  both  of  those 
things  with  the  nature  of  which  he  had  at  once 
become  acquainted.  It  is  plain,  therefore,  that 
wisdom  has  been  given  to  man  that  he  may  dis- 
tinguish good  from  evil  —  that  he  may  discrimi- 
nate between  things  advantageous  and  things 
disadvantageous,  between  things  useful  and 
things  useless  —  that  he  may  have  judgment  and 
consideration  as  to  what  he  ought  to  guard 
against,  what  to  desire,  what  to  avoid,  and  what 
to  follow.  Wisdom  therefore  cannot  exist  with- 
out evil;  and  that  first  author^  of  the  human 
race,  as  long  as  he  was  conversant  with  good 
only,  lived  as  an  infant,  ignorant  of  good  and 
evil.  But,  indeed,  hereafter  man  must  be  both 
wise  and  happy  without  any  evil ;  but  this  can- 
not take  place  as  long  as  the  soul  is  clothed 
with  the  abode  of  the  body. 

But  when  a  separation  shall  have  been  made 
between  the  body  and  the  soul,  then  evil  will  be 
disunited  from  good  ;  and  as  the  body  perishes 
and  the  soul  remains,  so  evil  will  perish  and  good 
be  permanent.  Then  man,  having  received  the 
garment  of  immortality,  will  be  wise  and  free 
from  evil,  as  God  is.  He,  therefore,  who  wishes 
that  we  should  be  conversant  with  good  only, 
especially  desires  this,  that  we  should  live  without 
the  body,  in  which  evil  is.  But  if  evil  is  taken 
away,  either  wisdom,  as  I  have  said,  or  the  body, 
will  be  taken  from  man  ;  wisdom,  that  he  may 
be  ignorant  of  evil ;  the  body,  that  he  may  not 
be  sensible  of  it.  But  now,  since  man  is  fur- 
nished with  wisdom  to  know,  and  a  body  to  per- 
ceive, God  willed  that  both  should  exist  alike  in 
this  life,  that  virtue  and  wisdom  may  be  in  agree- 
ment. Therefore  He  placed  man  in  the  midst, 
between  both,  that  he  might  have  liberty  to  fol- 
low either  good  or  evil.  But  He  mingled  with 
evil  some  things  which  appear  good,  that  is, 
various  and  delightful  enjoyments,  that  by  the 

6  Princeps. 


Chap.  VI.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


20' 


enticements  of  these  He  might  lead  men  to  the 
concealed  evil.  And  He  likewise  mingled  with 
good  some  things  which  appear  evil  —  that  is, 
hardships,  and  miseries,  and  labours  —  by  the 
harshness  and  unpleasantness  of  which  the  soul, 
being  offended,  might  shrink  back  from  the  con- 
cealed good.  But  here  the  office  of  wisdom  is 
needed,  that  we  may  see  more  with  the  mind 
.  than  with  the  body,  which  very  few  are  able  to 
do ;  because  while  virtue  is  difficult  and  rarely 
to  be  found,  pleasure  is  common  and  public. 
Thus  it  necessarily  happens  that  the  wise  man  is 
accounted  as  a  fool,  who,  while  he  seeks  good 
things  which  are  not  seen,  permits  those  which 
are  seen  to  slip  from  his  hands ;  and  while  he 
avoids  evils  which  are  not  seen,  runs  into  evils 
which  are  before  the  eyes ;  which  happens  to  us 
when  we  refuse  neither  torture  nor  death  in  be- 
half of  the  faith,  since  we  are  driven  to  the 
greatest  wickedness,  so  as  to  betray  the  faith 
and  deny  the  true  God,  and  to  sacrifice  to  dead 
and  death-bearing  gods.  This  is  the  cause  why 
God  made  man  mortal,  and  made  him  subject 
to  evils,  although  he  had  framed  the  world  for 
his  sake,  namely,  that  he  might  be  capable  of 
virtue,  and  that  his  virtue  might  reward  him  with 
immortality.  Now  virtue,  as  we  have  shown,  is 
the  worship  of  the  true  God. 

CHAP.     VI. WHY     THE     WORLD     AND     MAN    WERE 

CREATED.       HOW  UNPROFITABLE   IS  THE  WORSHIP 
OF  FALSE  GODS. 

Now  let  us  mark  the  whole  argument  by  a 
brief  definition.'  The  world  has  been  created 
for  this  purpose,  that  we  may  be  born  ;  we  are 
born  for  this  end,  that  we  may  acknowledge  the 
Maker  of  the  world  and  of  ourselves  —  God  ; 
we  acknowledge  Him  for  this  end,  that  we  may 
worship  Him ;  we  worship  Him  for  this  end, 
that  we  may  receive  immortality  as  the  reward 
of  our  labours,  since  the  worship  of  God  con- 
sists of  the  greatest  labours  ;  for  this  enti  we  are 
rewarded  with  immortality,  that  being  made  like 
to  the  angels,  we  may  serve  the  Supreme  Father 
and  Lord  for  ever,  and  may  be  to  all  eternity  a 
kingdom  to  God.  This  is  the  sum  of  all  things, 
this  the  secret  of  God,  this  the  mystery  of  the 
world,  from  which  they  are  estranged,  who,  fol- 
lowing present  gratification,  have  devoted  them- 
selves to  the  pursuit  of  earthly  and  frail  goods, 
and  by  means  of  deadly  enjoyments  have  sunk 
as  It  were  in  mire  and  mud  their  souls,  which 
were  born  for  heavenly  pursuits. 

Let  us  now,  in  the  next  ])lace,  inquire  whether 
there  is  anything  reasonable  in  the  worship  of 
these  gods  ;  for  if  they  are  many,  if  they  are 
worshipped  only  on  this  account  by  men,  that 
they  may  afford  them  riches,  victories,  honours, 


Circumscriptione. 


and  all  things,  which  are  of  no  avail  except  for 
the  present ;  if  we  are  produced  without  cause 
—  if  no  providence  is  employed  in  the  produc- 
tion of  men  —  if  we  are  brought  forth  by  chance 
for  ourselves,  and  for  the  sake  of  our  o\\'n  pleas- 
ure —  if  we  are  nothing  after  death,  —  what  can 
be  so  superfluous,  so  empty,  so  vain,  as  the 
affairs  of  man,  and  the  world  itself?  which, 
though  it  is  of  incredible  magnitude,  and  con- 
structed with  such  wonderful  arrangement,  is 
nevertheless  occupied  with  trifling  subjects.  For 
why  should  the  breathings  of  the  winds  put  the 
clouds  in  motion?  Why  should  lightnings  shine 
forth,  thunders  roar,  or  showers  fall,  that  the 
earth  may  bring  forth  its  increase,  and  nourish 
its  various  productions?  Why,  in  short,  should 
all  nature  labour  that  nothing  may  be  wanting 
of  those  things  by  which  the  life  of  man  is  sus- 
tained, if  it  is  vain,  if  we  utterly  perish,  if  there 
is  in  us  nothing  of  greater  advantage  to  God? 
But  if  it  is  unlawful  to  be  spoken,  and  is  not  to 
be  thought  possible,  that  that  which  you  see  to 
be  most  in  accordance  with  reason  was  not  es- 
tablished on  account  of  some  reason  of  impor- 
tance, what  reason  can  there  be  in  these  errors 
of  depraved  religions,  and  in  this  persuasion  of 
philosophers,  by  which  they  imagine  that  souls 
perish  ?  Assuredly  there  is  none  ;  for  what  have 
they  to  say  why  the  gods  so  regularly  supply  to 
men  everything  in  its  season  ?  Is  it  that  we  may 
present  to  them  corn  and  wine,  and  the  odour 
of  incense,  and  the  blood  of  cattle?  Which 
things  cannot  be  acceptable  to  the  immortals, 
because  they  are  perishable ;  nor  can  they  be 
of  use  to  beings  destitute  of  bodies,  because 
these  things  have  been  given  for  the  use  of  those 
possessed  of  bodies ;  and  yet  if  they  required 
these  things,  they  could  bestow  them  upon  them- 
selves when  they  wished.  Whether,  therefore, 
souls  perish  or  exist  for  ever,  what  principle  is 
involved  in  the  worship  of  the  gods,  or  by  whom 
was  the  world  established?  Why,  or  when,  or 
how  long,  or  how  far  were  men  produced,  or  on 
what  account?  Why  do  they  arise,  die,  succeed 
one  another,  are  renewed?  What  do  the  gods 
obtain  from  the  worship  of  those  who  after  death 
are  about  to  have  no  existence  ?  ^Vhat  do  they 
perform,  what  do  they  promise,  what  do  they 
threaten,  which  is  worthy  of  men  or  of  gods? 
Or  if  souls  remain  after  death,  what  do  they  do 
or  are  they  about  to  do  respecting  them?  What 
need  is  there  to  them  of  a  treasure-house  of 
souls?  From  what  source  do  they  themselves 
arise?  How,  or  why,  or  whence  are  they  so 
many?  Thus  it  comes  to  pass,  that  if  you  de- 
part from  that  sum  of  things  which  we  comprised 
above,  all  system  is  destroyed,  and  all  things 
return  ^  to  nothing. 

^  Revolvantur.     Others  read  "  rcsolvantur." 


204 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VII. 


CHAP.    VII. OF    THE    VARIETY    OF    PHILOSOPHERS, 

AND    THEIR   TRUTH. 

And  because  the  philosophers  did  not  compre- 
hend this  main  point,  they  were  neither  able  to 
comprehend  truth,  although  they  for  the  most 
part  both  saw  and  explained  those  things  of  which 
the  main  point  itself  consists.  But  different  per- 
sons brought  forward  all  these  things,  and  in  dif- 
ferent ways,  not  connecting  the  causes  of  things, 
nor  the  consequences,  nor  the  reasons,  so  that 
they  might  join  together  and  complete  that  main 
point  which  comprises  the  whole.  But  it  is  easy 
to  show  that  almost  the  whole  truth  has  been 
divided  by  philosophers  and  sects.  For  we  do 
not  overthrow  philosophy,  as  the  Academics  are 
accustomed  to  do,  whose  plan  was  to  reply  to 
everything,  which  is  rather  to  calumniate  and 
mock ;  but  we  show  that  no  sect  was  so  much 
out  of  the  way,  and  no  philosopher  so  vain,  as 
not  to  see  something  of  the  truth.'  But  while 
they  are  mad  with  the  desire  of  contradicting, 
while  they  defend  their  own  arguments  even 
though  false,  and  overthrow  those  of  others  even 
though  true,  not  only  has  the  truth  escaped  from 
them,  which  they  pretended  that  they  were  seek- 
ing, but  they  themselves  lost  it  chiefly  through 
their  own  fault.  But  if  there  had  been  any  one 
to  collect  together  the  truth  which  was  dispersed 
amongst  individuals  and  scattered  amongst  sects, 
and  to  reduce  it  to  a  body,  he  assuredly  would 
not  disagree  with  us.  But  no  one  is  able  to  do 
this,  unless  he  has  experience^  and  knowledge 
of  the  truth.  But  to  know  the  truth  belongs  to 
him  only  who  has  been  taught  by  God.  For  he 
cannot  in  any  other  way  reject  the  things  which 
are  false,  or  choose  and  approve  of  those  which 
are  true  ;  but  if  even  by  chance  he  should  effect 
this,  he  would  most  surely  act  the  part  of  the 
philosopher ;  and  though  he  could  not  defend 
those  things  by  divine  testimonies,  yet  the  truth 
would  explain  itself  by  its  own  light.  Where- 
fore the  error  of  those  is  incredible,  who,  when 
they  have  approved  of  any  sect,  and  have  devoted 
themselves  to  it,  condemn  all  others  as  false  and 
vain,  and  arm  themselves  for  battle,  neither 
knowing  what  they  ought  to  defend  nor  what  to 
refute  ;  and  make  attacks  everywhere,  without 
distinction,^  upon  all  things  which  are  brought 
forward  by  those  who  disagree  with  them. 

On  account  of  these  most  obstinate  conten- 
tions of  theirs,  no  philosophy  existed  which  made 
a  nearer  approach  to  the  truth,  for  the  whole 
truth  has  been  comprised  by  these  in  separate 
portions.'*  Plato  said  s  that  the  world  was  made 
by  God  :  the  prophets  ^  speak  the    same ;  and 


'  [See  Clement,  sparsiin,  and  notably  (cap.  5  of  Stromata)  vol. 
ii.  p.  30;,  this  series.] 

^  Veri  peritus  ac  sciens. 
3  Sine  delectu. 
*  Particulatim. 
S  In  the  Timceus. 
^  Gen.  i. ;  Ps.  xxxiii. 


the  same  is  apparent  from  the  verses  of  the  Sibyl. 
They  therefore  are  in  error,  who  have  said  either 
that  all  things  were  produced  of  their  own  accord 
or  from  an  assemblage  of  atoms  ;  ^  since  so  great 
a  world,  so  adorned  and  of  such  magnitude, 
could  neither  have  been  made  nor  arranged  and 
set  in  order  without  some  most  skilful  author, 
and  that  very  arrangement  by  which  all  things  are 
perceived  to  be  kept  together  and  to  be  governed 
bespeaks  ^  an  artificer  with  a  most  skilful  mind. 
The  Stoics  say  that  the  world,  and  all  things  which 
are  in  it,  were  made  for  the  sake  of  men  :  the 
sacred  writings  9  teach  us  the  same  thing.  There- 
fore Democritus  was  in  error,  who  thought  that 
they  were  poured  forth  from  the  earth  like  worms, 
without  any  author  or  plan.  For  the  reason  of 
man's  creation  belongs  to  a  divine  mystery  ;  and 
because  he  was  unable  to  know  this,  he  drew  '° 
down  man's  life  to  nothing.  Aristo  asserted  that 
men  were  born  to  the  exercise  of  virtue  ;  we  are 
also  reminded  of  and  learn  the  same  from  the 
prophets.  Therefore  Aristippus  is  deceived,  who 
made  man  subject  to  pleasure,  that  is,  to  evil,  as 
though  he  were  a  beast.  Pherecydes  and  Plato 
contended  that  souls  were  immortal ;  but  this  is 
a  peculiar  doctrine  in  our  religion.  Therefore 
Dicaearchus  was  mistaken,  together  with  Democ- 
ritus, who  argued  that  souls  perished  with  the 
body  and  were  dissolved.  Zeno  the  Stoic  taught 
that  there  were  infernal  regions,  and  that  the 
abodes  of  the  good  were  separated  from  the 
wicked  \  and  that  the  former  enjoyed  peaceful 
and  delightful  regions,  but  that  the  latter  suffered 
punishment  in  dark  places,  and  in  dreadful 
abysses  of  mire  :  the  prophets  show  the  same 
thing.  Therefore  Epicurus  was  mistaken,  who 
thought  that  that  was  an  invention  "  of  the  poets, 
and  explained  those  punishments  of  the  infernal 
regions,  which  are  spoken  of,  as  happening  in  this 
life.  Therefore  the  philosophers  touched  upon 
the  whole  truth,  and  every  secret  of  our  holy  reli- 
gion ;  but  when  others  denied  it,  they  were  unable 
to  defend  that  which  they  had  found,  because  the 
system  did  not  agree  '^  with  the  particulars  ;  nor 
were  they  able  to  reduce  to  a  summary  those 
things  which  they  had  perceived  to  be  true,  as 
we  have  done  above. 

CHAP.   VIII.  —  OF   THE  IMMORTALITY  OF   THE   SOUL. 

The  one  chief  good,  therefore,  is  immortality, 
for  the  reception  of  which  we  were  originally 
formed  and  born.  To  this  we  direct  our  course  ; 
human  nature  regards  this ;  to  this  virtue  exalts 
us.  And  because  we  have  discovered  this  good, 
it  remains  that  we  should  also  speak  of  immor- 


^  Minutis  seminibus  conglobatis. 

8  Confitetur. 

9  Gen.  i. :   Ps.  viii.;  Heb.  ii. 
■°  Deduxit  ad  nihilum. 

"  Figmentum. 

'^  Singulis  ratio  non  quadravit. 


Chap.  IX.] 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


205 


tality  itself.  The  arguments  of  Plato,  although 
they  contribute  much  to  the  subject,  have  little 
strength  to  prove  and  fill  up  the  truth,  since  he 
had  neither  summed  up  and  collected  into  one 
the  plan  of  the  whole  of  this  great  mystery,  nor 
had  he  comprehended  the  chief  good.  P'or  al- 
though he  perceived  the  truth  respecting  the 
mimortality  of  the  soul,  yet  he  did  not  speak 
respecting  it  as  though  it  were  the  chief  good. 
We,  therefore,  are  able  to  elicit  the  truth  by 
more  certain  signs  ;  for  we  have  not  collected  it 
by  doubtful  surmise,'  but  have  known  it  by  divine 
instruction.  Now  Plato  thus  reasoned,  that  what- 
ever has  perception  by  itself,  and  always  moves, 
is  immortal ;  for  that  that  which  has  no  begin- 
ning of  motion  is  not  about  to  have  an  end,  be- 
cause it  cannot  be  deserted  by  itself.  But  this 
argument  would  give  eternal  existence  even  to 
dumb  animals,  unless  he  had  made  a  distinction 
by  the  addition  of  wisdom.  He  added,  there- 
fore, that  he  might  escape  this  common  ^  linking 
together,  that  the  soul  of  man  could  not  be  other- 
wise than  immortal,  since  its  wonderful  skill  in 
invention,  its  quickness  in  reflection,  and  its 
readiness  in  perceiving  and  learning,  its  memory 
of  the  past,  and  its  foresight  of  the  future,  and 
its  knowledge  of  innumerable  arts  and  subjects, 
which  other  living  creatures  do  not  possess,  ap- 
pear divine  and  heavenly ;  because  of  the  soul, 
which  conceives  such  great  things,  and  contains 
such  great  things,  no  origin  can  be  found  on  earth, 
since  it  has  nothing  of  earthly  admixture  united 
with  it.  But  that  which  is  ponderous  in  man, 
and  liable  to  dissolution,  must  be  resolved  into 
earth  ;  whereas  that  which  is  slight  and  subtle  is 
incapable  of  division,  and  when  freed  from  the 
abode  of  the  body,  as  from  prison,  it  flies  to  the 
heaven,  and  to  its  own  nature.  This  is  a  brief 
summary  of  the  tenets  of  Plato,  which  are  widely 
and  copiously  explained  in  his  own  writings. 

Pythagoras  also  was  previously  of  the  same 
sentiments,  and  his  teacher  Pherecydes,  whom 
Cicero  reported  to  have  been  the  first  who  dis- 
coursed respecting  the  immortality  of  the  soul. 
And  although  all  these  excelled  in  eloquence, 
nevertheless  in  this  contest  at  least,  those  who 
argued  against  this  opinion  had  no  less  author- 
ity ;  Dic^archus  first,  then  Democritus,  and  last- 
ly Epicurus  :  so  that  the  matter  itself,  respecting 
which  they  were  contending,  was  called  into 
doubt.  Finally,  Tullius  also  having  set  forth 
the  opinions  of  all  these  respecting  immortality 
and  death,  declared  that  he  did  not  know  what 
was  the  truth.  "  Which  of  these  opinions  is 
true,"  he  said,  "  some   God  may  see."  3     And 


'  Suspicione. 

^  Communitatem. 

3  ["  We  must  wait  patiently,"  said  Socrates,  "  until  some  one, 
either  a  god  or  man,  teach' us  our  moral  and  religious  duties,  and 
remove  the  darkness  from  our  eyes."  —  Akibiad.,  ii.,  OJ>era,yo\.  v. 
p.  loi,  Bipont.] 


again  he  says  in  another  place  :  "  Since  each  of 
these  opinions  had  most  learned  defenders,  it 
cannot  be  divined  what  is  certainty."  But  we 
have  no  need  of  divination,  since  the  divinity 
itself  has  laid  open  to  us  the  truth. 

CHAP.    IX. OF   THE    IMMORTALITY    OF    THE    SOUL, 

AND    OF    VIRTUE. 

By  these  arguments,  therefore,  which  neither 
Plato  nor  any  other  invented,  the  immortality 
of  souls  can  be  proved  and  perceived  :  which 
arguments  we  will  briefly  collect,  since  my  dis- 
course hastens  on  to  relate  the  great  judgment 
of  God,  which  will  be  celebrated  on  the  earth 
at  the  approaching  end  of  the  world. "*  Before 
all  things,  since  God  cannot  be  seen  by  man, 
lest  any  one  should  imagine  from  this  circum- 
stance that  God  does  not  exist,  because  He  was 
not  seen  by  mortal  eyes,  among  other  wonderful 
arrangements  5  He  also  made  many  things  the 
power  of  which  is  manifest,  but  the  substance  is 
not  seen,  as  the  voice,  smell,  the  wind,  that  by 
the  token  and  example  of  these  things  we  might 
perceive  God  from  His  power  and  operation 
and  works,  although  He  did  not  fall  under  the 
notice  of  our  eyes.  What  is  clearer  than  the 
voice,  or  stronger  than  the  wind,  or  more  forci- 
ble than  smell  ?  Yet  these,  when  they  are  borne 
through  the  air  and  come  to  our  senses,  and  im- 
pel them  by  their  eiificacy,  are  not  distinguished 
by  the  eyesight,  but  are  perceived  by  other  parts 
of  the  body.  In  like  manner,  God  is  not  to  be 
perceived  by  us  through  the  sight  or  other  frail 
sense ;  but  He  is  to  be  beheld  by  the  eyes  of 
the  mind,  since  we  see  His  illustrious  and  won- 
derful works.  For  as  to  those  who  have  alto- 
gether denied  the  existence  of  God,  I  should 
not  only  refuse  to  call  them  philosophers,  but 
even  deny  them  the  name  of  men,  who,  vvith  a 
close  resemblance  to  dumb  animals,  consisted 
of  body  only,  discerning  nothing  with  their 
mind,  and  referring  all  things  to  the  bodily 
senses,  who  thought  that  nothing  existed  but 
that  which  they  beheld  with  their  eyes.  And 
because  they  saw  that  adversity  befell  the  wicked, 
or  prosperity  happened  to  the  good,  they  be- 
lieved that  all  things  were  carried  on  by  fortune, 
and  that  the  world  was  established  by  nature, 
and  not  by  providence. 

Hence  they  at  once  feU  into  the  absurdities  ^ 
which  necessarily  followed  such  a  sentiment. 
But  if  there  is  a  God  who  is  incorporeal,  invisi- 
ble, and  eternal,  therefore  it  is  credible  that  the 
soul,  since  it  is  not  seen,  does  not  perish  after 
its  departure  from  the  body ;  for  it  is  manifest 
that  something  exists  which  perceives  and  is 
vigorous,  ^and  yet  does   not   come   into   sight. 


■<  Appropinquante  ssculorum  fine. 
5  Instituiorum  rairacula. 
<>  Deliramenta. 


206 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VII. 


1 


But,  it  is  said,  it  is  difficult  to  comprehend  with 
the  mind  how  the  soul  can  retain  its  perception 
without  those  parts  of  the  body  in  which  the 
office  of  perception  is  contained.  What  about 
God?  Is  it  easy  to  comprehend  how  He  is 
vigorous  without  a  body?  But  if  they  believe 
in  the  existence  of  gods  who,  if  they  exist,  are 
plainly  destitute  of  bodies,  it  must  be  that  hu- 
man souls  exist  in  the  same  way,  since  it  is  per- 
ceived from  reason  itself,  and  discernment,  that 
there  is  a  certain  resemblance  in  man  and  God. 
Finally,  that  proof  which  even  Marcus  TuUius  ' 
saw  is  of  sufficient  strength  :  that  the  immortal- 
ity of  the  soul  may  be  discerned  from  the  fact 
that  there  is  no  other  animal  which  has  any 
knowledge  of  God ;  and  religion  is  almost  the 
only  thing  which  distinguishes  man  from  the 
dumb  creation.  And  since  this  falls  to  man 
alone,  it  assuredly  testifies  that  we  may  aim  at, 
desire,  and  cultivate  that  which  is  about  to  be 
familiar  and  very  near. 

Can  any  one,  when  he  has  considered  the 
nature  of  other  animals,  which  the  providence  of 
the  Supreme  God  has  made  abject,  with  bodies 
bending  down  and  prostrated  to  the  earth,  so 
that  it  may  be  understood  from  this  that  they 
have  no  intercourse  with  heaven,  fail  to  under- 
stand that  man  alone  of  all  animals  is  heavenly 
and  divine,  whose  body  raised  from  the  ground,^ 
elevated  countenance,  and  upright  position,  goes 
in  quest  of  its  origin,  and  despising,  as  it  were, 
the  lowliness  of  the  earth,  reaches  forth  to  that 
which  is  on  high,  because  he  perceives  that  the 
highest  good  is  to  be  sought  by  him  in  the  high- 
est place,  and  mindful  of  his  condition  in  which 
God  made  him  illustrious,  looks  towards  his 
Maker?  And  Trismegistus  most  rightly  called 
this  looking  a  contemplation  of  God,^  which  has 
no  existence  in  the  dumb  animals.  Since  there- 
fore wisdom,  which  is  given  to  man  alone,  is 
nothing  else  but  the  knowledge  of  God,  it  is 
evident  that  the  soul  does  not  perish,  nor  un- 
dergo dissolution,  but  that  it  remains  for  ever, 
because  it  seeks  after  and  loves  God,  who  is 
everlasting,  by  the  impulse  of  its  very  nature 
perceiving  either  from  what  source  it  has  sprung, 
or  to  what  it  is  about  to  return.  Moreover,  it  is 
no  slight  proof  of  immortality  that  man  alone 
makes  use  of  the  heavenly  element.  For,  since 
the  nature  of  the  world  consists  of  two  elements  ■♦ 
which  are  opposed  to  one  another  —  fire  and 
water  —  of  which  the  one  is  assigned  to  the 
heaven,  the  other  to  the  earth,  the  other  living 
creatures,  because  they  are  of  the  earth  and 
mortal,  make  use  of  the  element  which  is  earthly 


1  De  Leg.,  i.  8. 

2  [Here  .igain  the  reference  to  Ovid's  maxim.    5ee  pp.  41,  56, 
and  5S,  supra. \ 

i  Ofunriha.     Others  read  Seuipiav,  i.e.,  "  a  contemplation." 
*  [See  the  most  instructive  pages  of  Tayler  Lewis  again:  Plato 
against  the  Atheists,  p.  121. j 


and  heavy  :  man  alone  makes  use  of  fire,  which 
is  an  element  light,  rising  upward,5  and  heavenly. 
But  those  things  which  are  weighty  depress  to 
death,  and  those  which  are  light  elevate  to  life ; 
because  life  is  on  high,  and  death  below.  And 
as  there  cannot  be  light  without  fire,  so  there 
cannot  be  life  without  light.  Therefore  fire  is 
the  element  of  light  and  life  ;  from  which  it  is 
evident  that  man  who  uses  it  is  a  partaker  of  an 
immortal  condition,  because  that  which  causes 
life  is  familiar  to  him. 

The  gift  of  virtue  also  to  man  alone  is  a  great 
proof  that  souls  are  immortal.  For  this  will  not 
be  in  accordance  with  nature  if  the  soul  is  ex- 
tinguished ;  for  it  is  injurious  to  this  present  hfe. 
For  that  earthly  life,  which  we  lead  in  common 
with  dumb  animals,  both  seeks  pleasure,  by  the 
varied  and  agreeable  fruits  of  which  it  is  de- 
lighted, and  avoids  pain,  the  harshness  of  which, 
by  its  unpleasant  sensations,  injures  the  nature 
of  living  beings,  and  endeavours  to  lead  them 
to  death,  which  dissolves  the  living  being.  If, 
therefore,  virtue  both  prohibits  man  from  those 
goods  which  are  naturally  desired,  and  impels 
him  to  endure  evils  which  are  naturally  avoided, 
it  follows  that  virtue  is  an  evil,  and  opposed  to 
nature  ;  and  he  must  necessarily  be  judged  fool- 
ish who  pursues  it,  since  he  injures  himself  both  by 
avoiding  present  goods,  and  by  seeking  equally 
evils,  without  hope  of  greater  advantage.  For 
when  it  is  permitted  us  to  enjoy  the  sweetest 
pleasures,  should  we  not  appear  to  be  without 
sense  if  we  should  not  prefer  to  live  in  low- 
liness, in  want,  in  contempt  and  ignominy,  or 
not  to  live  at  all,  but  to  be  tormented  with  pain, 
and  to  die,  when  from  these  evils  we  should 
gain  nothing  to  compensate  us  for  the  pleasure 
which  we  have  given  up?  But  if  virtue  is  not 
an  evil,  and  acts  honourably,  inasmuch  as  it 
despises  vicious  and  shameful  pleasures,  and 
bravely,  inasmuch  as  it  neither  fears  pain  nor 
death,  that  it  may  discharge  its  duty,  therefore 
it  must  obtain  some  greater  good  than  those 
things  are  which  it  despises.  But  when  death 
has  been  undergone,  what  further  good  can  be 
hoped  for  except  immortality? 

CHAP.    X. OF   VICES    AND    VIRTUES,    AND    OF    LIFE 

AND    DEATH. 

Let  US  now  in  turn  pass  on  to  those  things 
which  are  opposed  to  virtue,  that  from  these  also 
the  immortality  of  the  soul  may  be  inferred.  All 
vices  are  for  a  time  ;  for  they  are  excited  for  the 
present.  The  impetuosity  of  anger  is  appeased 
when  vengeance  has  been  taken ;  the  pleasure 
of  the  body  puts  an  end  ^  to  lust ;  desire  is  de- 
stroyed either  by  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  ob- 


5  Sublime. 

*>  Libidinis  finis  est. 


Chap.  XL] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


207 


jects  which  it  seeks,  or  by  the  excitement  of 
other  affections ;  ambition,  when  it  has  gained 
the  honours  which  it  wished  for,  loses '  its 
strength  ;  hkewise  the  other  vices  are  unable  to 
stand  their  ground  and  remain,  but  they  are 
ended  by  the  very  enjoyment  which  they  desire. 
Therefore  they  withdraw  and  return.  But  virtue 
is  perpetual,  without  any  intermission ;  nor  can 
he  who  has  once  taken  it  up  depart  from  it. 
For  if  it  should  have  any  interruption,^  if  we 
can  at  any  time  do  without  it,  vices,  which  al- 
ways oppose  virtue,  will  return.  Therefore  it 
has  not  been  grasped,  if  it  deserts  its  post,  if  at 
any  time  it  withdraws  itself.  But  when  it  has 
established  for  itself  a  firm  abode,  it  must  ne- 
cessarily be  engaged  in  every  act ;  nor  can  it 
faithfully  drive  away  and  put  to  flight  vices, 
unless  it  shall  fortify  with  a  perpetual  guard  the 
breast  which  it  inhabits.  Therefore  the  unin- 
terrupted duration  3  of  virtue  itself  shows  that 
the  soul  of  man,  if  it  has  received  virtue,  re- 
mains permanent,  because  virtue  is  perpetual, 
and  it  is  the  human  mind  alone  which  receives 
virtue.  Since,  therefore,  vices  are  contrary  to 
virtue,  the  whole  systems  must  of  necessity  dif- 
fer from  and  be  contrary  to  each  other.  Be- 
cause vices  are  commotions  and  perturbations 
of  the  soul ;  virtue,  on  the  contrary,  is  mildness 
and  tranquillity  of  mind.  Because  vices  are 
temporary,  and  of  short  duration ;  virtue  is  per- 
petual and  constant,  and  always  consistent  with 
itself.  Because  the  fruits  of  vices,  that  is,  pleas- 
ures, equally  with  themselves,  are  short  and  tem- 
porary, therefore  the  fruit  and  reward  of  virtue 
are  everlasting.  Because  the  advantage  of  vices 
is  immediate,  therefore  that  of  virtue  is  future. 

Thus  it  happens  that  in  this  life  there  is  no 
reward  of  virtue,  because  virtue  itself  still  exists. 
For  as,  when  vices  are  completed  in  their  per- 
formance, pleasure  and  their  rewards  follow  ;  so, 
when  virtue  has  been  ended,  its  reward  follows. 
But  virtue  is  never  ended  except  by  death,  since 
its  highest  office  is  in  the  undergoing  of  death  ; 
therefore  the  reward  of  virtue  is  after  death.  In 
fine,  Cicero,  in  his  Tusculan  Disputations,'^  per- 
ceived, though  with  doubt,  that  the  chief  good 
does  not  happen  to  man  except  after  death. 
"  A  man  will  go,"  he  says,  "  with  confident  spirit, 
if  circumstances  shall  so  happen,  to  death,  in 
which  we  have  ascertained  that  there  is  either 
the  chief  good  or  no  evil."  Death,  therefore, 
does  not  extinguish  man,  but  admits  him  to  the 
reward  of  virtue.  But  he  who  has  contaminated 
himself,5  as  the  same  writer  says,  with  vices  and 
crimes,  and  has  been  the  slave  of  pleasure,  he 
truly,  being  condemned,  shall  suffer  eternal  pun- 


'  Senescit. 

2  Intervallum. 

3  Perpetuitas. 

*  Tiisc.  Di'sp.,  i.  46. 
S  Ibid.,  i.  30. 


ishment,  which  the  sacred  writings  call  the  sec- 
ond death,  which  is  both  eternal  and  full  of  the 
severest  torments.^  For  as  two  lives  are  pro- 
posed to  man,  of  which  the  one  belongs  to  the 
soul,  the  other  to  the  body ;  so  also  two  deaths 
are  proposed,  —  one  relating  to  the  body,  which 
all  must  undergo  according  to  nature,  the  other 
relating  to  the  soul,  which  is  acquired  by  wicked- 
ness and  avoided  by  virtue.  As  this  life  is  tem- 
porary and  has  fixed  hmits,  because  it  belongs 
to  the  body ;  so  also  death  is  in  like  manner 
temporary  and  has  a  fixed  end,  because  it  affects 
the  body. 

CHAP.    XI.  —  OF    THE    LAST    TIMES,    AND    OF    THE 
SOUL   AND    BODY. 

Therefore,  when  the  times  which  God  has  ap- 
pointed for  death  shall  be  completed,  death 
itself  shall  be  ended.  And  because  temporal 
death  follows  temporal  life,  it  follows  that  souls 
rise  again  to  everlasting  life,  because  temporal 
death  has  received  an  end.  Again,  as  the  life 
of  the  soul  is  everlasting,  in  which  it  receives  the 
divine  and  unspeakable  fruits  of  its  immortality ; 
so  also  its  death  must  be  eternal,  in  which  it  suf- 
fers perpetual  punishments  and  infinite  torments 
for  its  faults.  Therefore  things  are  in  this  posi- 
tion, that  they  who  are  happy  in  this  life,  per- 
taining to  the  body  and  the  earth,  are  about  to 
be  miserable  for  ever,  because  they  have  already 
enjoyed  the  good  things  which  they  preferred, 
which  happens  to  those  who  adore  false  gods  and 
neglect  the  true  God.  In  the  next  place,  they 
who,  following  righteousness,  have  been  misera- 
ble, and  despised,  and  poor  in  this  life,  and  have 
often  been  harassed  with  insults  and  injuries  on 
account  of  righteousness  itself,  because  virtue 
cannot  otherwise  be  attained,  are  about  to  be 
always  happy,  that  since  they  have  already  en- 
dured evils,  they  may  also  enjoy  goods.  AVhich 
plainly  happens  to  those  who,  having  despised 
gods  of  the  earth  and  frail  goods,  follow  the 
heavenly  religion  of  God,  whose  goods  are  ever- 
lasting, as  He  Himself  who  gave  them.  ^Vhat 
shall  I  say  of  the  works  of  the  body  and  soul? 
Do  not  they  show  that  the  soul  is  not  subject  to 
death?  For,  as  to  the  body,  since  it  is  itself 
frail  and  mortal,  whatever  works  it  contrives  are 
equally  perishable.  For  TuUius  says  that  there 
is  nothing  which  is  wrought  by  the  hands  of  man 
which  is  not  at  some  time  reduced  to  destruc- 
tion, either  through  injury  caused  by  men,  or 
through  length  of  time,  which  is  the  destroyer 
of  all  things. 

But  truly  we  see  that  the  productions  of  the 
mind  are  immortal.  For  as  many  as,  devoting 
themselves  to  the  contempt  of   present  things, 


*  [Tayler  Lewis,  Plato,  etc.,  pp.  294-300;   more  especially,  pp. 
318-322.] 


208 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VII. 


have  handed  down  to  memory  the  monuments 
of  their  genius  and  great  deeds,  have  plainly 
gained  by  these  an  imperishable  name  for  their 
mind  and  virtue.  Therefore,  if  the  deeds  of  the 
body  are  mortal  for  this  reason,  because  the 
body  itself  is  mortal,  it  follows  that  the  soul  is 
shown  to  be  immortal  from  this,  because  we  see 
that  its  productions  are  not  mortal.  In  the 
same  manner  also,  the  desires  of  the  body  and 
of  the  soul  declare  that  the  one  is  mortal,  the 
other  everlasting.  For  the  body  desires  nothing 
except  what  is  temporal,  that  is,  food,  drink, 
clothing,  rest,  and  pleasure  ;  and  it  cannot  desire 
or  attain  to  these  very  things  without  the  assent 
and  assistance  '  of  the  soul.  But  the  soul  of 
itself  desires  many  things  which  do  not  extend  ^ 
to  the  duty  or  enjoyment  of  the  body  ;  and  those 
are  not  frail,  but  eternal,  as  the  fame  of  virtue, 
as  the  remembrance  of  the  name.  For  the  soul 
even  in  opposition  to  the  body  desires  the  wor- 
ship of  God,  which  consists  in  abstinence  from 
desires  and  lusts,  in  the  enduring  of  pain,  in  the 
contempt  of  death.  From  which  it  is  credible 
that  the  soul  does  not  perish,  but  is  separated 
from  the  body,  because  the  body  can  do  nothing 
without  the  soul,  but  the  soul  can  do  many  and 
great  things  without  the  body.  Why  should  I 
mention  that  those  things  which  are  visible  to 
the  eyes,  and  capable  of  being  touched  by  the 
hand,  cannot  be  eternal,  because  they  admit  of 
external  violence  ;  but  those  things  which  neither 
come  under  the  touch  nor  under  the  sight,  but 
are  apparent  only  in  their  force  and  method  and 
effect,  are  eternal  because  they  suffer  no  violence 
from  without?  But  if  the  body  is  mortal  on  this 
account,  because  it  is  equally  open  to  the  sight 
and  to  the  touch,  therefore  the  soul  is  immortal 
for  this  reason,  because  it  can  be  neither  touched 
nor  seen. 

CHAP.  XII.  —  OF  THE  SOUL  AND  THE  BODY,  AND  OF 
THEIR  UNION  AND  SEPARATION  AND  RETURN. 

Now  let  us  refute  the  arguments  of  those  who 
maintain  the  opposite  opinions,  which  Lucretius 
has  related  in  his  third  book.  Since,  he  says, 
the  soul  is  born  together  with  the  body,  it  must 
necessarily  die  with  the  body.  But  the  two 
cases  are  not  similar.  For  the  body  is  solid, 
and  capable  of  being  grasped  ^  both  by  the  eyes 
and  the  hand  ;  but  the  soul  is  slight,^  and  elud- 
ing the  touch  and  sight.  The  body  is  formed 
from  the  earth;  and  made  firm  ;  the  soul  has  in 
it  nothing  concrete,  nothing  of  earthly  weight, 
as  Plato  maintained.  For  it  could  not  have  such 
great  force,  such  great  skill,  such  great  rapidity, 
unless  it  derived  its  origin  from  heaven.     The 


'  Sine  nutu  et  adminiculo  animi. 

*  Redunrlent. 

3  Comprehensibile. 

*  Tenuis. 


body,  therefore,  since  it  is  made  up  of  a  ponder- 
ous and  corruptible  element,  and  is  tangible  and 
visible,  is  corrupted  and  dies ;  nor  is  it  able  to 
repel  violence,  because  it  comes  under  the  sight 
and  under  the  touch ;  but  the  soul,  which  by  its 
slightness  avoids  all  touch,  can  be  dissolved  by 
no  attack.  Therefore,  although  they  are  joined 
and  connected  together  from  birth,  and  the  one 
which  is  formed  of  earthly  material  5  is,  as  it 
were,  the  vessel  of  the  other,  which  is  drawn  out 
from  heavenly  fineness,  when  any  violence  has 
separated  the  two,  which  separation  is  called 
death,  then  each  returns  into  its  own  nature  ; 
that  which  was  of  earth  is  resolved  into  earth ; 
that  which  is  of  heavenly  breath  remains  fixed, 
and  flourishes  always,  since  the  divine  spirit  is 
everlasting.  In  fine,  the  same  Lucretius,  for- 
getting what  he  asserted,  and  what  dogma  he 
defended,  wrote  these  verses  :  ^  — 

"  That  also  which  before  was  from  the  earth  passes 
back  into  the  earth,  and  that  which  was  sent  from 
the  borders  of  ether  is  carried  again  by  the  quar- 
ters of  heaven." ' 

But  this  language  was  not  for  him  to  employ, 
who  contended  that  souls  perished  with  the 
bodies  ;  but  he  was  overcome  by  the  truth,  and 
the  true  system  stole  upon  him  unawares.  More- 
over, that  very  inference  which  he  draws,  that 
the  soul  suffers  dissolution,  that  is,  that  it  per- 
ishes together  with  the  body,  since  they  are 
produced  together,  is  both  false,  and  is  capable 
of  being  turned  to  the  opposite  direction.  For 
the  body  does  not  perish  together  with  the  soul ; 
but  when  the  soul  departs  it  remains  entire  for 
many  days,  and  frequently  by  medical  prepara- 
tions it  remains  entire  for  a  very  long  time.  For 
if  they  both  perished  together,  as  they  are  pro- 
duced together,  the  soul  would  not  hastily  depart 
and  desert  the  body,  but  both  would  be  dispersed 
alike  at  one  point  of  time ;  and  the  body  also, 
while  the  breath  still  remained  in  it,  would  dis- 
solve and  perish  as  quickly  as  the  soul  departs : 
yes,  truly,  the  body  being  dissolved,  the  soul 
would  vanish,  as  moisture  poured  forth  from  a 
broken  vessel.  For  if  the  earthly  and  frail 
body  after  the  departure  of  the  soul  does  not 
immediately  flow  away  and  waste  into  earth,  from 
which  it  has  its  origin,  therefore  the  soul,  which 
is  not  frail,  endures  to  eternity,  since  its  origin 
is  eternal.  He  says,  since  the  understanding  in- 
creases in  boys,  and  is  vigorous  in  young  men, 
and  is  lessened  in  the  aged,  it  is  evident  that  it 
is  mortal.  First,  the  soul  is  not  the  same  thing 
as  the  mind  ;  for  it  is  one  thing  that  we  live, 
another  that  we  reflect.  For  it  is  the  mind 
of  those  who  are  asleep  which  is  at  rest,^  not 


5  De  terrenl  concretione. 

*"  De  Rer.  Nat.,  ii.  999. 

7  [Ex  aetheris  oris.     Concerning  aiS^p  consult  Lewis,  Plato,  cic. 

pp.  127-129.] 
*  Sopitur. 


Chap.  XII.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


209 


the  soul ;  and  in  those  who  are  mad,  the  mind 
is  extinguished,  the  soul  remains  ;  and  there- 
fore they  are  not  said  to  be  without  a  soul,  but 
to  be  deprived  of  their  mind."  Therefore  the 
mind,  that  is,  the  understanding,  is  either  in- 
creased or  lessened  according  to  age.  The  soul 
is  always  in  its  own  condition  ;  and  from  the 
time  when  it  receives  the  power  of  breathing,  it 
remains  the  same  even  to  the  end,  until,  being 
sent  forth  from  the  confinement  of  the  body,  it 
flies  back  to  its  own  abode.  In  the  next  place, 
the  soul,  although  inspired  by  God,  yet,  because 
it  is  shut  up  in  a  dark  abode  of  earthly  flesh, 
does  not  possess  knowledge,  which  belongs  to 
divinity.  Therefore  it  hears  and  learns  all  things, 
and  receives  wisdom  by  learning  and  hearing ; 
and  old  age  does  not  lessen  wisdom,  but  in- 
creases it,  if  the  age  of  youth  has  been  passed 
in  virtue  ;  and  if  excessive  old  age  shall  have 
enfeebled  the  limbs,  it  is  not  the  fault  of  the 
mind  if  the  sight  has  vanished,  if  the  tongue  has 
become  benumbed,  if  the  hearing  has  grown 
deaf,  but  it  is  the  fault  of  the  body.  But,  it  is 
said,  the  memory  fails.  What  wonder,  if  the 
mind  is  oppressed  by  the  ruin  of  the  falling 
house,  and  forgets  the  past,  not  about  to  be 
divine  on  any  other  condition  than  if  it  shall 
have  escaped  the  prison  in  which  it  is  confined  ? 
But  the  soul,  he  says,  is  also  subject  to  pain 
and  grief,  and  loses  its  senses  through  drunken- 
ness, whence  it  is  evidently  frail  and  mortal.  On 
this  account,  therefore,  virtue  and  wisdom  are 
necessary,  that  both  grief,  which  is  contracted 
by  the  suffering  and  the  sight  of  unworthy  ob- 
jects, may  be  repelled  by  fortitude,  and  that 
pleasure  may  be  overcome,  not  only  by  abstain- 
ing from  drinking,  but  also  from  other  things. 
For  if  it  be  destitute  of  virtue,  if  it  be  given  up 
to  pleasure,  and  thus  rendered  effeminate,  it  will 
become  subject  to  death,  since  virtue,  as  we  have 
shown,  is  the  contriver  of  immortality,  as  pleas- 
ure is  of  death.  But  death,  as  I  have  set  forth, 
does  not  entirely  extinguish  and  destroy,  but  visits 
with  eternal  torments.  For  the  soul  cannot  en- 
tirely perish,  since  it  received  its  origin  from  the 
Spirit  of  God,  which  is  eternal.  The  soul,  he 
says,  is  sensible  even  of  disease  of  the  body,  and 
suffers  forgetfulness  of  itself;  and  as  it  grows  ill, 
so  also  it  is  often  healed.  This  is  therefore  the 
reason  why  virtue  is  especially  to  be  used,  that 
the  mind  —  not  the  soul  ^  —  may  not  be  harassed 
by  any  pain  of  the  body,  or  undergo  oblivion 
of  itself.  And  since  this  has  its  seat  in  a  certain 
part  of  the  body,  when  any  violence  of  disease 
has  vitiated  that  part,  it  is  moved  from  its  place  ; 
and  as  though  shaken,  it  departs  from  its  station, 


'  Nnn  exanimes,  sed  dementes  vocantur. 

^  [1  he  original  must  be  compared:  Ne  iillo  corporis  dolore  fran- 
gatur  et  oblivioiiem  siii  non  aniiiia,  sed  mens  patiatur.  For  voiii  and 
'/'"X'/i  see  Lewis,  «/  supra,  pp.  2iy,  etc. J 


about  to  return  when  a  cure  and  health  shall 
have  remodelled  its  abode.  For,  since  the  soul 
is  united  with  the  body,  if  it  is  destitute  of  vir- 
tue, it  grows  sick  by  the  contagion  of  the  body, 
and  from  sharing  its  frailty  the  weakness  extends 
to  the  mind.  But  when  it  shall  be  disunited 
from  the  body  it  will  flourish  by  itself;  nor  will 
it  now  be  assailed  by  any  condition  of  frailty, 
because  it  has  laid  aside  its  frail  covering.  As 
the  eye,  he  says,  when  torn  out  and  separated 
from  the  body,  can  see  nothing,  so  also  the  soul, 
when  separated,  can  perceive  nothing,  because 
it  is  itself  also  a  part  of  the  body.  This  is  false, 
and  dissimilar  to  the  case  supposed  ;  for  the 
soul  is  not  a  part  of  the  body,  but  in  the  body. 
As  that  which  is  contained  in  a  vessel  is  not  a 
part  of  the  vessel,  and  these  things  which  are  in 
a  house  are  not  said  to  be  a  part  of  the  house  ; 
so  the  mind  is  not  a  part  of  the  body,  because 
the  body  is  either  the  vessel  or  the  receptacle  of 
the  soul. 

Now,  that  is  a  much  more  empty  argument 
which  says  that  the  soul  appears  to  be  mortal 
because  it  is  not  quickly  sent  forth  from  the  body, 
but  gradually  unfolds  itself  from  all  the  mem- 
bers, beginning  from  the  extremity  of  the  feet ; 
as  though,  if  it  were  eternal,  it  would  burst  forth 
in  a  single  moment  of  time,  which  takes  place 
in  those  who  die  by  the  sword.  But  they  who 
are  slain  by  disease  are  longer  in  breathing  forth 
their  spirit,  so  that  as  the  limbs  grow  cold  the 
soul  is  breathed  forth.  P'or,  since  it  is  con- 
tained in  the  material  of  the  blood,  as  light  is 
in  the  oil,  that  material  being  consumed  by  the 
heat  of  fevers,  the  extremities  of  the  limbs  must 
grow  cold  ;  since  the  more  slender  veins  are  ex- 
tended into  the  extremities  of  the  body,  and  the 
extreme  and  smaller  streams  are  dried  up  when 
the  fountain-spring  fails.  It  must  not,  however, 
be  supposed  that,  because  the  perception  of  the 
body  fails,  the  sensibility  of  the  soul  is  extin- 
guished and  perishes.  For  it  is  not  the  soul 
that  becomes  senseless  when  the  body  fails,  but 
it  is  the  body  which  becomes  senseless  when  the 
soul  takes  its  departure,  because  it  draws  all 
sensibility  with  it.  But  since  the  soul  by  its 
presence  gives  sensibility  to  the  body,  and 
causes  it  to  live,  it  is  impossible  that  it  should 
not  live  and  perceive  by  itself,  since  it  is  in 
itself  both  consciousness  and  life.  For  as  to 
that  which  says, 

"  But  if  our  mind  were  immortal,  it  would  not  when 
dying  complain  so  much  of  its  dissulution  as  it 
would  rejoice  in  passing  abroad  and  quitting  its 
vesture  like  a  snake,"  ^ 

I  never  saw  any  one  who  complained  of  his  dis- 
solution in  death  ;  but  he  perhaps  had  seen 
some  Epicurean  philosophizing  even   in  death, 


3  Lucret.,  iii.  6ii. 


2IO 


THE    DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VII, 


and  with  his  latest  breath  discoursing  about  his 
dissokition. 

How  can  it  be  known  whether  he  feels  that  he 
is  in  a  state  of  dissolution,  or  that  he  is  being 
set  free  from  the  body,  when  his  tongue  grows 
dumb  at  his  departure  ?  For  as  long  as  he  per- 
ceives and  has  the  power  of  speech,  he  is  not 
yet  dissolved  ;  when  he  has  suffered  dissolution, 
he  is  now  unable  either  to  perceive  or  to  speak, 
so  that  either  he  is  not  yet  able  to  complain  of 
his  dissolution,  or  he  is  no  longer  able.  But,  it 
is  said,  he  understands  before  he  undergoes  dis- 
solution, that  he  must  undergo  it.  Why  should 
I  mention  that  we  see  many  of  the  dying,  not 
complaining  that  they  are  undergoing  dissolu- 
tion, but  testifying  that  they  are  passing  out, 
and  setting  forth  on  their  journey  and  walking? 
and  they  signify  this  by  gesture,  or  if  they  still 
are  able,  they  express  it  also  by  their  voice. 
From  which  it  is  evident  that  it  is  not  a  dissolu- 
tion which  takes  place,  but  a  separation ;  and 
this  shows  that  the  soul  continues  to  exist. 
Other  arguments  of  the  Epicurean  system  are 
opposed  to  Pythagoras,  who  contends  that  souls 
migrate  from  bodies  worn  out  with  old  age  and 
death,  and  gain  admission  '  into  those  which  are 
new  and  recently  born ;  and  that  the  same  souls 
are  always  reproduced  at  one  time  in  a  man,  at 
another  time  in  a  sheep,  at  another  in  a  wild 
beast,  at  another  in  a  bird  ;  and  that  they  are 
immortal  on  this  account,  because  they  often 
change  their  abodes,  consisting  of  various  and 
dissimilar  bodies.  And  this  opinion  of  a  sense- 
less man,  since  it  is  ridiculous  and  more  worthy 
of  a  stage-player  than  of  a  school  of  philoso- 
phy, ought  not  even  tJ  have  been  refuted  seri- 
ously ;  for  he  who  does  this  appears  to  be 
afraid  lest  any  one  should  believe  it.  Therefore 
we  must  pass  by  those  things  which  have  been 
discussed  in  behalf  of  falsehood  against  false- 
hood ;  it  is  sufficient  to  have  refuted  those 
things  which  are  against  the  truth. 

CHAP.    XIII.  OF    THE     SOUL,    AND     THE    TESTIMO- 
NIES  CONCERNING   ITS   ETERNITY. 

I  have  made  it  evident,  as  I  think,  that  the 
soul  is  not  subject  to  dissolution.  It  remains 
that  I  bring  forward  witnesses  by  whose  authority 
my  arguments  may  be  confirmed.  And  I  will 
not  now  allege  the  testimony  of  the  prophets, 
whose  system  and  divination  consist  in  this 
alone,  the  teaching  that  man  was  created  for 
the  worship  of  God,  and  for  receiving  immor- 
tality from  Him ;  but  I  will  rather  bring  forward 
those  whom  they  who  reject  the  truth  cannot 
but  believe.  Hermes,  describing  the  nature  of 
man,  that  he  might  show  how  he  was  made  by 
God,  introduced  this  statement :  "  And  the  same 

'  Se  insinuare. 


out  of  two  natures  —  the  immortal  and  the  mor- 
tal —  made  one  nature,  that  of  man,  making 
the  same  partly  immortal,  and  partly  mortal ; 
and  bringing  this,  he  placed  it  in  the  midst,  be- 
tween that  nature  which  was  divine  and  immor- 
tal, and  that  which  was  mortal  and  changeable, 
that  seeing  all  things,  he  may  admire  all  things." 
But  some  one  may  perhaps  reckon  him  in  the 
number  of  the  philosophers,  although  he  has 
been  placed  among  the  gods,  and  honoured  by 
the  Egyptians  under  the  name  of  Mercury,  and 
may  give  no  more  authority  to  him  than  to 
Plato  or  Pythagoras.  Let  us  therefore  seek  for 
greater  testimony.  A  certain  Polites  asked 
Apollo  of  Miletus  whether  the  soul  remains  after 
death  or  goes  to  dissolution  ;  and  he  replied  in 
these  verses : — 

"As  long  as  the  soul  is  bound  by  fetters  to  the  body, 
perceiving  corruiHible  sufferings,  it  \ields  to  mor- 
tal pains  ;  but  when,  after  the  wasting  of  the  body, 
it  has  found  a  very  swift  dissolution  of  mortality, 
it  is  altogether  borne  into  the  air,  never  growing 
old,  and  it  remains  always  uninjured  ;  for  the  first- 
born providence  of  God  made  this  disposition." 

What  do  the  Sibylline  poems  say?  Do  they  not 
declare  that  this  is  so,  when  they  say  that  the 
time  will  come  when  God  will  judge  the  living  and 
the  dead?  —  whose  authority  we  will  hereafter 
bring  forward.^  Therefore  the  opinion  enter- 
tained by  Democritus,  and  Epicurus,  and  Dicse- 
archus  concerning  the  dissolution  of  the  soul  is 
false ;  and  they  would  not  venture  to  speak 
concerning  the  destruction  of  souls,  in  the  pres- 
ence of  any  magician,  who  knew  that  souls  are 
called  forth  from  the  lower  regions  by  certain 
incantations,  and  that  they  are  at  hand,  and 
afford  thernselves  to  be  seen  by  human  eyes, 
and  speak,  and  foretell  future  events  ;  and  if 
they  should  thus  venture,  they  would  be  over- 
powered by  the  fact  itself,  and  by  proofs  pre- 
sented to  them.  But  because  they  did  not 
comprehend  the  nature  of  the  soul,  which  is  so 
subtle  that  it  escapes  the  eyes  of  the  human 
mind,  they  said  that  it  perishes.  What  of  Aris- 
toxenus,  who  denied  that  there  is  any  soul  at  all, 
even  while  it  lives  in  the  body?  But  as  on  the 
lyre  harmonious  sound,  and  the  strain  which  mu- 
sicians call  harmony,  is  produced  by  the  tighten- 
ing of  the  strings,  so  he  thought  that  the  power 
of  perception  existed  in  bodies  from  the  joining 
together  of  the  vitals,  and  from  the  vigour  of 
the  limbs ;  than  which  nothing  can  be  said 
more  senseless.  Truly  he  had  his  eyes  unin- 
jured, but  his  heart  was  blind,  with  which  he 
did  not  see  that  he  lived,  and  had  the  mind  by 
which  he  had  conceived  that  very  thought. 
But    this   has  happened  to  many  philosophers, 


2  ["  Dies  irsE,  dies  ilia,  .  .  . 
Teste  David  el  Sibylla." 
i.e.,  divine  and  ethnic  oracles  alike  are  full  of  it. 
xi.t,  supra.     Elucidation  V.j 


See  note  9,  p. 


Chap.  XIV.] 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


21  I 


that  they  did  not  beheve  in  the  existence  of  any 
object  which  is  not  apparent  to  the  eyes  ;  where- 
as the  sight  of  the  mind  ought  to  be  much 
clearer  than  that  of  the  body,  for  perceiving 
those  things  the  force  and  nature  of  which  are 
rather  felt  than  seen. 

CHAP.    XIV. OF    THE     FIRST   AND    LAST    TIMES    OF 

THE   WORLD. 

Since  we  have  spoken  of  the  immortality  of 
the  soul,  it  follows  that  we  teach  how  and  when 
it  is  given  to  man ;  that  in  this  also  they  may 
see  the  errors  of  their  perverseness  and  folly, 
who  imagine  that  some  mortals  have  become 
gods  by  the  decrees  and  dogmas  of  mortals ; 
either  because  they  had  invented  arts,  or  be- 
cause they  had  taught  the  use  of  certain  pro- 
ductions of  the  earth,  or  because  they  had 
discovered  things  useful  for  the  life  of  men,  or 
because  they  had  slain  savage  beasts.  How  far 
these  things  were  from  deserving  immortality  we 
have  both  shown  in  the  former  books,  and  we 
will  now  show,  that  it  may  be  evident  that  it  is 
righteousness  alone  which  procures  for  man  eter- 
nal life,  and  that  it  is  God  alone  who  bestows 
the  reward  of  eternal  life.  For  they  who  are 
said  to  have  been  immortalized  by  their  merits, 
inasmuch  as  they  possessed  neither  righteous- 
ness nor  any  true  virtue,  did  not  obtain  for 
themselves  immortality,  but  death  by  their  sins 
and  lusts ;  nor  did  they  deserve  the  reward  of 
heaven,  but  the  punishment  of  hell,  which  im- 
pends over  them,  together  with  all  their  wor- 
shippers. And  I  show  that  the  time  of  this 
judgment  draws  near,  that  the  due  reward  may 
be  given  to  the  righteous,  and  the  deserved  pun- 
ishment may  be  inflicted  on  the  wicked. 

Plato  and  many  others  of  the  philosophers, 
since  they  were  ignorant  of  the  origin  of  all 
things,  and  of  that  primal  period  at  which  the 
world  was  made,  said  that  many  thousands  of 
ages  had  passed  since  this  beautiful  arrangement 
of  the  world  was  completed ;  and  in  this  they 
perhaps  followed  the  Chalcieans,  who,  as  Cicero 
has  related  in  his  first  book  respecting  divina- 
tion,' foolishly  say  ^  that  they  possess  comprised 
in  their  memorials  four  hundred  and  seventy 
thousand  years ;  in  which  matter,  because  they 
thought  that  they  could  not  be  convicted,  they 
believed  that  they  were  at  liberty  ^  to  speak 
falsely.  But  we,  whom  the  Holy  Scriptures  in- 
stuct  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  know  the 
beginning  and  the  end  of  the  world,  respecting 
which  we  will  now  speak  in  the  end  of  our 
work,  'since  we  have  explained  respecting  the 
beginning  in  the  second  book.  Therefore  let 
the  philosophers,  who   enumerate  thousands  of 


'  1.  ig. 

2  Delirant. 

3  Liberum  esse. 


ages  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  know  that 
the  six  thousandth  year  is  not  yet  completed, 
and  that  when  this  number  is  completed  the 
consummation  must  take  place,  and  the  condi- 
tion of  human  affairs  be  remodelled  for  the 
better,  the  proof  of  which  must  first  be  related, 
that  the  matter  itself  may  be  plain.  God  com- 
pleted the  world  and  this  admirable  work  of 
nature  in  the  space  of  six  days,  as  is  contained 
in  the  secrets  of  Holy  Scripture,  and  consecrated 
the  seventh  day,  on  which  He  had  rested  from 
His  works.  But  this  is  the  Sabbath-day,  which 
in  the  language  of  the  Hebrews  received  its 
name  from  the  number,-*  whence  the  seventh  is 
the  legitimate  and  complete  number.  For  there 
are  seven  days,  by  the  revolutions  of  which  in 
order  the  circles  of  years  are  made  up  ;  and 
there  are  seven  stars  which  do  not  set,  and 
seven  luminaries  which  are  called  planets,'  whose 
differing  and  unequal  movements  are  believed 
to  cause  the  varieties  of  circumstances  and 
times.^ 

Therefore,  since  all  the  works  of  God  were 
completed  in  six  days,  the  world  must  continue 
in  its  present  state  through  six  ages,  that  is,  six 
thousand  years.  For  the  great  day  of  God  is 
limited  by  a  circle  of  a  thousand  years,  as  the 
prophet  shows,  who  says,?  "  In  Thy  sight,  O 
Lord,  a  thousand  years  are  as  one  day."  And 
as  God  laboured  during  those  six  days  in  creat- 
ing such  great  works,  so  His  religion  and  truth 
must  labour  during  these  six  thousand  years, 
while  wickedness  prevails  and  bears  rule.  And 
again,  since  God,  having  finished  His  works, 
rested  the  seventh  day  and  blessed  it,  at  the  end 
of  the  six  thousandth  year  all  wickedness  must 
be  abolished  from  the  earth,  and  righteousness 
reign  for  a  thousand  years  ;  and  there  must  be 
tranquillity  and  rest  from  the  labours  which  the 
world  now  has  long  endured.  But  how  that 
will  come  to  pass  I  will  explain  in  its  order. 
We  have  often  said  that  lesser  things  and  things 
of  small  importance  are  figures  and  previous 
shadowings  forth  of  great  things ;  as  this  day  of 
ours,  which  is  bounded  by  the  rising  and  the 
setting  of  the  sun,  is  a  representation  ^  of  that 
great  day  to  which  the  circuit  of  a  thousand 
years  affixes  its  limits.^ 

In  the  same  manner  also  the  fashioning  of  the 
earthly  man  held  forth  to  the  future  the  formation 
of  the  heavenly  people.  For  as,  when  all  things 
were  completed  which  were  contrived  for  the 
use  of  man,  last  of  all,  on  the  sixth  day.  He 


■♦  The  word  Sabbath  means  rest.     [He  derives  it  from  ^^W-  but 

one  wonders  how  these  divers  etymologies  came  into  the  use  of  Gen- 
tile believers.     Compare  vol.  ii.  Elucidation  VIII.  p.  443. J 

5   Errantia. 

*  [Efficere  creciuntur.  Our  author  seems  to  guard  himself 
against  affirming  the  verity  of  the  science  of  his  times.] 

"   Ps    xc.  4;   see  also  2  Pet.  iii.  8. 

'  Speciem  gerere. 

9  Determinat.     [Compare  p.  220,  ////>■«.] 


212 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VII. 


made  man  also,  and  introduced  him  into  this 
world  as  into  a  home  now  carefully  prepared  ; 
so  now  on  the  great  sixth  day  the  true  man  is 
being  formed  by  the  word  of  God,  that  is,  a  holy 
people  is  fashioned  for  righteousness  by  the  doc- 
trine and  precepts  of  God.  And  as  then  a  mor- 
tal and  imperfect  man  was  formed  from  the 
earth,  that  he  might  live  a  thousand  years  in 
this  world ;  so  now  from  this  earthly  age  is 
formed  a  perfect  man,  that  being  quickened  by 
God,  he  may  bear  rule  in  this  same  world 
through  a  thousand  years.  But  in  what  manner 
the  consummation  will  take  place,  and  what  end 
awaits  the  affairs  of  men,  if  any  one  shall  ex- 
amine the  divine  writings  he  will  ascertain.  But 
the  voices  also  of  prophets  of  the  world,  agreeing 
with  the  heavenly,  announce  the  end  and  over- 
throw of  all  things  after  a  short  time,  describing 
as  it  were  the  last  old  age  of  the  wearied  and 
wasting  world.  But  the  things  which  are  said 
by  prophets  and  seers  to  be  about  to  happen 
before  that  last  ending  comes  upon  the  world, 
I  will  subjoin,  being  collected  and  accumulated 
from  all  quarters. 

CHAP.    XV. OF   THE    DEVASTATION  OF  THE  WORLD 

AND    CHANGE    OF   THE    EMPIRES. 

It  is  contained  in  the  mysteries  of  the  sacred 
writings,  that  a  prince  of  the  Hebrews,  com- 
pelled by  want  of  corn,  passed  into  Egypt  with 
all  his  family  and  relatives.  And  when  his  pos- 
terity, remaining  long  in  Egypt,  had  increased 
into  a  great  nation,  and  were  oppressed  by  the 
heavy  and  intolerable  yoke  of  slavery,  God 
smote  Egypt  with  an  incurable  stroke,  and  freed 
His  people,  leading  them  through  the  midst  of 
the  sea,  when,  the  waves  being  cut  asunder  and 
parted  on  either  side,  the  people  went  over  on 
dry  ground.  And  the  king  of  the  Egyptians 
endeavouring  to  follow  them  as  they  fled,  the 
sea  returning  to  its  place,  he  was  cut  off,  with 
all  his  people.  And  this  deed  so  illustrious  and 
so  wonderful,  although  for  the  present  it  dis- 
played to  men  the  power  of  God,  was  also  a 
foreshadowing  and  figure  of  a  greater  deed, 
which  the  same  God  was  about  to  perform  at 
the  last  consummation  of  the  times,  for  He  will 
free  His  people  from  the  oppressive  bondage  of 
the  world.  But  since  at  that  time  the  people 
of  God  were  one,  and  in  one  nation  only,  Egypt 
only  was  smitten.  But  now,  because  the  people 
of  Ciod  are  collected  out  of  all  languages,  and 
dwell  among  all  nations,  and  are  oppressed  by 
those  bearing  rule  over  them,  it  must  come  to 
pass  that  all  nations,  that  is,  the  whole  world,  be 
beaten  with  heavenly  stripes,  that  the  righteous 
people,  who  are  worshippers  of  God,  may  be 
set  free.  And  as  then  signs  were  given  by  which 
the  coming  destruction  was  shown  to  the  Egyp- 


tians, so  at  the  last  time  wonderful  prodigies  will 
take  place  throughout  all  the  elements  of  the 
world,  by  which  the  mipending  destruction  may 
be  understood  by  all  nations. 

Therefore,  as  the  end  of  this  world  approaches, 
the  condition  of  human  affairs  must  undergo  a 
change,  and  through  the  prevalence  of  wicked- 
ness become  worse  ;  so  that  now  these  times  of 
ours,  in  which  iniquity  and  impiety  have  increased 
even  to  the  highest  degree,  may  be  judged  happy 
and  almost  golden  in  comparison  of  that  incura- 
ble evil.  For  righteousness  will  so  decrease,  and 
impiety,  avarice,  desire,  and  lust  will  so  greatly 
increase,  that  if  there  shall  then  happen  to  be 
any  good  men,  they  will  be  a  prey  to  the  wicked, 
and  will  be  harassed  on  all  sides  by  the  unright- 
eous ;  while  the  wicked  alone  will  be  in  opulence, 
but  the  good  will  be  afflicted  in  all  calumnies 
and  in  want.  All  justice  will  be  confounded,  and 
the  laws  will  be  destroyed.  No  one  will  then 
have  anything  except  that  which  has  been  gained 
or  defended  by  the  hand  :  boldness  and  violence 
will  possess  all  things.  There  will  be  no  faith 
among  men,  nor  peace,  nor  kindness,  nor  shame, 
nor  truth ;  and  thus  also  there  will  be  neither 
security,  nor  government,  nor  any  rest  from  evils. 
For  all  the  earth  will  be  in  a  state  of  tumult ; 
wars  will  everywhere  rage  ;  all  nations  will  be  in 
arms,  and  will  oppose  one  another ;  neighbour- 
ing states  will  carry  on  conflicts  with  each  other; 
and  first  of  all,  Egypt  will  pay  the  penalties  of 
her  foolish  superstitions,  and  will  be  covered  with 
blood  as  if  with  a  river.  Then  the  sword  will 
traverse  the  world,  mowing  down  everything,  and 
laying  low  all  things  as  a  crop.  And — my  mind 
dreads  to  relate  it,  but  I  will  relate  it,  because  it 
is  about  to  happen  —  the  cause  of  this  desolation 
and  confusion  will  be  this ;  because  the  Roman 
name,  by  which  the  world  is  now  ruled,  will  be 
taken  away  from  the  earth,  and  the  government 
return  to  Asia ;  and  the  East  will  again  bear 
rule,  and  the  West  be  reduced  to  servitude.' 
Nor  ought  it  to  appear  wonderful  to  any  one,  if 
a  kingdom  founded  with  such  vastness,  and  so 
long  increased  by  so  many  and  such  men,  and 
in  short  strengthened  by  such  great  resources, 
shall  nevertheless  at  some  time  fall.  There  is 
nothing  prepared  by  human  strength  which  can- 
not equally  be  destroyed  by  human  strength, 
since  the  works  of  mortals  are  mortal.  Thus 
also  other  kingdoms  in  former  times,  though 
they  had  long  flourished,  were  nevertheless  de- 
stroyed. For  it  is  related  that  the  Egyptians, 
and  Persians,  and  Greeks,  and  Assyrians  had  the 
government  of  the  world  ;  and  after  the  destruc- 
tion of  them  all,  the  chief  power  came  to  the 
Romans  also.  And  inasmuch  as  they  excel  all 
other  kingdoms   in   magnitude,  with   so   much 


'   [This  could  not  have  been  ventured  before  Constantine's  time, 
and  must  have  been  bold  even  then.     2  Thess.  ii.  7.     P.  213,  ift/ra.] 


Chap.  XVI.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


213 


greater  an  overthrow  will  they  fall,  because  those 
buildings  which  are  higher  than  others  have  more 
weight  for  a  downfall.' 

Seneca  therefore  not  unskilfully  divided  the 
times  of  the  Roman  city  by  ages.  For  he  said 
that  at  first  was  its  infancy  under  King  Romulus, 
by  whom  Rome  was  brought  into  being,  and  as 
it  were  educated  ;  then  its  boyhood  under  the 
other  kings,  by  whom  it  was  increased  and  fash- 
ioned with  more  numerous  systems  of  instruction 
and  institutions ;  but  at  length,  in  the  reign  of 
Tarquinius,  when  now  it  had  begun  as  it  were 
to  be  grown  up,  it  did  not  endure  slavery ;  and 
having  thrown  off  the  yoke  of  a  haughty  tyranny, 
it  preferred  to  obey  laws  rather  than  kings  ;  and 
when  its  youth  was  terminated  by  the  end  of  the 
Punic  war,  then  at  length  with  confirmed  strength 
it  began  to  be  manly. ^  For  when  Carthage  was 
taken  away,  which  was  long  its  rival  in  power,  it 
stretched  out  its  hands  by  land  and  sea  over  the 
whole  world,  until,  having  subdued  all  kings  and 
nations,  when  the  materials  ^  for  war  now  failed, 
it  abused  its  strength,  by  which  it  destroyed 
itself.  This  was  its  first  old  age,  when,  lacerated 
by  civil  wars  and  oppressed  by  intestine  evil,  it 
again  fell  back  to  the  government  of  a  single 
ruler,  as  it  were  revolving  to  a  second  infancy. ■• 
For,  having  lost  the  liberty  which  it  had  defended 
under  the  guidance  and  authority  of  Brutus,  it 
so  grew  old,  as  though  it  had  no  strength  to 
support  itself,  unless  it  depended  on  the  aid  of 
its  rulers.  But  if  these  things  are  so,  what  re- 
mains, except  that  death  follow  old  age  ?  And 
that  it  will  so  come  to  pass,  the  predictions  of 
the  prophets  briefly  announce  under  the  covers 
of  other  names,  so  that  no  one  can  easily  under- 
stand them.  Nevertheless  the  Sibyls  openly  say 
that  Rome  is  doomed  to  perish,  and  that  indeed 
by  the  judgment  of  God,  because  it  held  His 
name  in  hatred  ;  and  being  the  enemy  of  right- 
eousness, it  destroyed  the  people  who  kept^  the 
truth.  Hystaspes  also,  who  was  a  very  ancient  king 
of  the  Medes,  from  whom  also  the  river  which  is 
now  called  Hydaspes  received  its  name,  handed 
down  to  the  memory  of  posterity  a  wonderful 
dream  upon  the  interpretation  of  a  boy  who  uttered 
divinations,  announcing  long  before  the  founding 
of  the  Trojan  nation,  that  the  Roman  empire  and 
name  would  be  taken  away  from  the  world. 

CHAP.  XVI. OF  THE  DEVASTATION  OF  THE  WORLD, 

AND    ITS   PROPHETIC    OMENS.7 

But,  lest  any  one  should  think  this  incredible, 
I  will  show  how  it  will  come  to  pass.     First,  the 


'  [The  Colosseum  and  its  traditions  may  have  influenced  our  au- 
thor in  this  passage.     See  vol.  iii    p.  108,  snj>ra.\ 

^  Juvenescere. 

3  Materia 

*  [^Scc  p    i6g,  notes  i,  2,  stifira.'] 

5  Sub  ambase;  properly  a  "  circumlocution." 

'  .■\lumniun  veritatis.     ^P.  212,  note  i,  sufira.'] 

'  Pnidiijiis.  [Tliese  prunitive  iiUcri>rctations  of  Daniel  and  St. 
John  may  be  compared  with  the  expositions  of  Victorinus,  in/ra.^ 


kingdom  will  be  enlarged,  and  the  chief  power, 
dispersed  among  many  and  divided,**  will  be  di- 
minished. Then  civil  discords  will  perpetually 
be  sown  ;  nor  will  there  be  any  rest  from  deadly 
wars,  until  ten  kings  arise  at  the  same  time,  who 
will  divide  the  world,  not  to  govern,  but  to  con- 
sume it.  These,  having  increased  their  armies 
to  an  immense  extent,  and  having  deserted  the 
cultivation  of  the  fields,  which  is  the  beginning 
of  overthrow  and  disaster,  will  lay  waste  and 
break  in  pieces  and  consume  all  things.  Then  a 
most  powerful  enemy  will  suddenly  arise  against 
him  from  the  extreme  boundaries  of  the  northern 
region,  who,  having  destroyed  three  of  that  num- 
ber who  shall  then  be  in  possession  of  Asia,  sliall 
be  admitted  into  alliance  by  the  others,  and  shall 
be  constituted  prince  of  all.  He  shall  harass  the 
world  with  an  intolerable  rule  ;  shall  mingle  things 
divine  and  human  ;  shall  contrive  things  impious 
to  relate,  and  detestable  ;  shall  meditate  new  de- 
signs in  his  breast,  that  he  may  establish  the  gov- 
ernment for  himself:  he  will  change  the  laws, 
and  appoint  his  own  ;  he  will  contaminate,  plun- 
der, spoil,  and  put  to  death.  And  at  length,  the 
name  being  changed  and  the  seat  of  government 
being  transferred,  confiision  and  the  disturbance 
of  mankind  will  follow.  Then,  in  truth,  a  de- 
testable and  abominable  time  shall  come,  in 
which  life  shall  be  pleasant  to  none  of  men. 

Cities  shall  be  utterly  overthrown,  and  shall 
perish  ;  not  only  by  fire  and  the  sword,  but  also  by 
continual  earthquakes  and  overflowings  of  waters, 
and  by  frequent  diseases  and  repeated  famines. 
For  the  atmosphere  will  be  tainted,  and  become 
corrupt  and  pestilential  —  at  one  time  by  un- 
seasonable rains,  at  another  by  barren  drought, 
now  by  colds,  and  now  by  excessive  heats.  Nor 
will  the  earth  give  its  fruit  to  man  :  no  field,  or 
tree,  or  vine  will  produce  anything  ;  but  after  they 
have  given  the  greatest  hope  in  the  blossom,  they 
will  fail  in  the  fruit.  Fountains  also  shall  be  dried 
up,  together  with  the  rivers ;  so  that  there  shall 
not  be  a  sufficient  supply  for  drinking ;  and 
waters  shall  be  changed  into  blood  or  bitterness. 
On  account  of  these  things,  beasts  shall  fail  on 
the  land,  and  birds  in  the  air,  and  fishes  in  the 
sea.  Wonderful  prodigies  also  in  heaven  shall 
confound  the  minds  of  men  with  the  greatest  ter- 
rors, and  the  trains  of  comets,  and  the  darkness 
of  the  sun,  and  the  colour  of  the  moon,  and  the 
gliding  of  the  falling  stars.  Nor,  however,  will 
these  things  take  place  in  the  accustomed  man- 
ner ;  but  there  will  suddenly  appear  stars  un- 
known and  unseen  by  the  eyes ;  the  sun  will  be 
perpetually  darkened,  so  that  there  will  be 
scarcely  any  distinction  between  the  night  and 
the  day  ;  the  moon  will  now  fail,  not  for  three 
hours  only,  but  overspread  with  perpetual  blood, 
will  go  through  extraordinary  movements,  so  that 

*  Concisa. 


214 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VII. 


it  will  not  be  easy  for  man  to  ascertain  the  courses 
of  the  heavenly  bodies  or  the  system  of  the 
times  ;  for  there  will  either  be  summer  in  the 
winter,  or  winter  in  the  summer.  Then  the  year 
will  be  shortened,  and  the  month  diminished,  and 
the  day  contracted  into  a  short  space  ;  and  stars 
shall  fall  in  great  numbers,  so  that  all  the  heaven 
will  appear  dark  without  any  lights.  The  loftiest 
mountains  also  will  fall,  and  be  levelled  with  the 
plains  ;  the  sea  will  be  rendered  unnavigable. 

And  that  nothing  may  be  wanting  to  the  evils 
of  men  and  the  earth,  the  trumpet  shall  be  heard 
from  heaven,  which  the  Sibyl  foretells  in  this  man- 
ner :  — 

"  The  trumpet  from  heaven  shall  utter  its  wailing  voice." 

And  then  all  shall  tremble  and  quake  at  that 
mournful  sound.'  But  then,  through  the  anger 
of  God  against  the  men  who  have  not  known 
righteousness,  the  sword  and  fire,  famine  and  dis- 
ease, shall  reign  ;  and,  above  all  things,  fear  al- 
ways overhanging.  Then  they  shall  call  upon 
God,  but  He  will  not  hear  them  ;  death  shall  be 
desired,  but  it  will  not  come  ;  not  even  shall  night 
give  rest  to  their  fear,  nor  shall  sleep  approach 
to  their  eyes,  but  anxiety  and  watchfulness  shall 
consume  the  souls  of  men  ;  they  shall  deplore 
and  lament,  and  gnash  their  teeth  ;  they  shall 
congratulate  the  dead,  and  bewail  the  living. 
Through  these  and  many  other  evils  there  shall 
be  desolation  on  the  earth,  and  the  world  shall 
be  disfigured  and  deserted,  which  is  thus  ex- 
pressed in  the  verses  of  the  Sibyl :  — 

"The  world  shall  be  despoiled  of  beauty,  through  the 
destruction  of  men." 

For  the  human  race  will  be  so  consumed,  that 
scarcely  the  tenth  part  of  men  will  be  left ;  and 
from  whence  a  thousand  had  gone  forth,  scarcely 
a  hundred  will  go  forth.  Of  the  worshippers  of 
God  also,  two  parts  will  perish  ;  and  the  third 
part,  which  shall  have  been  proved,  will  remain. 

CHAP.    XVII. OF    THE    FALSE    PROPHET,    AND   THE 

HARDSHIPS     OF    THE     RIGHTEOUS,     AND     HIS     DE- 
STRUCTION. 

But  I  will  more  plainly  set  forth  the  manner  in 
which  this  happens.  When  the  close  of  the 
times  draws  nigh,  a  great  prophet  shall  be  sent 
from  God  to  turn  men  to  the  knowledge  of  God, 
and  he  shall  receive  the  power  of  doing  wonder- 
ful things.^  Wherever  men  shall  not  hear  him, 
he  will  shut  up  the  heaven,  and  cause  it  to  with- 
hold its  rains  ;  he  will  turn  their  water  into  blood, 
and  torment  them  with  thirst  and  hunger ;  and 
if  any  one  shall  endeavour  to  injure  him,  fire 

'  [P.  210,  note  2,  supra.     Tuba  spargens  minim  sonum.] 
^  [A  final  apparition  of  Elijah  was  anticipated  by  primitive  be- 
lievers, who   regarded   Mai.    i.  5  as  only   partially   fiiltilled   in   the 
Baptist  and  the  tvpical  judgment  of  Jerusalem  and  the  Jews  under 
Vespasian.     See  Enoch  and  Elias,  vol.  v.  p.  213;  also  iii.  591.] 


shall  come  forth  out  of  his  mouth,  and  shall  burn 
that  man.  By  these  prodigies  and  powers  he 
shall  turn  many  to  the  worship  of  God  ;  and 
when  his  works  shall  be  accomplished,  another 
king  shall  arise  out  of  Syria,  born  from  an  evil 
spirit,  the  overthrower  and  destroyer  of  the  hu- 
man race,  who  shall  destroy  that  which  is  left 
by  the  former  evil,  together  with  himself.  He 
shall  fight  against  the  prophet  of  God,  and  shall 
overcome,  and  slay  him,  and  shall  suffer  him  to 
lie  unburied  ;  but  after  the  third  day  he  shall 
come  to  life  again  ;  and  while  all  look  on  and 
wonder,  he  shall  be  caught  up  into  heaven.  But 
that  king  will  not  only  be  most  disgraceful  in 
himself,  but  he  will  also  be  a  prophet  of  lies  ; 
and  he  will  constitute  and  call  himself  God,  and 
will  order  himself  to  be  worshipped  as  the  Son 
of  God  ;  and  power  will  be  given  him  to  do 
signs  and  wonders,  by  the  sight  of  which  he  may 
entice  men  to  adore  him.  He  will  command 
fire  to  come  down  from  heaven,  and  the  sun  to 
stand  and  leave  his  course,  and  an  image  to 
speak ;  and  these  things  shall  be  done  at  his 
word,  —  by  which  miracles  ^  many  even  of  the 
wise  shall  be  enticed  by  him.  Then  he  will 
attempt  to  destroy  the  temple  of  God,  and  per- 
secute the  righteous  people  ;  and  there  will  be 
distress  and  tribulation,''  such  as  there  never  has 
been  from  the  beginning  of  the  world. 

As  many  as  shall  believe  him  and  unite  them- 
selves to  him,  shall  be  marked  by  him  as  sheep ; 
but  they  who  shall  refuse  his  mark  will  either 
flee  to  the  mountains,  or,  being  seized,  will  be 
slain  with  studied  s  tortures.  He  will  also  enwrap 
righteous  men  with  the  books  of  the  prophets, 
and  thus  burn  them  ;  and  power  will  be  given 
him  to  desolate*^  the  whole  earth  for  forty-two 
months.  That  will  be  the  time  in  which  right- 
eousness shall  be  cast  out,  and  innocence  be 
hated ;  in  which  the  wicked  shall  prey  upon  the 
good  as  enemies  ;  neither  law,  nor  order,  nor 
military  discipline  shall  be  preserved ;  no  one 
shall  reverence  hoary  locks,  nor  recognise  the 
duty  of  piety,  nor  pity  sex  or  infancy  ;  all  things 
shall  be  confounded  and  mixed  together  against 
right,  and  against  the  laws  of  nature.  Thus  the 
earth  shall  be  laid  waste,  as  though  by  one  com- 
mon robbery.  When  these  things  shall  so  hap- 
pen, then  the  righteous  and  the  followers  of  truth 
shall  separate  themselves  from  the  wicked,  and 
flee  into  solitudes.  And  when  he  hears  of  this, 
the  impious  king,  inflamed  with  anger,  will  come 
with  a  great  army,  and  bringing  up  all  his  forces, 
will  surround  all  the  mountain  in  which  the 
righteous  shall  be  situated,  that  he  may  seize 
them.     But  they,  when  they  shall  see  themselves 


3  Rev.  xiii.;  2  Thess.  ii. 

4  Pressura  et  contritio. 

5  Exquisitis  cruciatibus. 
*  Dan.  vii.;  Rev.  ii. 


Chap.  XIX.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


215 


to  be  shut  in  on  all  sides  and  besieged,  will  call 
upon  God  with  a  loud  voice,  and  implore  the  aid 
of  heaven  ;  and  God  shall  hear  them,  and  send 
from  heaven  a  great  king  to  rescue  and  free 
them,  and  destroy  all  the  wicked  with  fire  and 
sword. 

CHAP.    XVTII. OF   THE    FORTUNES    OF   THE   WORLD 

AT   THE    LAST   TIME,  AND    OF    THE   THINGS    FORE- 
TOLD   BY    THE    SOOTHSAYERS. 

That  these  things  will  thus  take  place,  all  the 
prophets  have  announced  from  the  inspiration 
of  God,  and  also  the  soothsayers  at  the  instiga-  j 
tion  of  the  demons.  For  Hystaspes,  whom  1 1 
have  named  above,  having  described  the  iniq- 
uity of  this  last  time,  says  that  the  pious  and 
faithful,  being  separated  from  the  wicked,  will 
stretch  forth  their  hands  to  heaven  with  weep- 
ing and  mourning,  and  will  implore  the  protec- 
tion of  Jupiter :  that  Jupiter  will  look  to  the 
earth,  and  hear  the  voices  of  men,  and  will 
destroy  the  wicked.  All  which  things  are  true 
except  one,  that  he  attributed  to  Jupiter  those 
things  which  God  will  do.  But  that  also  was 
withdrawn  from  the  account,  not  without  fraud 
on  the  part  of  the  demons,  viz.,  that  the  Son 
of  God  would  then  be  sent,  who,  having  de- 
stroyed all  the  wicked,  would  set  at  liberty  the 
pious.  Which,  however,  Hermes  did  not  con- 
ceal. For  in  that  book  which  is  entitled  the 
Complete  Treatise,  after  an  enumeration  of  the 
evils  concerning  which  we  have  spoken,  he 
added  these  things  :  "  But  when  these  things  thus 
come  to  pass,  then  He  who  is  Lord,  and  Father, 
and  God,  and  the  Creator  of  the  first  and  one 
God,  looking  upon  what  is  done,  and  opposing 
to  the  disorder  His  own  will,  that  is,  goodness, 
and  recalling  the  wandering  and  cleansing  wick- 
edness, partly  inundating  it  with  much  water, 
and  partly  burning  it  with  most  rapid  fire,  and 
sometimes  pressing  it  with  wars  and  pestilences. 
He  brought  His  world  to  its  ancient  state  and 
restored  it."  The  Sibyls  also,  show  that  it  would 
not  be  otherwise  than  that  the  Son  of  God 
should  be  sent  by  His  supreme  Father,  to  set 
free  the  righteous  from  the  hands  of  the  wicked, 
and  to  destroy  the  unrighteous,  together  with 
their  cruel  tyrants.    One  of  whom  thus  wrote  :  — 

"  He  shall  come  also,  wishing  to  destroy  the  city  of  the 
blest ;  and  a  king  sent  against  him  from  the  gods 
shall  slay  all  the  great  kings  and  chief  men:  then 
judgment  shall  thus  come  from  the  Immortal  to 
men." 

Also  another  Sibyl  :  — 

"And  then  God  shall  send  a  king  from  the  sun,  who 
shall  cause  all  the  earth  to  cease  from  disastrous 
war." 

And  again  another  :  — 

"  He  will  take  away  the  intolerable  yoke  of  slavery 
which  is  placed  on  our  neck,  and  he  will  do  away 
with  impious  laws  and  violent  chains." 


CHAP.  XIX. OF  THE  ADVENT  OF  CHRIST  TO  JUDG- 
MENT, AND  OF  THE  OVERCOMING  OF  THE  FALSE 
PROPHET. 

The  world  therefore  being  oppressed,  since 
the  resources  of  men  shall  be  insufficient  for 
the  overthrow  of  a  tyranny  of  immense  strength, 
inasmuch  as  it  will  press  upon  the  captive  world 
with  great  armies  of  robbers,  that  calamity  so 
great  will  stand  in  need  of  divine  assistance. 
Therefore  God,  being  aroused  both  by  the  doubt- 
ful danger  and  by  the  wretched  lamentation  of 
the  righteous,  will  immediately  send  a  deliverer. 
Then  the  middle  of  the  heaven  shall  be  laid 
open  in  the,  dead  and  darkness  of  the  night, 
that  the  light  of  the  descending  God  may  be 
manifest  in  all  the  world  as  lightning  :  of  which 
the  Sibyl  spoke  in  these  words  :  — 

"  When  He  shall  come,  there  will  be  fire  and  darkness 
in  the  midst  of  the  black  night." 

This  is  the  night  which  is  celebrated  by  us  in 
watchfulness  on  account  of  the  coming  of  our 
King  and  God  :  '  of  which  night  there  is  a  two- 
fold meaning ;  because  in  it  He  then  received 
life  when  He  suffered,  and  hereafter  He  is  about 
to  receive  the  kingdom  of  the  world.  For  He 
is  the  Deliverer,  and  Judge,  and  Avenger,  and 
King,  and  God,  whom  we  call  Christ,  who  be- 
fore He  descends  will  give  this  sign^  There 
shall  suddenly  fall  from  heaven  a  sword,  that  the 
righteous  may  know  that  the  leader  of  the  sacred 
warfare  is  about  to  descend  \  and  He  shall  de- 
scend'with  a  company  of  angels  to  the  middle 
of  the  earth,  and  there  shall  go  before  Him  an 
unquenchable  fire,  and  the  power  of  the  angels 
shall  deliver  into  the  hands  of  the  just  that  mul- 
titude which  has  surrounded  the  mountain,  and 
they  shall  be  slain  from  the  third  hour  until  the 
evening,  and  blood  shall  flow  like  a  torrent ;  and 
all  his  forces  being  destroyed,  the  wicked  one 
shall  alone  escape,  and  his  power  shall  perish 
from  him. 

Now  this  is  he  who  is  called  Antichrist ;  but 
he  shall  falsely  call  himself  Christ,  and  shall 
fight  against  the  truth,  and  being  overcome  shall 
flee  ;  and  shall  often  renew  the  war,  and  often 
be  conquered,  until  in  the  fourth  battle,  all  the 
wicked  being  slain,  subdued,  and  captured,  he 
shall  at  length  pay  the  penalty  of  his  crimes. 
But  other  princes  also  and  t}rants  who  have 
harassed  the  world,  together  with  him,  shall  be 
led  in  chains  to  the  king  ;  and  he  shall  rebuke 
them,  and  reprove  them,  and  upbraid  them  with 
their  crimes,  and  condemn  them,  and  consign 
them  to  deserved  tortures.  Thus,  wickedness 
being  extinguished  and  impiety  suppressed,  the 
world  will  be  at  rest,  which  having  been  subject 


'  [Not  the  eve  of  Easter,  but  that  of  the  Nativity.     This  cor- 
roborates St   Chrysostom's  testimony  concerning  the  obser\-ance  of 
1  that  feast  in  the  West.     See  Opp.,  Semi.  287,  torn.  v.  804.] 


2l6 


THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VIT. 


to  error  and  wickedness  for  so  many  ages,  en-  j 
dured  dreadful  slavery.  No  longer  shall  gods  j 
made  by  the  hands  be  worshipped ;  but  the 
images  being  thrust  out  from  their  temples  and 
couches,  shall  be  given  to  the  fire,  and  shall  be 
burnt,  together  with  their  wonderful  gifts  :  which 
also  the  Sibyl,  in  accordance  with  the  prophets, 
announced  as  about  to  take  place  :  — 

"But  mortals  shall  break  in  pieces  the  images  and  all 
the  wealth." 

The  Erythraean  Sibyl  also  made  the  same  prom- 
ise :  — 

"And  the  works  made  by  the  hand  of  the  gods  shall  be 
burnt  up." 

CHAP.    XX. — OF    THE    JUDGMENT     OF    CHRIST,    OF 
CHRISTIANS,    AND    OF   THE    SOUL. 

After  these  things  the  lower  regions  shall  be 
opened,  and  the  dead  shall  rise  again,  on  whom 
the  same  King  and  God  shall  pass  judgment,  to 
whom  the  supreme  Father  shall  give  the  great 
power  both  of  judging  and  of  reigning.  And 
respecting  this  judgment  and  reign,  it  is  thus 
found  in  the  Erythraean  Sibyl :  — 

"When  this  shall  receive  its  fated  accomplishment,  and 
the  judgment  of  the  immortal  God  shall  now  come 
to  mortals,  the  great  judgment  shall  come  upon 
men,  and  the  beginning." 

Then  in  another  :  — 

"And  then  the  gaping  earth  shall  show  a  Tartarean 
chaos;  and  all  kings  shall  come  to  the  judgment- 
seat  of  God." 

And  in  another  place  in  the  same  :  — 

"Rolling  along  the  heavens,  I  will  open  the  caverns  of 
the  earth;  and  then  I  will  raise  the  dead,  loosing 
fate  and  the  sting  of  death;  and  afterwards  I  will 
call  them  into  judgment,  judging  the  life  of  pious 
and  impious  men." 

Not  all  men,  however,  shall  then  be  judged  by 
God,  but  those  only  who  have  been  exercised 
in  the  religion  of  God.  For  they  who  have 
not  known  God,  since  sentence  cannot  be  passed 
upon  them  for  their  acquittal,  are  already  judged 
and  condemned,  since  the  Holy  Scriptures  testi- 
fy that  the  wicked  shall  not  arise  to  judgment." 
Therefore  they  who  have  known  God  shall  be 
judged,  and  their  deeds,  that  is,  their  evil  works, 
shall  be  compared  and  weighed  against  their 
good  ones  :  so  that  if  those  which  are  good  and 
just  are  more  ^  and  weighty,  they  may  be  given 
to  a  life  of  blessedness  ;  but  if  the  evil  exceed, 
they  may  be  condemned  to  punishment.     Here, 


'  The  reference  is  to  Ps.  1.5:  "  The  ungodly  shall  not  stand  in 
the  judgment."  They  shall  indeed  arise,  but  it  will  be  to  "  the  resur- 
rection of  damnation."  See  Dan.  xii.  2;  John  v.  28,  29;  Acts  xxiv. 
15. 

^  Good  and  bad  actions  will  not  be  compared  by  reference  to  num- 
ber: "  For  whosoever  shall  keep  the  whole  hw,  and  yet  offend  in  one 
point,  he  is  guilty  of  all."  —  Jas.  ii.  lo.  [The  fieure,  however,  is  not 
dissimilar  in  Job  x.vxi.  6.  We  must  be  judged  by  our  works,  though 
saved  by  faith  in  Christ.] 


perhaps,  some  one  will  say.  If  the  soul  is  im- 
mortal, how  is  it  represented  as  capable  of  suf- 
fering, and  sensible  of  punishment?  For  if  it 
shall  be  punished  on  account  of  its  deserts,  it  is 
plain  that  it  will  be  sensible  of  pain,  and  even 
of  death.  If  it  is  not  liable  to  death,  not 
even  to  pain,  it  follows  that  it  is  not  capable  of 
suffering. 

This  question  or  argument  is  thus  met  by  the 
Stoics  :  that  the  souls  of  men  continue  to  exist, 
and  are  not  annihilated  ^  by  the  intervention  of 
death  :  that  the  souls,  moreover,  of  those  who 
have  been  just,  being  pure,  and  incapable  of 
suffering,  and  happy,  return  to  the  heavenly 
abodes  from  which  they  had  their  origin,  or  are 
borne  to  some  happy  plains,  where  they  may 
enjoy  wonderful  pleasures  ;  but  that  the  wicked, 
since  they  have  defiled  themselves  with  evil 
passions,  have  a  kind  of  middle  nature,  between 
that  of  an  immortal  and  a  mortal,  and  have 
something  of  weakness,  from  the  contagion  of 
the  flesh ;  and  being  enslaved  to  its  desires  and 
lusts,  they  contract  an  indelible  stain  and  earth- 
ly blot ;  and  when  this  has  become  entirely  in- 
herent through  length  of  time,  souls  are  given 
over  to  its  nature,  so  that,  though  they  cannot 
altogether  be  extinguished,  inasmuch  as  they  are 
from  God,  nevertheless  they  become  liable  to 
torment  through  the  taint  of  the  body,  which 
being  burnt  in  by  means  of  sins,  produces  a 
feeling  of  pain.  Which  sentiment  is  thus  ex- 
pressed by  the  poet :  ■*  — 

Nay,  when  at  last  the  life  has  fled, 
And  left  the  body  cold  and  dead, 
E'en  then  there  passes  not  away 
The  painful  heritage  of  clay  : 
Full  many  a  long  contracted  stain 
Perforce  must  linger  deep  in  grain. 
So  penal  sufferings  they  endure 
For  ancient  crime,  to  make  them  pure." 

These  things  are  near  to  the  truth. 5  For  the 
soul,  when  separated  from  the  body,  is,  as  the 
same  poet  says,'^  such  as 

"  No  vision  of  the  drowsy  night, 
No  airy  current  half  so  light," 

because  it  is  a  spirit,  and  by  its  very  slightness 
incapable  of  being  perceived,  but  only  by  us 
who  are  corporeal ;  but  capable  of  being  per- 
ceived by  God,  since  it  belongs  to  Him  to  be 
able  to  do  all  things. 

CHAP.  XXI. OF  THE  TORIMENTS  AND   PITNISHMENTS 

OF    SOULS. 

First  of  all,  therefore,  we  say  that  the  power 
of  God  is  so  great,  that  He  perceives  even  in- 
corporeal things,  and  manages  them  as  He  will. 


3  In  nihilum  resolvi. 
*  Virg.,  y'A"««V/',  vi.  735. 

5   [i  Cor.  iii.  13-15.     An  approximation  to  this  truth  is  recog- 
nised by  our  author  in  a  heathen  poet.     See  p.  217,  n.  2.] 
^  Virg.,  /Eneid,  vi.  702. 


Chap.  XXII.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


217 


For  even  angels  fear  God,  because  they  can  be 
chastised  by  Him  in  some  unspeakable  manner; 
and  devils  dread  Him,  because  they  are  torment- 
ed and  punished  by  Him.  What  wonder  is  it, 
therefore,  if  souls,  though  they  are  immortal,  are 
nevertheless  capable  of  suffering  at  the  hand  of 
God?  For  since  they  have  nothing  solid  and 
tangible  in  themselves,  they  can  suffer  no  vio- 
lence from  solid  and  corporeal  beings ;  but  be- 
cause they  live  in  their  spirits  only,  they  are 
capable  of  being  handled  by  God  alone,  whose 
energy  and  substance  is  spiritual.  But,  however, 
the  sacred  writings  inform  us  in  what  manner 
the  wicked  are  to  undergo  punishment.  For  be- 
cause they  have  committed  sins  in  their  bodies, 
they  will  again  be  clothed  with  flesh,  that  they 
may  make  atonement  in  their  bodies  ;  and  yet 
it  will  not  be  that  flesh  with  which  God  clothed 
man,  like  this  our  earthly  body,  but  indestruc- 
tible, and  abiding  for  ever,  that  it  may  be  able  to 
hold  out  against  tortures  and  everlasting  fire, 
the  nature  of  which  is  different  from  this  fire  of 
ours,  which  we  use  for  the  necessary  purposes 
of  life,  and  which  is  extinguished  unless  it  be 
sustained  by  the  fuel  of  some  material.  But 
that  divine  fire  always  lives  by  itself,  and  flour- 
ishes without  any  nourishment ;  nor  has  it  any 
smoke  mixed  with  it,  but  it  is  pure  and  liquid, 
and  fluid,  after  the  manner  of  water.  For  it  is 
not  urged  upwards  by  any  force,  as  our  fire,  which 
the  taint  of  the  earthly  body,  by  which  it  is  held, 
and  smoke  intermingled,  compels  to  leap  forth, 
and  to  fly  upwards  to  the  nature  of  heaven,  with 
a  tremulous  movement.' 

The  same  divine  fire,  therefore,  with  one  and 
the  same  force  and  power,  will  both  burn  the 
wicked  and  will  form  them  again,  and  will  re- 
place as  much  as  it  shall  consume  of  their  bodies, 
and  will  supply  itself  with  eternal  nourishment : 
which  the  poets  transferred  to  the  vulture  of 
Tityus.  Thus,  without  any  wasting  of  bodies, 
which  regain  their  substance,  it  will  only  burn 
and  affect  them  with  a  sense  of  pain.  But  when 
He  shall  have  judged  the  righteous.  He  will  also 
try  them  with  fire.  Then  they  whose  sins  shall 
exceed  either  in  weight  or  in  number,  shall  be 
scorched  by  the  fire  and  burnt :  ^  but  they  whom 
full  justice  and  maturity  of  virtue  has  iml)ued 
will  not  perceive  that  fire  ;  for  they  have  some- 
thing of  God  in  themselves  which  repels  and  re- 
jects the  violence  of  the  flame.  So  great  is  the 
force  of  innocence,  that  the  flame  shrinks  from 
it  without  doing  harm  ;  which  has  received  from 
God  this  power,  that  it  burns  the  wicked,  and  is 
under  the  command  of  the  righteous.  Nor, 
however,   let   any  one  imagine   that   souls   are 


'  Cum  trepidatione  mobili.     [See  vol.  vi.  f).  375,  note  i.] 
2  Perstringentur  igni  atque  ambureiitiir.     [Sec  p.  216,  n.  ^,sii/im.'\ 
This  idea  of  passing  Ihnmgh  flames   of  the  final  judgment  has  in   it 
nothing  in  conunon  with  "  purgator\'  "  as  a  />l.icr  and  as  a  punishment 
from  which  admission  into  heaven  may  be  gained  (Jf/Ort' judgment.] 


immediately  judged  after  death.  For  all  are  de- 
tained in  one  and  a  common  place  of  confine- 
ment, until  the  arrival  of  the  time  in  which  the 
great  Judge  shall  make  an  investigation  of  their 
deserts.3  Then  they  whose  piety  shall  have 
been  approved  of  will  receive  the  reward  of  im- 
mortality ;  but  they  whose  sins  and  crimes  shall 
have  been  brought  to  light  will  not  rise  again, 
but  will  be  hidden  in  the  same  darkness  with  the 
wicked,  being  destined  to  certain  punishment. 

CHAP.  XXII. OF   THE    ERROR    OF   THE    POETS,   AND 

THE    RETURN    OF    THE    SOUL    FROM    THE    LOWER 
REGIONS. 

Some  imagine  that  these  things  are  figments 
of  the  poets,  not  knowing  whence  the  poets  re- 
ceived them,  and  they  say  that  these  things  are 
impossible ;  and  it  is  no  wonder  that  it  so  ap- 
pears to  them.  For  the  matter  is  related  by  the 
poets  in  a  manner  which  is  different  from  the 
truth  ;  for  although  they  are  much  more  ancient 
than  the  historians  and  orators,  and  other  kinds 
of  writers,  yet  because  they  were  ignorant  of  the 
secret  of  the  divine  mystery,  and  mention  of  a 
future  resurrection  had  reached  them  by  an  ob- 
scure rumour,  yet  they  handed  it  down,  when 
carelessly  and  lightly  heard,  after  the  manner  of 
a  feigned  story.  And  yet  they  also  testified  that 
they  did  not  follow  a  sure  authority,  but  mere 
opinion,  as  Maro,  who  says,"* 

"  What  ear  has  heard  let  tongue  make  known." 

Although,  therefore,  they  have  partly  corrupted 
the  secrets  of  the  truth,  yet  the  matter  itself  is 
found  to  be  more  true,  because  it  partly  agrees 
with  the  prophets  :  which  is  sufficient  for  us  as 
a  proof  of  the  matter.  Yet  some  reason  is  con- 
tained in  their  error.  For  when  the  prophets 
proclaimed  with  continual  announcements  that 
the  Son  of  God  was  about  to  judge  the  dead, 
and  this  announcement  did  not  escape  their 
notice  ;  inasmuch  as  they  supposed  that  there 
was  no  other  ruler  of  heaven  but  Jupiter,  they 
reported  that  the  son  of  Jupiter  was  king  in  the 
lower  regions,  but  not  Apollo,  or  Liber,  or  Mer- 
curius,  who  are  supposed  to  be  gods  of  heaven, 
but  one  who  was  both  mortal  and  just,  either 
Minos,  or  ^acus,  or  Rhadamanthus.  Therefore 
with  poetic  licence  they  corrupted  that  which 
they  had  received  ;  or,  the  opinion  being  scat- 
tered through  different  mouths  and  various  dis- 
courses, changed  the  truth.  For  inasmuch  as 
they  foretold  that,  when  a  thousand  years  had 
been  passed  in  the  lower  regions,  they  should 
again  be  restored  to  life,  as  Maro  said  :  5  — 

"  All  these,  when  centuries  ten  times  told 
The  wheel  of  destiny  have  rolled, 


3  [See  vol.  iii.  p.  59,  sjtpra,  Elucidation  X.] 
■♦  Virg.,  .^H.,  vi.  266. 
S  Ibtd.,  748. 


2l8 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VII. 


The  voice  divine  from  far  and  wide 
Calls  up  to  Lethe's  river  side, 
That  earthward  they  may  pass  once  more, 
Remembering  not  the  things  before, 
And  with  a  blind  propension  yearn 
To  fleshly  bodies  to  return :  " 

this  matter  escaped  their  notice,  that  the  dead 
will  rise  again,  not  after  a  thousand  years  from 
their  death,  but  that,  when  again  restored  to  life, 
they  may  reign  with  God  a  thousand  years.  For 
God  will  come,  that,  having  cleansed  the  world 
from  all  defilement.  He  may  restore  the  souls  of 
the  righteous  to  their  renewed  bodies,  and  raise 
them  to  everlasting  blessedness.  Therefore  the 
other  things  are  true,  except  the  water  of  obliv- 
ion, which  they  feigned  on  this  account,  that  no 
one  might  make  this  objection  :  why,  therefore, 
did  they  not  remember  that  they  were  at  one 
time  alive,  or  who  they  were,  or  what  things  they 
accomplished  ?  But  nevertheless  it  is  not  thought 
probable,  and  the  whole  matter  is  rejected,  as 
though  licentiously  and  fabulously  invented.  But 
when  we  affirm  the  doctrine  of  the  resurrection, 
and  teach  that  souls  will  return  to  another  life, 
not  forgetful  of  themselves,  but  possessed  of  the 
same  perception  and  figure,  we  are  met  with  this 
objection  :  So  many  ages  have  now  passed  ;  what 
individual  ever  arose  from  the  dead,  that  through 
his  example  we  may  believe  it  to  be  possible? 
But  the  resurrection  cannot  take  place  while  un- 
righteousness still  prevails.  For  in  this  world 
men  are  slain  by  violence,  by  the  sword,  by  am- 
bush, by  poisons,  and  are  visited  with  injuries, 
with  want,  with  imprisonment,  with  tortures,  and 
with  proscriptions.  Add  to  this  that  righteous- 
ness is  hated,  that  all  who  wish  to  follow  God 
are  not  only  held  in  hatred,  but  are  harassed 
with  all  reproaches,  and  are  tormented  by  mani- 
fold kinds  of  punishments,  and  are  driven  to  the 
impious  worship  of  gods  made  with  hands,  not 
by  reason  or  truth,  but  by  dreadful  laceration  of 
their  bodies. 

Ought  men  therefore  to  rise  again  to  these 
same  things,  or  to  return  to  a  life  in  which  it  is 
impossible  for  them  to  be  safe  ?  Since  the  right- 
eous, then,  are  so  lightly  esteemed,  and  so  easily 
taken  away,  what  can  we  suppose  would  have 
happened  if  any  one  returning  from  the  dead 
had  recovered  life  by  a  recovery '  of  his  former 
condition  ?  He  would  assuredly  be  taken  away 
from  the  eyes  of  men,  lest,  if  he  were  seen  or 
heard,  all  men  with  one  accord  should  leave  the 
gods  and  betake  themselves  to  the  worship  and 
religion  of  the  one  God.  Therefore  it  is  neces- 
sary that  the  resurrection  should  take  place  once 
only  when  evil  shall  have  been  taken  away,  since 
it  is  befitting  that  those  who  have  risen  again 
should  neither  die  any  more,  nor  be  injured  in 
any  way,  that  they  may  be  able  to  pass  a  happy 


life  whose  death  has  been  annulled.^  But  the 
poets,  knowing  that  this  life  abouiids  with  all 
evils,  introduced  the  river  of  oblivion,  lest  the 
souls,  remembering  their  labours  and  evils,  should 
refuse  to  return  to  the  upper  regions ;  whence 
Virgil  says  :  ^  — 

"  O  Father !  and  can  thought  conceive 
That  happy  souls  this  realm  would  leave, 

And  seek  the  upper  sky, 
With  sluggish  clay  to  reunite  ? 
This  dreadful  longing  for  the  light, 

Whence  comes  it,  say,  and  why?" 

For  they  did  not  know  how  or  when  it  must  take 
place  ;  and  therefore  they  supposed  that  souls 
were  born  again,  and  that  they  returned  afresh  to 
the  womb,  and  went  back  to  infancy.  Whence 
also  Plato,  while  discussing  the  nature  of  the  soul, 
says  that  it  may  be  known  from  this  that  souls 
are  immortal  and  divine,  because  in  boys  minds 
are  pliant,  and  easy  of  perception,  and  because 
they  so  quickly  comprehend  the  subjects  which 
they  learn,  that  they  appear  not  then  to  be  learn- 
ing for  the  first  time,  but  to  be  recalling  them  to 
mind  and  recollecting  them  :  in  which  matter 
the  wise  man  most  foolishly  believed  the  poets. 

CHAP.  XXIII.  —  OF  THE  RESURRECTION  OF  THE 
SOUL,    AND    THE    PROOFS    OF   THIS    FACT. 

Therefore  they  will  not  be  born  again,  which 
is  impossible,  but  they  will  rise  again,  and  be 
clothed  by  God  with  bodies,  and  will  remember 
their  former  life,  and  all  its  actions  ;  and  being 
placed  in  the  possession  of  heavenly  goods,  and 
enjoying  the  pleasure  of  innumerable  resources, 
they  will  give  thanks  to  God  in  His  immediate 
presence,  because  He  has  destroyed  all  evil, 
and  because  He  has  raised  them  to  His  king- 
dom and  to  perpetual  life.  Respecting  which 
resurrection  the  philosophers  also  attempted  to 
speak  as  corrupdy  as  the  poets.  For  Pythagoras 
asserted  that  souls  passed  into  new  bodies  ;  but 
foolishly,  that  they  passed  from  men  into  cattle, 
and  from  cattle  into  men ;  and  that  he  himself 
was  restored  from  Euphorbus.  Chrysippus  says 
better,  whom  Cicero  speaks  of  as  supporting  the 
portico  of  the  Stoics,  who,  in  the  books  which 
he  wrote  concerning  providence,  when  he  was 
speaking  of  the  renewing  of  the  world,  intro- 
duced these  words  :  "  But  since  this  is  so,  it  is 
evident  that  nothing  is  impossible,  and  that  we, 
after  our  death,  when  certain  periods  of  time 
have  again  come  round,  are  restored  to  this 
state  in  which  we  now  are."  But  let  us  return 
from  human  to  divine  things.  The  Sibyl  thus 
speaks ; — 

"  For  the  whole  race  of  mortals  is  hard  to  be  believed ; 
but  when  the  judgment  of  the  world  and  of  mor- 
tals shall  now  come,  which   God   Himself  shall 


'  Postliminio.     For  the  uses  of  this  word,  see  Smith's  Dictionary 
of  Creek  and  Roman  Antiquities. 


2  Resignata  est,  properly  "  unsealed.' 

3  Virg.,  Mn.,  vi.  719. 


Chap.  XXIV.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


219 


institute,  judging  the  impious  and  the  holy  at  the 
same  time,  then  at  length  He  shall  send  the  wicked 
to  darkness  in  fire.  Lut  as  many  as  are  holy  shall 
live  again  on  the  earth,  God  giving  them  at  the 
same  time  a  spirit,  and  honour,  and  life." 

But  if  not  only  prophets,  but  even  bards,  and 
poets,  and  philosophers,  agree  that  there  will  be 
a  resurrection  of  the  dead,  let  no  one  ask  of  us 
how  this  is  possible  :  for  no  reason  can  be  as- 
signed for  divine  works  ;  but  if  from  the  begin- 
ning God  formed  man  in  some  unspeakable 
manner,  we  may  believe  that  the  old  man  can 
be  restored  by  Him  who  made  the  new  man. 

CH.A.P.    XXIV. OF   THE    RENEWED    WORLD. 

Now  I  will  sulijoin  the  rest.  Therefore  the 
Son  of  the  most  high  and  mighty  God  shall  come 
to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead,  as  the  Sibyl 
testifies  and  says  :  — 

"  For  then  there  shall  be  confusion  of  mortals  through- 
out the  whole  earth,  when  the  Almighty  Himself 
shall  come  on  His  judgment-seat  to  judge  the 
souls  of  the  quick  and  dead,  and  all  the  world." 

But  He,  when  He  shall  have  destroyed  unright- 
eousness, and  executed  His  great  judgment,  and 
shall  have  recalled  to  life  the  righteous,  who 
have  lived  from  the  beginning,  will  be  engaged 
among  men  a  thousand  years,  and  will  rule  them 
with  most  just  command.  Which  the  Sibyl  pro- 
claims in  another  place,  as  she  utters  her  inspired 
predictions  :  — 
"  Hear  me,  ye  mortals ;  an  everlasting  King  reigns." 

Then  they  who  shall  be  alive  in  their  bodies  shall 
not  die,  but  during  those  thousand  years  shall 
produce  an  infinite  multitude,  and  their  offspring 
shall  be  holy,  and  beloved  by  God  ;  but  they 
who  shall  be  raised  from  the  dead  shall  preside 
over  the  living  as  judges.'  But  the  nations  shall 
not  be  entirely  extinguished,  but  some  shall  be 
left  as  a  victory  for  God,  that  they  may  be  the 
occasion  of  triumph  to  the  righteous,  and  may 
be  subjected  to  perpetual  slavery.  About  the 
same  time  also  the  prince  of  tlie  devils,  who  is 
the  contriver  of  all  evils,  shall  be  bound  with 
chains,  and  shall  be  imprisoned  during  the  thou- 
sand years  of  the  heavenly  rule  in  which  right- 
eousness shall  reign  in  the  world,  so  that  he 
may  contrive  no  evil  against  the  people  of  God. 
After  His  coming  the  righteous  shall  be  collected 
from  all  the  earth,  and  the  judgment  being  com- 
pleted, the  sacred  city  shall  be  planted  in  the 
middle  of  the  earth,  in  which  God  Himself  the 
builder  may  dwell  together  with  the  righteous, 
bearing  rule  in  it.  And  the  Sibyl  marks  out  this 
city  when  she  says  :  — 

"  And  the  city  which  God  made,  this  He  made  more 
brilliant  than  the  stars,  and  sun,  and  moon." 

Then  that  darkness  will  be  taken  away  from  the 


'   [This  is  "  the  first  resurrection  "  as  conceived  of  by  the  ancients, 
and  the  (Phil,  iii.  11)  e^avdaTaai?  of  St.  Paul.] 


world  with  which  the  heaven  will  be  overspread 
and  darkened,  and  the  moon  will  receive  the 
brightness  of  the  sun,  nor  will  it  be  further 
diminished :  but  the  sun  will  become  seven 
times  brighter  than  it  now  is  ;  and  the  earth 
will  open  its  fruitfulness,  and  bring  forth  most 
abundant  fruits  of  its  own  accord ;  the  rocky 
mountains  shall  drop  with  honey ;  streams  of 
wine  shall  run  down,  and  rivers  flow  with  milk  : 
in  short,  the  world  itself  shall  rejoice,  and  all 
nature  exult,  being  rescued  and  set  free  from 
the  dominion  of  evil  and  impiety,  and  guilt  and 
error.  Throughout  this  time  beasts  shall  not  be 
nourished  by  blood,  nor  birds  by  prey ;  but  all 
things  shall  be  peaceful  and  tranquil.  Lions  and 
calves  shall  stand  together  at  the  manger,  the 
wolf  shall  not  carry  off  the  sheep,  the  hound 
shall  not  hunt  for  prey ;  hawks  and  eagles  shall 
not  injure  ;  the  infant  shall  play  with  serpents. 
In  short,  those  things  shall  then  come  to  pass 
which  the  poets  spoke  of  as  being  done  in  the 
reign  of  Saturnus.  Whose  error  arose  from  this 
source, —  that  the  prophets  bring  forward  and 
speak  of  many  future  events  as  already  accom- 
plished. For  visions  were  brought  before  their 
eyes  by  the  divine  Spirit,  and  they  saw  these 
things,  as  it  were,  done  and  completed  in  their 
own  sight.  And  when  fame  had  gradually  spread 
abroad  their  predictions,  since  those  who  were 
uninstructed  in  the  mysteries^  of  religion  did 
not  know  why  they  were  spoken,  they  thought 
that  all  those  things  were  already  fulfilled  in  the 
ancient  ages,  which  evidently  could  not  be  ac- 
complished and  fulfilled  under  the  reign  of  a 
man. 3  But  when,  after  the  destruction  of  impious 
religions  and  the  suppression  of  guilt,  the  earth 
shall  be  subject  to  God,  — 

"  The  sailor  *•  himself  also  shall  renounce  the  sea,  nor 

shall  the  naval  pine 
Barter  merchandise;  all  lands  shall  produce  all  things. 
The  ground  shall  not  endure  the  harrow,  nor  the  vine- 

vard  the  pruning  hook; 
The  'sturdy  ploughnian  also  shall  loose  the  bulls  from 

the  yoke. 
The  plain  shall  by  degrees  grow  yellow  with  soft  ears 

of  corn. 
The   blushing  grape   shall   hang   on   the   uncultivated 

bramliles. 
And  hard  oaks  shall  distil  the  dewy  honey. 
Nor  shall  the  wool  learn  to  counterfeit  various  colours; 
But  the  ram  himself  in  the  meadows  shall   change  his 

fleece. 
Now  for  a  sweetly  blushing  purple,  now  for  saffron  dye  ; 
Scarlet  of  its  owi'i  accord  "shall  cover  the  lambs  as  they 

feed. 
The  goats  of  themselves  shall  bring  back  home  their 

udders  distended  with  milk  ; 
Nor  shall  the  herds  dread  huge  lions." ' 


^  Profani  a  sacramentis. 

3  fThis  rationale  of  the  Orphica  and  Sibytlina  deserves 
thought  J 

<  Vector,  i.e.,  the  passenger,  as  opposed  to  one  who  sails  in  a 
ship  of  war. 

5  Virg.,  Bucol.,  iv.  21-45.  The  order  of  the  lines  is  changed. 
[This,  the  famous  Pollio,  greatly  influenced  Constantine.  See  p.  140, 
note  7,  siipra.\ 


2  20 


THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VII. 


Which  things  the  poet  foretold  according  to  the 
verses  of  the  CumKan  Sibyl.  But  the  Erythraean 
thus  speaks  :  — 

"But  wolves  shall  not  contend  with  lambs  on  the  moun- 
tains, and  lynxes  shall  eat  grass  with  kids  ;  boars 
shall  feed  with  calves,  and  with  all  flocks  ;  and 
the  carnivorous  lion  shall  eat  chaff  at  the  manger, 
and  serpents  shall  sleep  with  infants  deprived  of 
their  mothers." 

And.  in  another  place,  speaking  of  the  fruitful- 
ness  of  all  things  :  — 

"And  then  shall  God  give  great  joy  to  men;  for  the 
earth,  and  the  trees,  and  the  numberless  flocks  of 
the  earth  shall  give  to  men  the  true  fruit  of  the 
vine,  and  sweet  honey,  and  white  milk,  and  corn, 
which  is  the  best  of  all  things  to  mortals." 

And  another  in  the  same  manner  :  — 

"The  sacred  land  of  the  pious  only  will  produce  all 
these  things,  the  stream  of  honey  from  the  rock 
and  from  the  fountain,  and  the  milk  of  ambrosia 
W'ill  flow  for  all  the  just." 

Therefore  men  will  live  a  most  tranquil  life, 
abounding  with  resources,  and  will  reign  together 
with  God  ;  and  the  kings  of  the  nations  shall 
come  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  with  gifts  and 
offerings,  to  adore  and  honour  the  great  King, 
whose  name  shall  be  renowned  and  venerated 
by  all  the  nations  which  shall  be  under  heaven, 
and  by  the  kings  who  shall  rule  on  earth. 

CHAP.    XXV. OF    THE    LAST    TIMES,    AND    OF    THE 

CITY    OF    ROME. 

These  are  the  things  which  are  spoken  of  by 
the  prophets  as  about  to  happen  hereafter :  but 
I  have  not  considered  it  necessary  to  bring  for- 
ward their  testimonies  and  words,  since  it  would 
be  an  endless  task ;  nor  would  the  limits  of  my 
book  receive  so  great  a  multitude  of  subjects, 
since  so  many  with  one  breath  speak  similar 
things ;  and  at  the  same  time,  lest  weariness 
should  be  occasioned  to  the  readers  if  I  should 
heap  together  things  collected  and  transferred 
from  all ;  moreover,  that  I  might  confirm  those 
very  things  which  I  said,  not  by  my  own  writings, 
but  in  an  especial  manner  by  the  writings  of 
others,  and  might  show  that  not  only  among  us, 
but  even  with  those  very  persons  who  revile  us, 
the  truth  is  preserved,'  which  they  refuse  to  ac- 
knowledge.^ But  he  who  wishes  to  know  these 
things  more  accurately  may  draw  from  the  foun- 
tain itself,  and  he  will  know  more  things  worthy 
of  admiration  than  we  have  comprised  in  these 
books.  Perhaps  some  one  may  now  ask  when 
these  things  of  which  we  have  spoken  are  about 
to  come  to  pass?  I  have  already  shown  above, 
that  when  six  thousand  years  shall  be  completed 
this  change  must  take  place,  and  that  the  last 
day  of  the  extreme  conclusion  is  now  drawing 


*  Consignatam  teneri. 

*  [See  p.  218,  su/>ra,  and  Victorinus,  sparsiin,  iiifra.\ 


near.  It  is  permitted  us  to  know  respecting  the 
signs,  which  are  spoken  by  the  prophets,  for  they 
foretold  signs  by  which  the  consummation  of 
the  times  is  to  be  expected  by  us  from  day  to 
day,  and  to  be  feared.  When,  however,  this 
amount  will  be  completed,  those  teach,  who  have 
written  respecting  the  times,  collecting  them  from 
the  sacred  writings  and  from  various  histories, 
how  great  is  the  number  of  years  from  the  begin- 
ning of  the  world.  And  although  they  vary,  and 
the  amount  of  the  number  as  reckoned  by  them 
differs  considerably,  yet  all  expectation  does  not 
exceed  the  limit  of  two  hundred  years.  The 
subject  itself  declares  that  the  fall  and  ruin  of 
the  world  will  shortly  take  place  ;  except  that 
while  the  city  of  Rome  remains  it  appears  that 
nothing  of  this  kind  is  to  be  feared. ^  But  when 
that  capital  of  the  world  shall  have  fallen,  and 
shall  have  begun  to  be  a  street,'^  which  the  Sibyls 
say  shall  come  to  pass,  who  can  doubt  that  the 
end  has  now  arrived  to  the  affairs  of  men  and 
the  whole  world?  It  is  that  city,  that  only, 
which  still  sustains  all  things ;  and  the  God  of 
heaven  is  to  be  entreated  by  us  and  implored  — 
if,  indeed.  His  arrangements  and  decrees  can  be 
delayed  —  lest,  sooner  than  we  think  for,  that 
detestable  tyrant  should  come  who  will  under- 
take so  great  a  deed,  and  dig  out  that  eye,  by 
the  destruction  of  which  the  world  itself  is  about 
to  fall.  Now  let  us  return,  to  set  forth  the  other 
things  which  are  then  about  to  follow. 

CHAP.  XXVI. OF  THE  LOOSING  OF  THE  DEVIL,  AND 

OF  THE  SECOND  AND  GREATEST  JUDGMENT. 

We  have  said,  a  little  before,  that  it  will  come 
to  pass  at  the  commencement  of  the  sacred 
reign,  that  the  prince  of  the  devils  will  be  bound 
by  God.  But  he  also,  when  the  thousand  years 
of  the  kingdom,  that  is,  seven  thousand  of  the 
world,  shall  begin  to  be  ended,  will  be  loosed 
afresh,  and  being  sent  forth  from  prison,  will  go 
forth  and  assemble  all  the  nations,  which  shall 
then  be  under  the  dominion  of  the  righteous, 
that  they  may  make  war  against  the  holy  city ; 
and  there  shall  be  collected  together  from  all  the 
world  an  innumerable  company  of  the  nations, 
and  shall  besiege  and  surround  the  city.  Then 
the  last  anger  of  God  shall  come  upon  the  na- 
tions, and  shall  utterly  s  destroy  them  ;  and  first 
He  shall  shake  the  earth  most  violently,  and  by 
its  motion  the  moimtains  of  Syria  shall  be  rent, 
and  the  hills  shall  sink  down  precipitously,  and 
the  walls  of  all  cities  shall  fall,  and  God  shall 
cause  the  sun  to  stand,  so  that  he  set  not  for 
three  days,  and  shall  set  it  on  fire  ;  and  excessive 
heat  and  great  burning  shall  descend  upon  the 
hostile  and  impious  people,  and  showers  of  brim- 


3  [Again  a  reference,  as  on  p.  213,  note  1,  sufrn.\ 

*  iiMfj-ri.     There  are  other  readings,  as  irup  and  "  pyra." 

£  Usque  ad  luiuni. 


Chap.  XXVI.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


221 


Stone,  and  hailstones,  and  drops  of  fire  ;  and  their 
spirits  shall  melt  through  the  heat,  and  their 
bodies  shall  be  bruised  by  the  hail,  and  they  shall 
smite  one  another  with  the  sword.  The  moun- 
tains shall  be  filled  with  carcases,  and  the  plains 
shall  be  covered  with  bones ;  but  the  people 
of  God  during  those  three  days  shall  be  con- 
cealed under  caves  of  the  earth,  until  the  anger 
of  God  against  the  nations  and  the  last  judgment 
shall  be  ended. 

Then  the  righteous  shall  go  forth  from  their 
hiding-places,  and  shall  find  all  things  covered 
with  carcases  and  bones.  But  the  whole  race  of 
the  wicked  shall  utterly  perish  ;  and  there  shall 
no  longer  be  any  nation  in  this  world,  but  the 
nation  of  God  alone.  Then  for  seven  continuous 
years  the  woods  shall  be  untouched,  nor  shall 
timber  be  cut  from  the  mountains,  but  the  arms 
of  the  nations  shall  be  burnt ;  and  now  there 
shall  be  no  war,  but  peace  and  everlasting  rest. 
But  when  the  thousand  years  shall  be  completed, 
the  world  shall  be  renewed  by  God,  and  the 
heavens  shall  be  folded  together,  and  the  earth 
shall  be  changed,  and  God  shall  transform  men 
into  the  similitude  of  angels,  and  they  shall  be 
white  as  snow ;  and  they  shall  always  be  em- 
ployed in  the  sight  of  the  Almighty,  and  shall 
make  offerings  to  their  Lord,  and  serve  Him  for 
ever.  At  the  same  time  shall  take  place  that 
second  and  public  resurrection '  of  all,  in  which 
the  unrighteous  shall  be  raised  to  everlasting 
punishments.  These  are  they  who  have  wor- 
shipped the  works  of  their  own  hands,  who  have 
either  been  ignorant  of,  or  have  denied  the  Lord 
and  Parent  of  the  world.  But  their  lord  with  his 
servants  shall  be  seized  and  condemned  to  punish- 
ment, together  with  whom  all  the  band  of  the 
wicked,  in  accordance  with  their  deeds,  shall  be 
burnt  for  ever  with  perpetual  fire  in  the  sight  of 
angels  and  the  righteous. 

This  is  the  doctrine  of  the  holy  prophets  which 
we  Christians  follow ;  this  is  our  wisdom,  which 
they  who  worship  frail  objects,  or  mamtain  an 
empty  philosophy,  deride  as  folly  and  vanity, 
because  we  are  not  accustomed  to  defend  and 
assert  it  in  public,  since  God  orders  us  in  quiet- 
ness and  silence  to  hide  His  secret,  and  to  keep 
it  within  our  own  conscience  ;  and  not  to  strive 
with  obstinate  contention  against  those  who  are 
ignorant  of  the  truth,  and  who  rigorously  assail 
God  and  His  religion  not  for  the  sake  of  learn- 
ing, but  of  censuring  and  jeering.  For  a  mys- 
tery ought  to  be  most  faithfully  concealed  and 
covered,  especially  by  us,  who  bear  the  name  of 
faith.^  But  they  accuse  this  silence  of  ours,  as 
though  it  were  the  result  of  an  evil  conscience  ; 
whence  also  they  invent  some  detestable  things 


'  [This  clearly  proves  that  the  better  sort  of  Chiliaiin  was  not 
extinct  in  the  Church.] 

^  [i.e.,  "the  faithful,"  a  title  often  used  to  designate  Christians. 
This  discipline  was  based  on  Heb.  v.  14  and  Matt.  vii.  6. J 


respecting  those  who  are  holy  and  blameless,  and 
willingly  believe  their  own  inventions. 

The  address  to  Constantine  is  wanting  in  some  MSS.  and 
editions,  but  is  inserted  in  the  te.\t  by  Migne,  as  found 
in  some  important  MSS.,  and  as  in  accordance  with  the 
style  and  spirit  of  Lactantius. 

But  all  fictions  have  now  been  hushed,  most 
holy  Emperor,  since  the  time  when  the  great 
God  raised  thee  up  for  the  restoration  of  the 
house  of  justice,  and  for  the  protection  of  the 
human  race ;  for  while  thou  rulest  the  Roman 
state,  we  worshippers  of  God  are  no  more  re- 
garded as  accursed  and  impious.  Since  the  truth 
now  comes  forth  ^  from  obscurity,  and  is  brought 
into  light,  we  are  not  censured  as  unrighteous 
who  endeavour  to  perform  the  works  of  right- 
eousness. No  one  any  longer  reproaches  us  with 
the  name  of  God.  None  of  us,  who  are  alone  of 
all  men  religious,  is  any  more  called  irreligious  ; 
since  despising  the  images  of  the  dead,  we  wor- 
ship the  living  and  true  God.  The  providence 
of  the  supreme  Deity  has  raised  thee  to  the  im- 
perial dignity,  that  thou  mightest  be  able  with 
true  piety  to  rescind  the  injurious  decrees  of 
others,  to  correct  faults,  to  provide  with  a  father's 
clemency  for  the  safety  of  men,  —  in  short,  to 
remove  the  wicked  from  the  state,  whom  being 
cast  down  by  pre-eminent  piety,  God  has  deliv- 
ered into  your  hands,  that  it  might  be  evident  to 
all  in  what  true  majesty  consists. 

For  they  who  wished  to  take  away  the  worship 
of  the  heavenly  and  matchless  ^  God,  that  they 
might  defend  impious  superstitions,  lie  in  ruin. 5 
But  thou,  who  defendest  and  lovest  His  name, 
excelling  in  virtue  and  prosperity,  enjoyest  thy 
immortal  glories  with  the  greatest  happiness. 
They  suffer  and  have  suffered  the  punishment  of 
their  guilt.  The  powerful  right  hand  of  God 
protects  thee  from  all  dangers ;  He  bestows  on 
thee  a  quiet  and  tranquil  reign,  with  the  highest 
congratulations  of  all  men.  And  not  undeserv- 
edly has  the  Lord  and  Ruler  of  the  world  cho- 
sen thee  in  preference  to  all  others,  by  whom  He 
might  renew  His  holy  religion,  since  thou  alone 
didst  exist  of  all,  who  mightest  afford  a  surpassing 
example  of  virtue  and  holiness  :  in  which  thou 
mightest  not  only  equal,  but  also,  which  is  a  very 
great  matter,  excel  the  glory  of  ancient  princes, 
whom  nevertheless  fame  reckons  among  the  good. 
They  indeed  perhaps  by  nature  only  resembled 
the  righteous.  For  he  who  is  ignorant  of  God, 
the  Ruler  of  the  universe,  may  attain  to  a  resem- 
blance of  righteousness,  but  he  cannot  attain  to 
righteousness  itself.  But  thou,  both  by  the  in- 
nate sanctity  of  thy  character,  and  by  thy  ac- 
knowledgment of  the  truth  and  of  God  in  every 
action,  dost  fully  perform  ^  the  works  of  riglit- 


3  Jam  emergente  atque  illustrata  veritate. 

*  Singularis. 

5  Proiligati  jacent. 

6  Consumnias.     [Art  fulfilling  ;  i.e.,  as  a  catechumen.] 


222 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


[Book  VII. 


eousness.'  It  was  therefore  befitting  that,  in  ar- 
ranging the  condition  of  the  human  race,  tlie 
Deity  should  make  use  of  thy  authority  and 
service.  \\'hom  we  suppHcate  with  daily  prayers, 
that  He  may  especially  guard  thee  whom  He  has 
wished  to  be  the  guardian  of  the  world  :  then 
that  He  may  inspire  thee  with  a  disposition  by 
which  thou  mayest  always  continue  in  the  love 
of  the  divine  name.  For  this  is  serviceable  to 
all,  both  to  thee  for  happiness,  and  to  others  for 
repose. 

CHAP.      XXVir.  AN     ENCOURAGEMENT    AND     CON- 
FIRMATION  OF   THE   PIOUS. 

Since  we  have  completed  the  seven  courses  ^ 
of  the  work  which  we  undertook,  and  have  ad- 
vanced to  the  goal,  it  remains  that  we  exhort  all 
to  undertake  wisdom  together  with  true  religion, 
the  strength  and  office  of  which  depends  on  this, 
that,  despising  earthly  things,  and  laying  aside 
the  errors  by  which  we  were  formerly  held  while 
we  served  frail  things,  and  desired  frail  things, 
we  may  be  directed  to  the  eternal  rewards  of  the 
heavenly  treasure.  And  that  we  may  obtain 
these,  the  alluring  pleasures  of  the  present  life 
must  as  soon  as  possible  be  laid  aside,  which 
soothe  the  souls  of  men  with  pernicious  sweetness. 
How  great  a  happiness  must  it  be  thought,  to  be 
withdrawn  from  these  stains  of  the  earth,  and  to 
go  to  that  most  just  Judge  and  indulgent  Father, 
who  in  the  place  of  labours  gives  rest,  in  the  place 
of  death  life,  in  the  place  of  darkness  brightness, 
and  in  the  place  of  short  and  earthly  goods,  gives 
those  which  are  eternal  and  heavenly :  with 
which  reward  the  hardships  and  miseries  which 
we  endure  in  this  world,  in  accomplishing  the 
works  of  righteousness,  can  in  no  way  be  com- 
pared and  equalled.  Therefore,  if  we  wish  to  be 
wise  and  happy,  not  only  must  those  sayings  of 
Terence  be  reflected  upon  and  proposed  to  us, 

"  That  we  must  ever  grind  at  the  mill,  we  must  be  beaten, 
and  put  in  fetters ;  "  ^ 

but  things  much  more  dreadful  than  these  must 
be  endured,  namely,  the  prison,  chains,  and  tor- 
tures :  pains  must  be  undergone,  in  short,  death 
itself  must  be  undertaken  and  borne,  when  it  is 
clear  to  our  conscience  that  that  frail  pleasure 
will  not  be  without  punishment,  nor  virtue  without 
a  divine  reward.  All,  therefore,  ought  to  en- 
deavour either  to  direct  themselves  to  the  right 
way  as  soon  as  possible,  or,  having  undertaken 
and  exercised  virtues,  and  having  patiently  per- 
formed the  labours  of  this  life,  to  deserve  to  have 
God  as   their  comforter.     For  our  Father  and 


'  [In  admonishing  the  great,  the  form  was  to  ascribe  to  them  the 
characters  they  should  cultivate.  Lactantius  here  speaks  as  a  courtier, 
but  guardedly.] 

^  Decursis  septem  spatiis,  —  an  expression  horrowed  from  the 
chariot  race:  here  applied  to  the  seven  books  of  this  treatise. 

^  Terent.,  Phorm.,  ii.  i.  19. 


Lord,  who  built  and  strengthened  the  heaven, 
who  placed  in  it  the  sun,  with  the  other  heavenly 
bodies,  who  by  His  power  weighed  the  earth  and 
fenced  it  with  mountains,  surrounded  it  with  the 
sea,  and  divided  it  with  rivers,  and  who  made 
and  completed  out  of  nothing  whatever  there  is 
in  this  workmanship  of  the  world ;  ha\ing  ob- 
served the  errors  of  men,  sent  a  Guide,  who 
might  open  to  us  the  way  of  righteousness  :  let 
us  all  follow  Him,  let  us  hear  Him,  let  us  obey 
Him  with  the  greatest  devotedness,  since  He 
alone,  as  Lucretius  says,* 

"  Cleansed  men's  breasts  with  truth-telling  precepts,  and 
fixed  a  limit  to  lust  and  fear,  and  explained  what 
was  the  chief  good  which  we  all  strive  to  reach, 
and  pointed  out  the  road  by  which,  along  a  narrow 
track,  we  might  arrive  at  it  in  a  straightforward 
course." 

And  not  only  pointed  it  out,  but  also  went 
before  us  in  it,  that  no  one  might  dread  the 
path  of  virtue  on  account  of  its  difficulty.  Let 
the  way  of  destruction  and  deceit,  if  it  is  possi- 
ble, be  deserted,  in  which  death  is  concealed, 
being  covered  by  the  attractions  of  pleasure. 

And  the  more  nearly  each  one,  as  his  years 
incline  to  old  age,  sees  to  be  the  approach  of 
that  day  in  which  he  must  depart  from  this  life, 
let  him  reflect  how  he  may  leave  it  in  purity, 
how  he  may  come  to  the  Judge  in  innocency ; 
not  as  they  do,  to  whose  dark  minds  the  light  is 
denied, 5  who,  when  the  strength  of  their  body 
now  fails,  are  admonished  in  this  of  the  last 
pressing  necessity,  that  they  should  with  greater 
eagerness  and  ardour  apply  themselves  to  the 
satisfying  of  their  lusts.  From  which  abyss  let 
everyone  free  himself  while  it  is  permitted  him, 
while  the  opportunity  is  present,  and  let  him 
turn  himself  to  God  with  his  whole  mind,  that 
he  may  without  anxiety  await  that  day,  in  which 
God,  the  Ruler  and  Lord  of  the  world,  shall 
judge  the  deeds  and  thoughts  of  each.  What- 
ever things  are  here  desired,  let  him  not  only 
neglect,  but  also  avoid  them,  and  let  him  judge 
that  his  soul  is  of  greater  value  than  those  deceit- 
ful goods,  the  possession  of  which  is  uncertain 
and  transitory ;  for  they  take  their  departure 
every  day,  and  they  go  forth  much  more  quickly 
than  they  had  entered,  and  if  it  is  permitted  us 
to  enjoy  them  even  to  the  last,  they  must  still, 
without  doubt,  be  left  to  others.  We  can  take 
nothing  with  us,  except  a  well  and  innocently 
spent  life.  That  man  will  appear  before  God 
with  abundant  resources,  that  man  will  appear  in 
opulence,  to  whom  there  shall  belong  self-re- 
straint, mercy,  patience,  love,  and  faith.  This 
is  our  inheritance,  which  can  neither  be  taken 
away  from  any  one,  nor  transferred  to  another. 


*  De  Nat.  Rer.,  vi.  24. 

5  Quorum  cjecis  mentibus  lux  negatur.     Others  read,  "  Quidam 
caecis  mentibus  viri." 


Chap.  XXVII.] 


THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


223 


And  who  is    there  who  would  wish  to  provide 
and  acquire  for  himself  these  goods  ? 

Let  those  who  are  hungry  come,  that  being 
fed  with  heavenly  food,  they  may  lay  aside  their 
lasting  hunger ;  let  those  who  are  athirst  come, 
that  they  may  with  full  mouth  draw  forth  the 
water  of  salvation  from  an  ever-flowing  fountain.' 
By  this  divine  food  and  drink  the  blind  shall 
both  see,  and  the  deaf  hear,  and  the  dumb 
speak,  and  the  lame  walk,  and  the  foolish  shall 
be  wise,  and  the  sick  shall  be  strong,  and  the 
dead  shall  come  to  life  again.  For  whoever  by 
his  virtue  has  trampled  upon  the  corruptions  of 
the  earth,  the  supreme  and  truthful  arbiter  will 
raise  him  to  life  and  to  perpetual  light.  Let  no 
one  trust  in  riches,  no  one  in  badges  of  authority, 

'  [This  evident  quotation  from  Rev.  xxi.  7  and  xxii.  17  is  note- 
worthy as  proof  of  the  currency  of  the  Apocalypse  in  North  Africa.] 


no  one  even  in  royal  power :  these  things  do 
not  make  a  man  immortal.  For  whosoever 
shall  cast  away  the  conduct  becoming  a  man,^ 
and,  following  present  things,  shall  i)rostrate 
himself  upon  the  ground,  will  be  punished  as  a 
deserter  from  his  Lord,  his  commander,  and  his 
Father.  Let  us  therefore  apply  ourselves  to 
righteousness,  which  will  alone,  as  an  insepara- 
ble companion,  lead  us  to  God ;  and  "  while  a 
spirit  rules  these  limbs,"  ^  let  us  serve  God  with 
unwearied  service,  let  us  keep  our  posts  and 
watches,  let  us  boldly  engage  with  the  enemy 
whom  we  know,  that  victorious  and  triumphant 
over  our  conquered  adversary,  we  may  obtain 
from  the  Lord  that  reward  of  valour  which  He 
Himself  has  promised. 


2  Rationem  hominis. 

3  Virg.,  /Eneid,  iv.  336. 


GENERAL   NOTE. 


For  remarks  on  the  dubious  passages  which  bear  upon  that  of  p.  221,  supra,  see  the  General 
Note  suffixed  to  the  tractate  on  the  Workmanship  of  God,  p.  300,  infra. 


THE    EPITOME    OF    THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 

ADDRESSED   TO  HIS  BROTHER   PEXTADICS. 


THE    PRF.FACR. — THE    PLA.V   AND   FVRPORT  OF  THE 
WHOLE  EPTTOVIE,'  AND  OF  THE  LVSTrTLTlONS. 

Although  the  books  of  the  Diviru  Instiiutions 
which  we  wrote  a  long  time  since  to  illustrate 
the  truth  and  religion,  rnay  so  prepare  and  mould 
the  rninds  of  the  readers,  that  their  length  may 
not  produce  disgust,  nor  their  copiousness  be 
burtliensome  ;  nevertheless  you  desire,  O  brother 
Pentariius,  that  an  epitome  of  them  should  be 
made  fur  you,  I  suppose  for  this  reason,  that  I 
may  write  something  to  you,  and  that  your  name 
may  be  rendered  famous  by  my  work,  such  as 
it  is.  I  will  comply  with  your  desire,  although  it 
seems  a  difficult  matter  to  comprise  within  the 
compass  of  one  book  those  things  which  have 
been  treated  of  in  seven  large  volumes.*  For 
the  whole  matter  becomes  less  full  when  so  great 
a  multitude  of  subjects  is  to  be  compressed 
within  a  narrow  space  ;  and  it  becomes  less  clear 
by  its  very  brevity,  especially  since  many  argu- 
ments and  examples,  on  which  the  elucidation 
of  the  proofs  depends,  must  of  necessity  be 
omitted,  since  their  copiousness  is  so  great,  that 
even  by  themselves  they  are  enough  to  make  up 
a  book.  And  when  these  are  removed,  what  can 
appear  useful,  what  plain?  But  I  will  strive  as 
much  as  the  subject  permits,  both  to  contract 
that  which  is  diffuse  and  to  shorten  that  which 
Ls  long  ;  in  such  a  manner,  however,  that  in  this 
work,  in  which  truth  is  to  be  brought  to  light, 
matter  may  not  seem  to  be  wanting  for  copious- 
ness, nor  clearness  for  understanding  it.J 

CHAP.    L — OF   THE    DFVl.VE    PROVIDEXCE. 

First  a  question  arises  :  WTiether  there  is  any 
providence  which  made  or  governs  the  world? 
That  there  is,  no  one  doubts,  since  of  almost  all 
the  philosophers,  except  the  school  of  F^jicurus, 
there  is  but  one  voice  and  one  opinion,  that  the 

'  f  A  tpedmeti  of  the  abrWgmenu  ma/le  fey  authors  and  editorj, 
owing  w  the  great  expense  of  books  in  nunuicript.  They  have  bccti 
fOurcK  of  great  injury  to  literature.] 

»  [  We  have  here  only  a  fragment  of  the  Epitome.  The  rest  is 
kxt-l 

J  [Christian  moraU  were  now  to  be  taught  openly  in  schooU: 
hen  eg  the  occd  of  tuch  manual*.] 
334 


world  could  not  have  been  made  without  a  con- 
triver, and  that  it  cannot  exist  without  a  ruler. 
Therefore  Epicurus  Ls  refuted  not  only  by  the 
most  learned  men,  but  also  by  the  testimonies 
and  perceptions  of  all  mortals.  For  who  can 
doubt  respecting  a  providence,  when  he  sees 
that  the  heavens  and  the  earth  have  been  so 
arranged,  and  that  all  things  have  been  so  regu- 
lated, that  they  might  be  most  befittingly  adapted, 
not  only  to  wonderful  beauty  and  ariomraent,  but 
also  to  the  use  of  men,  and  the  convenience 
of  the  other  living  creatures?  That,  therefore, 
which  exists  in  accordance  with  a  plan,  cannot 
have  had  its  beginning  without  a  plan :  thus*  It 
is  certain  that  there  is  a  providence. 

CHAP.    n. THAT    THERE    LS    BLT    OXE    GOD,    ANT) 

THAT  THERE   CA.VN'OT    BE   MORE. 

Another  question  follows :  Whether  there  be 
one  God  or  more?  And  this  indeed  contains 
much  ambiguity.  For  not  only  do  individuals 
differ  among  themselves,  but  also  peoples  and 
nations.  But  he  who  shall  follow  the  guidance 
of  reason  will  understand  that  there  cannot  be  a 
Lord  except  one,  nor  a  Father  except  one.  For 
if  God,  who  made  all  things,  is  also  Lord  and 
Father,  He  must  be  one  only,  so  that  the  same 
may  be  the  head  and  source  of  all  things.  Nor 
is  it  possible  for  the  world  s  to  exist  unless  all 
things  be  referred  to  one  person,  unless  one 
hold  the  rudder,  unless  one  guide  the  reins,  and, 
as  it  were,  one  mind  direct  all  the  members  of 
the  body.  If  there  are  many  kings  in  a  swarm 
of  bees,  they  will  perish  or  be  scattered  abroad, 
while 

"  Discord  attacks  the  kings  with  great  commotion."' 

If  there  are  several  leaders  in  a  herd,  they  will 
contend  until  one  gains  the  mastery.^     If  there 

*  Quoniam.  This  word  appt^n  to  be  out  of  place,  as  its  proper 
meaning  is  "  since."  Either  it  must  be  ulten  as  above,  or,  -wi?^  ■!Ofn« 
editors,  the  last  clause  of  this  chapter  may  be  ukcn  as  L  ,  , 

of  the  next  chapter  —  "  Since  there  is  a  providence,"  cti. 
1         i  Rerum  sum  ma. 

»  Vir^.,  Georg.,  iv.  fA. 
\       7  Obuaeat. 


THE    EPITOME    OF   THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


225 


are  many  commanders  in  an  army,  the  soldiers 
cannot  obey,  since  different  commands  are  given  ; 
nor  can  unity  be  maintained  by  themselves,  since 
each  consults  his  own  interests  according  to  his 
humours.'  Thus,  in  this  commonwealth  of  the 
world,  unless  there  were  one  ruler,  who  was  also 
its  founder,  either  this  mass  would  be  dissolved, 
or  it  could  not  have  been  put  together  at  all. 
Moreover,  the  whole  authority  could  not  exist 


CHAP.  IV. THE  TESTIMONIKS    OF   THE    PHILOSO- 
PHERS  TO   THE    UNllY    OK    GOD. 

But  let  US  come  to  the  philosophers,  whose 
authority  is  regarded  as  more  certain  than  that 
of  the  poets.  Plato  asserts  His  monarchy,  saying 
that  there  is  but  one  God,  by  whom  the  world 
was  prepared  and  completed  with  wonderful 
order.  Aristotle,  his  disciple,  admits  that  there 
is    one    mind    which    presides   over    the   world. 


in  many  deities,  since  they  separately  maintam  1  Antisthenes  says  that  there  is  one  who  is  God 
their  own  duties  and  their  own  prerogatives.  No  |  ^^y  nature,''  the  governor  of  the  whole  system, 
one,  therefore,  of  them  can  be  called  omnipotent,  ^  j^  ^^,^^,1^1  j^^  ^  j^^g  task  to  recount  the  state- 
which  is  the  true  title  of  God,  since  he  will  be  ,-nents  which  have  been  made  respecting  the 
able  to  accomplish  that  only  which  depends  supreme  God,  either  by  Thales,  or  by  Pythag- 
upon  himself,  and  will  not  venture  to  attempt  |  ^^^^  ^^^  Anaximenes  before  him,  or  afterwards 
that  which  depends  upon  others.     Vulcan  will   |^y  ^j^^    ^lo'xc'i   Cleanthes   and    Chrysippus   and 


not  claim  for  himself  water,  nor  Neptune  fire  ; 
nor  will  Ceres  claim  acquaintance  with  the  arts, 
nor  Minerva  with  fruits  ;  nor  will   Mercury  lay 


Zeno,  or  f f  our  countrymen,  by  Seneca  following 
the  Stoics,  and  by  Tullius  himself,  since  all 
these  attempted  to  define  the   being  of  (}od,5 


claim  to  arms,  nor  Mars  to  the  lyre  ;  Jupiter  will    ^^^^   affirmed    that  the  world  is  ruled  by  Him 
not  claim  medicine,  nor  /Esculapius  the  thunder-    j^i(„-,e,  and  that  He  is  not  subject  to  any  'nature. 


bolt :  he  will  more  easily  endure  it  when  thrown 
by  another,  than  he  will  brandish  it  himself.     If, 


since  all  nature  derives  its  origin  from  Him. 
Hermes,  who,  on  account  of   his  virtue  and 


therefore,  individuals  cannot  do  all  things,  they    j^;^  knowledge  of  many  arts,  deserved  the  name 
have  less  strength  and  less  power;  but  he  is  to    ^j-  'Prismegistus,  who  preceded  the  philosophers 


be  regarded  as  Ciod  who  can  accomplish  the 
whole,  and  not  he  who  can  only  accomplish  the 
smallest  part  of  the  whole. 


in  the  antiquity  of  his  doctrine,  and  who  is  rev- 
erenced by  the  Egyptians  as  a  god,  in  asserting 
the  majesty  of  the  one  God  with  infinite  praises, 
calls  Him  Lord  and  Father,  and  says  that  He  is 
without  a  name  because  He  docs  not  stand  in 
need   of  a   proper   name,  inasmuch   as    He    is 
alone,  antl   that    He  has  no   parents,  since  He 
corruptible,  incapable  of  suffering,  subject  to  no    exists  of  Himself  and  by   Himself     In  writing 
circumstance  or   power,   Himself  possessing  all    to  his  son  he  thus  begins  :  To  understand  God 
things,  ruling  all  things,  whom  the  human  mind  1  is  difficult,  to  describe   Him   in   speech   is    iin 


CHAP.  III. THE   TESTIMONIES   OF  THE   POETS  CON- 
CERNING  THE   ONE   GOD. 

There  is,  then,  one  God,  perfect,  eternal,  in- 


can  neither  estimate  in  thought  nor  mortal 
tongue  describe  in  speech.  For  He  is  too  ele- 
vated and  great  to  be  conceived  by  the  thought, 
or  expressed  by  the  language  of  man.  In  short, 
not  to  speak  of  the  prophets,  the  preachers  of 
the  one  God,  poets  also,  and  philosophers,  and 
inspired  women,^  utter  their  testimony  to  the 
unity  of  God.  Orpheus  speaks  of  the  surpass- 
ing God  who  made  the  heaven  and  the  sun,  with 
the  other  heavenly  bodies  ;  who  made  the  earth 
and  the  seas.  Also  our  own  Maro  calls  the  Su- 
preme God  at  one  time  a  spirit,  at  another 
time  a  mind,  and  says  that  it,  as  though  infused 
into  limbs,  puts  in  motion  the  body  of  the  whole 
world  ;  also,  that  God  permeates  the  heights  of 
heaven,  the  tracts  of  the  sea  and  lands,  and  that 
all  living  creatures  derive  their  life  from  Him. 
Even  Ovid  was  not  ignorant  that  the  world  was 
prepared  by  (iod,  whom  he  sometimes  calls  the 
framer  of  all  things,  sometimes  the  fabricator  of 
the  World.3 


'   Pro  moribus.     Anolhcr  reading  is  "  pro  viribus,"  with  all  their 
power. 

2  Vates,  i  c,  the  Sibyls. 

3  [1  shall  not  miiltipl>;  references  to  the  seven  books,  which  arc  so 
readily  compared  by  turning  back  to  the  pages  here  cpitomizcd.J 


possible,  even  for  one  to  whtnn  it  is  iH)ssible  to 
understand  Him  ;  for  the  perfect  cannot  be 
comprehended  by  the  imperfect,  nor  the  invisi- 
ble by  the  visible. 

CHAP.  V.  —  TH.AT    THE    PROPHETIC    WOMEN  —  THAT 

IS,   THE    SIBYLS DECLARE    1  H.Vf   THERE    IS    BUT 

ONE   GOD. 

It  remains  to  speak  of  the  prophetic  women. 
Varro  relates  that  there  were  ten  Sibyls,  —  the 
first  of  the  Persians,  the  second  the  Libyan,  the 
third  the  Delphian,  the  fourth  the  Cimmerian, 
the  fifth  the  Erythra;an,  the  sixth  the  Samian, 
the  seventh  the  Cuma;an,  the  eighth  the  Hel- 
lespontian,  the  ninth  the  Phrygian,  the  tenth  the 
Tiburtine,  who  has  the  name  of  Albunea.  Of 
all  these,  he  says  that  there  are  three  books  of 
the  Cuma^an  alone  which  contain  the  fiites  of  the 
Romans,  and  are  accounted  sacred,  but  that  there 
exist,  and  are  commonly  regarded  as  sej^arate, 
books  of  almost  all  the  others,  but  that  they  are 
entitled,  as  though  by  one  name.  Sibylline  books, 

*■  Naturalcm. 
5  Quid  sit  Deus. 


226 


THE    EPITOME    OF    THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


excepting  that  the  Erythraean,  who  is  said  to 
have  Hved  in  the  times  of  the  Trojan  war, 
placed  her  name  in  her  book  :  the  writings  of 
the  others  are  mixed  together.' 

All  these  Sibyls  of  whom  I  have  spoken,  ex- 
cept the  Cumaean,  whom  none  but  the  Quin- 
decemviri-  are  allowed  to  read,  bear  witness  that 
there  is  but  one  God,  the  ruler,  the  maker,  the 
parent,  not  begotten  of  any,  but  sprung  from 
Himself,  who  was  from  all  ages,  and  will  be  to 
all  ages  ;  and  therefore  is  alone  worthy  of  being 
worshipped,  alone  of  being  feared,  alone  of 
being  reverenced,  by  all  living  beings  ;  —  whose 
testimonies  I  have  omitted  because  I  was  unable 
to  abridge  them  ;  but  if  you  wish  to  see  them, 
you  must  have  recourse  to  the  books  themselves. 
Now  let  us  follow  up  the  remaining  subjects. 

CHAP.  VI.  SIXCE  GOD  IS  ETERNAL  AND  IMMOR- 
TAL, HE  DOES  NOT  STAND  IN  NEED  OF  SEX 
AND   SUCCESSION. 

These  testimonies,  therefore,  so  many  and  so 
great,  clearly  teach  that  there  is  but  one  gov- 
ernment in  the  world,  and  one  power,  the  origin 
of  which  cannot  be  imagined,  or  its  force  de- 
scribed. They  are  foolish,  therefore,  who  im- 
agine that  the  gods  were  born  of  marriage, 
since  the  sexes  themselves,  and  the  intercourse 
between  them,  were  given  to  mortals  by  God  for 
this  reason,  that  every  race  might  be  preserved 
by  a  succession  of  offspring.  But  what  need 
have  the  immortals  either  of  sex  or  succession, 
since  neither  pleasure  nor  death  affects  them? 
Those,  therefore,  who  are  reckoned  as  gods, 
since  it  is  evident  that  they  were  born  as  men, 
and  that  they  begat  others,  were  plainly  mortals  : 
but  they  were  believed  to  be  gods,  because, 
when  they  were  great  and  powerful  kings,  on 
account  of  the  benefits  which  they  had  conferred 
upon  men,  they  deserved  to  obtain  divine  hon- 
ours after  death  ;  and  temples  and  statues  being 
erected  to  them,  their  memory  was  retained  and 
celebrated  as  that  of  immortals. 

CHAP.     VII. OF    THE    WICKED     LIFE     AND     DEATH 

OF    HERCULES. 

But  though  almost  all  nations  are  persuaded 
that  they  are  gods,  yet  their  actions,  as  related 
both  by  poets  and  historians,  declare  that  they 
were  men.  Who  is  ignorant  of  the  times  in 
which  Hercules  lived,  since  he  both  sailed  with 
the  Argonauts  on  their  expedition,  and  having 
stormed  Troy,  slew  Laomedon,  the  father  of 
Priam,  on  account  of  his  perjury?  From  that 
time  rather  more  than  fifteen  hundred  years  are 


'  [See  Cyprian  on  Balaam,  vol.  v.  p.  502,  note  7.  A  hint  as  to 
the  qualified  inspiration  of  these  women  ] 

2  The  appointed  guardians  of  the  Sibylline  books.  At  first  there 
were  two;  the  number  was  afterwards  increased  to  ten,  and  subse- 
quently to  fifteen,  termed  Quindecemviri. 


reckoned.  He  is  said  not  even  to  have  been 
born  honourably,  but  to  have  been  sprung  from 
Alcmena  by  adultery,  and  to  have  been  himself 
addicted  to  the  vices  of  his  father.  He  never 
abstained  from  women,  or  males,  and  traversed 
the  whole  world,  not  so  much  for  the  sake  of 
glory  as  of  lust,  nor  so  much  for  the  slaughter 
of  beasts  as  for  the  begetting  of  children.  And 
though  he  was  unvanciuished,  yet  he  was  tri- 
umphed over  by  Omphale  alone,  to  whom  he 
gave  up  his  club  and  lion's  skin  ;  and  being 
clothed  in  a  woman's  garment,  and  crouching  at 
a  woman's  feet,  he  received  his  task  ^  to  execute. 
He  afterwards,  in  a  transport  of  frenzy,  killed  his 
little  children  and  his  wife  Megara.  At  last, 
having  put  on  a  garment  sent  by  his  wife  Deian- 
yra,  when  he  was  perishing  through  ulcers,  be- 
ing unable  to  endure  the  pain,  he  constructed 
for  himself  a  funeral  pile  on  Mount  QLta.,  and 
burnt  himself  alive.  Thus  it  is  effected,  that 
although  on  account  of  his  excellence  ■*  he  might 
have  been  believed  to  be  a  god,  nevertheless  on 
account  of  these  things  he  is  believed  to  have 
been  a  man. 

CHAP.  VIII.  —  OF  ^SCULAPIUS,  APOLLO,  MARS,  CAS- 
TOR AND  POLLUX,  AND  OF  MERCURIUS  AND 
BACCHUS. 

Tarquitius  relates  that  ^sculapius  was  bom 
of  doubtfiil  parents,  and  that  on  this  account  he 
was  exposed  ;  and  being  taken  up  by  hunters, 
and  fed  by  the  teats  of  a  hound,  was  given  to 
Chiron  for  instruction.  He  lived  at  Epidaurus, 
and  was  buried  at  Cynosurae,  as  Cicero  says,5 
when  he  had  been  killed  by  lightning.  But 
Apollo,  his  father,  did  not  disdain  to  take  charge 
of  another's  flock  that  he  might  receive  a  wife  ;  ^ 
and  when  he  had  unintentionally  killed  a  boy 
whom  he  loved,  he  inscribed  his  own  lamenta- 
tions on  a  flower.  Mars,  a  man  of  the  greatest 
bravery,  was  not  free  from  the  charge  of  adultery, 
since  he  was  made  a  spectacle,  being  bound 
with  a  chain  together  with  the  adulteress. 

Castor  and  Pollux  carried  off  the  brides  of 
others,  but  not  with  impunity,  to  whose  death 
and  burial  Homer  bears  witness,  not  with  poeti- 
cal, but  simple  faith.  Mercurius,  who  was  the 
father  of  Androgynus  by  his  intrigue  with  Venus, 
deserved  to  be  a  god,  because  he  invented  the 
lyre  and  the  palc^stra.  Father  Bacchus,  after 
subduing  India  as  a  conqueror,  having  by  chance 
come  to  Crete,  saw  Ariadne  on  the  shore,  whom 
Theseus  had  forced  and  deserted.  Then,  being 
inflamed  by  love,  he  united  her  in  marriage  to 


3  Pensa  quae  faceret.  "  Pensum "  properly  signifies  the  wool 
daily  weighed  out  and  given  to  each  servant. 

■t  Ob  virtutem. 

J  Cicero,  De  Nat.  Dear.,  iii.  22. 

6  When  Pelias  had  promised  his  daughter  Alcestis  to  Admetus,  on 
condition  of  his  coming  to  her  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  lions  and  boars, 
Apollo  enabled  Admetus  to  fulfil  this  condition. 


THE   EPITOME   OF   THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


227 


himself,  and  placed  her  crown,  as  the  poets  say, 
conspicuously  among  the  stars.  The  mother  of 
the  gods '  herself,  while  she  lived  in  Phrygia 
after  the  banishment  and  death  of  her  husband, 
though  a  widow,  and  aged,  was  enamoured  of  a 
beautiful  youth  ;  and  because  he  was  not  faithful, 
she  mutilated,  and  rendered  him  effeminate  :  on 
which  account  even  now  she  delights  in  the 
Galli^  as  her  priests. 

CHAP.    IX.  —  OF   THE    DISGRACEFUL    DEEDS   OF   THE 
GODS. 

Whence  did  Ceres  bring  forth  Proserpine,  ex- 
cept from  debauchery?  Whence  did  Latona 
bring  forth  her  twins,  except  from  crime?  Venus 
having  been  subject  to  the  lusts  of  gods  and 
men,  when  she  reigned  in  Cyprus,  invented  the 
practice  of  courtesanship,  and  commanded  wo- 
men to  make  traffic  of  themselves,  that  she  might 
not  alone  be  infamous.  Were  the  virgins  them- 
selves, Minerva  and  Diana,  chaste  ?  Whence, 
then,  did  Erichthonius  arise?  Did  Vulcan  shed 
his  seed  upon  the  ground,  and  was  man  born 
from  that  as  a  fungus  ?  Or  why  did  Diana  ban- 
ish Hippolytus  either  to  a  retired  place,  or  give 
him  up  to  a  woman,  where  he  might  pass  his 
life  in  solitude  among  unknown  groves,  and  hav- 
ing now  changed  his  name,  might  be  called 
Virbius?  What  do  these  things  signify  but  im- 
purity, which  the  poets  do  not  venture  to  con- 
fess? 

CHAP.  X. OF   JUPITER,  AND    HIS    LICENTIOUS  LIFE. 

But  respecting  the  king  and  father  of  all  these, 
Jupiter,  whom  they  believe  to  possess  the  chief 
power  in  heaven,  —  what  power  ^  had  he,  who 
banished  his  father  Saturnus  from  his  kingdom, 
and  pursued  him  with  arms  when  he  fled?  What 
self-restraint  had  he,  who  indulged  every  kind 
of  lust  ?  For  he  made  Alcmena  and  Leda,  the 
wives  of  great  men,  infamous  through  his  adul- 
tery :  he  also,  captivated  with  the  beauty  of  a 
boy,  carried  him  off  with  violence  as  he  was 
hunting  and  meditating  manly  things,  that  he 
might  treat  him  as  a  woman.  Why  should  I 
mention  his  debaucheries  of  virgins?  and  how 
great  a  multitude  of  these  there  was,  is  shown 
by  the  number  of  his  sons.  In  the  case  of 
Thetis  alone  he  was  more  temperate.  For  it 
had  been  predicted  that  the  son  whom  she 
should  bring  forth  would  be  more  powerful  than 
his  father.  Therefore  he  struggled  with  his 
love,  that  one  might  not  be  born  greater  than 
himself.  He  knew,  therefore,  that  he  was  not 
of  perfect  virtue,  greatness,  and  power,  since  he 

'  Rhea,  or  Cybele. 

=  Galli,  the  priests  of  Cybele,  were  so  called:  they  mutilated  them- 
selves, and  performed  many  raving  ceremonies. 

3  Quid  potestatis.  Others  read  "  pietatis,"  which  appears  more 
suitable  to  the  sense  of  the  passage. 


feared  that  which  he  himself  had  done  to  his 
father.  Why,  therefore,  is  he  called  best  and 
greatest,  since  he  both  contaminated  himself 
with  faults,  which  is  the  part  of  one  wlio  is 
unjust  and  bad,  and  feared  a  greater  than  him- 
self, which  is  the  part  of  one  who  is  weak  and 
inferior  ? 

CHAP.    XI. THE  VARIOUS  EMBLEMS    UNDER  WHICH 

THE    POETS    VEILED    THE   TURPITUDE    OF    JUPITER. 

But  some  one  will  say  that  these  things  are 
feigned  by  the  poets.  This  is  not  the  usage  of 
the  poets,  to  feign  in  such  a  manner  that  you 
fabricate  the  whole,  but  so  that  you  cover  the 
actions  themselves  with  a  figure,  and,  as  it  were, 
with  a  variegated  veil.  Poetic  licence  has  this 
limit,  not  that  it  may  invent  the  whole,  which  is 
the  part  of  one  who  is  false  and  senseless,  but 
that  it  may  change  something  consistently  with 
reason.  They  said  that  Jupiter  changed  him- 
self into  a  shower  of  gold,  that  he  might  deceive 
Danae.  What  is  a  shower  of  gold  ?  Plainly 
golden  coins,  by  offering  a  great  quantity  of 
which,  and  pouring  them  into  her  bosom,  he 
corrupted  the  frailty  of  her  virgin  soul  by  this 
bribe.  Thus  also  they  speak  of  a  shower  of 
iron,  when  they  wish  to  signify  a  multitude  of 
javelins.  He  carried  off  his  catamite  upon  an 
eagle.  What  is  the  eagle  ?  Truly  a  legion, 
since  the  figure  of  this  animal  is  the  standard  of 
the  legion.  He  carried  Europa  across  the  sea 
on  a  bull.  What  is  the  bull  ?  Clearly  a  ship, 
which  had  its  tutelary  image  '^  fashioned  in  the 
shape  of  a  bull.  So  assuredly  the  daughter  of 
Inachus  was  not  turned  into  a  cow,  nor  as  such 
did  she  swim  across,  but  she  escaped  the  anger 
of  Juno  in  a  ship  which  had  the  form  of  a  cow. 
Lastly,  when  she  had  been  conveyed  to  Egypt, 
she  became  Isis,  whose  voyage  is  celebrated  on 
a  fixed  day,  in  memory  of  her  flight, 

CHAP.     XII.  —  THE     POETS     DO     NOT     INVENT     ALL 
THOSE   THINGS    WHICH    RELATE   TO   THE   GODS. 

You  see,  then,  that  the  poets  did  not  invent 
all  things,  and  that  they  prefigured  some  things, 
that,  when  they  spoke  the  truth,  they  might  add 
something  like  this  of  divinity  to  those  whom 
they  called  gods  ;  as  they  did  also  respecting 
their  kingdoms.  For  when  they  say  that  Jupiter 
had  by  lot  the  kingdom  of  Ccelus,  they  either 
mean  Mount  Olympus,  on  which  ancient  stories 
relate  that  Saturnus,  and  afterwards  Jupiter, 
dwelt,  or  a  part  of  the  East,  which  is,  as  it  were, 
higher,  because  the  light  arises  thence  ;  but  the 
region  of  the  West  is  lower,  and  therefore  they 
say  that  Pluto  obtained  the  lower  regions ;  but 
that  the  sea  was  given  to  Neptune,  because  he 


*  Tutela.     The  image  of  some  deity,  supposed  to  be  the  tutelary 
guardian  of  the  ship,  was  usually  painted  on  the  stern. 


228 


THE    EPITOME    OF    THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


had  the  maritime  coast,  with  all  the  islands. 
Many  things  are  thus  coloured  by  the  poets ; 
and  they  who  are  ignorant  of  this,  censure  them 
as  false,  but  only  in  word  :  for  in  fact  they  be- 
lieve them,  since  they  so  fashion  the  images  of 
the  gods,  that  when  they  make  them  male  and 
female,  and  confess  that  some  are  married,  some 
parents,  and  some  children,  they  plainly  assent 
to  the  poets  ;  for  these  relations  cannot  exist  with- 
out intercourse  and  the  generation  of  children. 

CHAP.    XIII.  —  THE    ACTIONS    OF    JUPITER    ARE     RE- 
L.VrED    FROM    THE    HISTORIAN    EUHEMERUS. 

But  let  us  leave  the  poets  ;  let  us  come  to  his- 
tory, which  is  supported  both  by  the  credibility 
of  the  facts  and  by  the  antiquity  of  the  times. 
Euhemerus  was  a  Messenian,  a  very  ancient 
writer,  who  gave  an  account  of  the  origin  of 
Jupiter,  and  his  exploits,  and  all  his  posterity, 
gathered  from  the  sacred  inscriptions  of  ancient 
temples  ;  he  also  traced  out  the  parents  of  the 
other  gods,  their  countries,  actions,  commands, 
and  deaths,  and  even  their  sepulchres.  And 
this  history  Ennius  translated  into  Latin,  whose 
words  are  these  :  — 

"As  these  things  are  written,  so  is  the  origin  and  kindred 
of  Jupiter  and  his  brothers;  after  this  manner  it 
is  handed  down  to  us  in  the  sacred  writing." 

The  same  Euhemerus  therefore  relates  that  Jupi- 
ter, when  he  had  five  times  gone  round  the  world, 
and  had  distributed  governments  to  his  friends 
and  relatives,  and  had  given  laws  to  men,  and 
had  wrought  many  other  benefits,  being  endued 
with  immortal  glory  and  everlasting  remem- 
brance, ended  his  life  in  Crete,  and  departed  to 
the  gods,  and  that  his  sepulchre  is  in  Crete,  in  the 
town  of  Gnossus,  and  thai  upon  it  is  engraved  in 
ancient  Greek  letters  Zankronou,  which  is  Jupi- 
ter the  son  of  Saturnus.  It  is  plain,  therefore, 
from  the  things  which  I  have  related,  that  he 
was  a  man,  and  reigned  on  the  earth. 

CHAP.  XIV.  —  THE  ACTIONS  OF  SATURNUS  AND 
UR-^NUS   TAKEN    FROM    THE   HISTORIANS. 

Let  us  pass  on  to  former  things,  that  we  may 
discover  the  origin  of  the  whole  error.  Saturnus 
is  said  to  have  been  born  of  Crelus  and  Terra. 
This  is  plainly  incredible  ;  but  there  is  a  certain 
reason  why  it  is  thus  related,  and  he  who  is  igno- 
rant of  this  rejects  it  as  a  fable.  That  Uranus 
was  the  father  of  Saturnus,  both  Hermes  affirms, 
and  sacred  history  teaches.  When  Trismegistus 
said  that  there  were  very  few  men  of  perfect 
learning,  he  enumerated  among  them  his  rela- 
tives, Uranus,  Saturnus,  and  Mercurius.  Eu- 
hemerus relates  that  the  same  Uranus  was  the 
first  who  reigned  on  earth,  using  these  words  : 
"  In  the    beginning  Coelus    first   had   the  chief 


power  on  earth  :  he  instituted  and  prepared  that 
kingdom  for  himself  together  with  his  brothers."  ' 

CHAP.  XX. OF  THE  GODS  PECULIAR  TO  THE 

ROMANS. 

I  have  spoken  of  the  religious  rites  which  are 
common  to  all  nations.  I  will  now  speak  of  the 
gods  which  the  Romans  have  peculiar  to  them- 
selves. Who  does  not  know  that  the  wife  of 
Faustulus,  the  nurse  of  Romulus  and  Remus,  in 
honour  of  whom  the  Larentinalia  were  instituted, 
was  a  harlot?  And  for  this  reason  she  was 
called  Lupa,  and  represented  in  the  form  of  a 
wild  beast.  Faula  also  and  Flora  were  harlots, 
of  whom  the  one  was  the  mistress  of  Hercules, 
as  Verrius  relates ;  the  other,  having  acquired 
great  wealth  by  her  person,  made  the  people  her 
heir,  and  on  this  account  the  games  called 
Floralia  are  celebrated  in  her  honour. 

Tatius  consecrated  the  statue  of  a  woman 
which  had  been  found  in  the  principal  sewer, 
and  called  it  by  the  name  of  the  goddess  Cloa- 
cina.  The  Romans,  being  besieged  by  the  Gauls, 
made  engines  for  throwing  weapons  of  the  hair 
of  women  ;  and  on  this  account  they  erected  an 
altar  and  temple  to  Venus  Calva  :  ^  also  to  Jupi- 
ter Pistor,3  because  he  had  advised  them  in  a 
dream  to  make  all  their  corn  into  bread,  and  to 
throw  it  upon  the  enemy ;  and  when  this  had 
been  done,  the  Gauls,  despairing  of  being  able 
to  reduce  the  Romans  by  famine,  had  abandoned 
the  siege.  Tullus  Ho'stilius  made  Fear  and  Pal- 
lor gods.  Mind  is  also  worshipped  ;  but  if  they 
had  possessed  it,  they  would  never,  I  believe, 
have  thought  that  it  ought  to  be  worshipped. 
Marcellus  originated  Honour  and  Virtue. 

CHAP.    XXI. OF   THE    SACRED    RITES    OF   THE 

ROMAN    GODS. 

But  the  senate  also  instituted  other  false  gods 
of  this  kind,  —  Hope,  Faith,  Concord,  Peace, 
Chastity,  Piety ;  all  of  which,  since  they  ought 
truly  to  be  in  the  minds  of  men,  they  have  falsely 
placed  within  walls.  But  although  these  have  no 
substantial  existence  outside  of  man,  neverthe- 
less I  should  prefer  that  they  should  be  wor- 
shipped, rather  than  Blight  or  Fever,  which  ought 
not  to  be  consecrated,  but  rather  to  be  exe- 
crated ;  than  Fornax,  together  with  her  sacred 
ovens  ;  than  Stercutus,  who  first  showed  men  to 
enrich  the  ground  with  manure ;  than  the  god- 
dess Muta,  who  brought  forth  the  Lares  ;  than 
Cumina,  who  presides  over  the  cradles  of  infants  ; 
than  Caca,  who  gave  information  to  Hercules  re- 
specting the  stealing  of  his  cattle,  that  he  might 
slay  her  brother.    How  many  other  monstrous  and 

'  From  this  point  the  manuscripts  are  defective  to  ch.  xx. 
^  i.e.,  Venus  the  bald. 
3  i.e.,  Jupiter  the  baker. 


THE    EPITOME    OF    THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


229 


ludicrous  fictions  there  are,  respecting  which  it 
is  grievous  to  speak  !  I  do  not,  however,  wish 
to  omit  notice  of  Terminus,  since  it  is  related 
that  he  did  not  give  way  even  to  Jupiter,  though 
he  was  an  unwrought  stone.  They  suppose  that 
he  has  the  custody  of  the  boundaries,  and  pub- 
lic prayers  are  offered  to  him,  that  he  may  keep 
the  stone  of  the  Capitol  immoveable,  and  pre- 
serve and  extend  the  boundaries  of  the  Roman 
empire. 

CHAP.  XXII. OF   THE    SACRED    RITES    INTRODUCED 

BY  FAUNUS  AND  NUMA. 

Faunuswasthe  first  in  Latiumwho  introduced 
these  follies,  who  both  instituted  bloody  sacrifices 
to  his  grandfather  Saturnus,  and  wished  that  his 
father  Picus  should  be  worshipped  as  a  god,  and 
placed  Fatua  Fauna  his  wife  and  sister  among 
the  gods,  and  named  her  the  good  goddess. 
Then  at  Rome,  Numa,  who  burthened  those 
rude  and  rustic  men  with  new  superstitions,  in- 
stituted priesthoods,  and  distributed  the  gods 
into  families  and  nations,  that  he  might  call  off 
the  fierce  spirits  of  the  people  from  the  pursuits 
of  arms.  Therefore  Lucilius,  in  deriding  the 
folly  of  those  who  are  slaves  to  vain  superstitions, 
introduced  these  verses  :  — 

"  Those  bugbears  '  the  Lamis,  which  Faumisand  Numa 
Pompilius  and  others  instituted,  at  these  he  trem- 
bles ;  he  places  everything  in  this.  As  infant  boys 
believe  that  every  statue  of  bronze  is  a  living  man, 
so  these  imagine  that  all  things  feigned  are  true  : 
they  believe  that  statues  of  bronze  contain  a  heart. 
It  is  a  painter's^  gallery;  nothing  is  real,  every- 
thing fictitious." 

Tullius  also,  writing  of  the  nature  of  the  gods, 
complains  that  false  and  fictitious  gods  have 
been  introduced,  and  that  from  this  source  l!ave 
arisen  false  opinions,  and  turbulent  errors,  and 
almost  old  womanly  superstitions,  which  opinion 
ought  in  comparison^  with  others  to  be  esteemed 
more  weighty,  because  these  things  were  spoken 
by  one  who  was  both  a  philosopher  and  a  priest. 

CHAP.  XXIII. OF  THE   GODS   AND   SACRED  RITES  OF 

THE  BARBARIANS. 

We  have  spoken  respecting  the  gods  :  now 
we  will  speak  of  the  rites  and  practices  of  their 
sacred  institutions.  A  human  victim  used  to  be 
immolated  to  the  Cyprian  Jupiter,  as  Teucer  had 
appointed.  Thus  also  the  Tauri  used  to  offer 
strangers  to  Diana;  the  Latian  Jupiter  also  was 
propitiated  with  human  blood.  Also  before  Sa- 
turnus, men  of  sixty  years  of  age,  according  to 
the  oj;acle  "*  of  Apollo,  were  thrown  from  a  bridge 
into  the  Tiber.     And  the  Carthaginians  not  only 

'  Terriculas.     There  is  another  reading,  "  terricolas."     See  note 
at  Institutes,  book  i.  ch.  22,  p   38,  sufira. 
^  Sec  preceding  note  and  reference. 
3  Comparari.     CHhers  re.id  "  compatari." 
*  Ex  response.     The  common  reading  is  "  ex  persona." 


offered  infants  to  the  same  Saturnus  ;  but  being 
conquered  by  the  Sicilians,  to  make  an  expiation, 
they  immolated  two  hundred  sons  of  nobles. 
And  not  more  mild  than  these  are  those  offer- 
ings which  are  even  now  made  to  the  Great 
Mother  and  to  Bellona,  in  which  the  priests  make 
an  offering,  not  with  the  blood  of  others,  but 
with  their  own  blood ;  when,  mutilating  them- 
selves, they  cease  to  be  men,  and  yet  do  not 
pass  over  to  the  women  ;  or,  cutting  their  shoul- 
ders, they  sprinkle  the  loathsome  altars  with  their 
own  blood.     But  these  things  are  cruel. 

Let  us  come  to  those  which  are  mild.  The 
sacred  rites  of  Isis  show  nothing  else  than  the 
manner  in  which  she  lost  and  found  her  little 
son,  who  is  called  Osiris.  For  first  her  priests 
and  attendants,  having  shaved  all  their  limbs, 
and  beating  their  breasts,  howl,  lament,  and 
search,  imitating  the  manner  in  which  his  mother 
was  affected ;  afterwards  the  boy  is  found  by 
Cynocephalus.  Thus  the  mournful  rites  are 
ended  with  gladness.  The  mystery  of  Ceres 
also  resembles  these,  in  which  torches  are  lighted, 
and  Proserpine  is  sought  for  through  the  night ; 
and  when  she  has  been  found,  the  whole  rite  is 
finished  with  congratulations  and  the  throwing 
about  of  torches.  The  people  of  Lampsacus, 
offer  an  ass  to  Priapus  as  an  appropriate  victim. 5 
Lindus  is  a  town  of  Rhodes,  where  sacred  rites 
in  honour  of  Hercules  are  celebrated  with  re- 
vilings.  For  when  Hercules  had  taken  away  his 
oxen  from  a  ploughman,  and  had  slain  them,  he 
avenged  his  injury  by  taunts  ;  and  afterwards 
ha\ing  been  himself  appointed  priest,  it  was  or- 
dained that  he  himself,  and  other  priests  after 
him,  should  celebrate  sacrifices  with  the  same 
revilings.  But  the  mystery  of  the  Cretan  Jupiter 
represents  the  manner  in  which  he  was  withdrawn 
from  his  father,  or  brought  up.  The  goat  is  be- 
side him,  by  the  teats  of  which  Amalthea  nour- 
ished the  boy.  The  sacred  rites  of  the  mother 
of  the  gods  also  show  the  same  thing.  For  be- 
cause the  Corybantes  then  drowned  the  cry  of 
the  boy  by  the  tinkling  of  their  helmets  and  the 
striking  of  their  shields,  a  representation  of  this 
circumstance  is  now  repeated  in  the  sacred  rites  ; 
but  cymbals  are  beaten  instead  of  helmets,  and 
drums  instead  of  shields,  that  Saturnus  may  not 
hear  the  cries  of  the  boy. 

CHAP.    XXIV. OF   THE   ORIGIN     OF    SACRED     RITES 

AND    SUPERSTITIONS. 

These  are  the  mysteries  of  the  gods.  Now 
let  us  inquire  also  into  the  origin  of  superstitions, 
that  we  may  search  out  by  whom  and  at  what 
times  they  were  instituted.  Didymus,  in  those 
books  which  are  inscribed   Of  the  Explanation 


S  Ea  enim  visa  est  aptior  victima,  quae  ipsi,  cui  mactatur,  magni- 
tudine  virilis  obsceni  posset  a;quan. 


230 


THE    EPITOME    OF   THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


of  Pindar,  relates  that  Melisseus  was  king  of 
the  Cretans,  whose  daughters  were  Amalthea 
and  MeHssa,  who  nourished  Jupiter  with  goats' 
milk  and  honey ;  that  he  introduced  new  rites 
and  ceremonies  of  sacred  things,  and  was  the 
first  who  sacrificed  to  gods,  that  is,  to  Vesta, 
who  is  called  Tellus,  —  whence  the  poet  says  :  — 

"  And  the  first  of  the  gods, 
Tellus,"  — 

and  afterwards  to  the  mother  of  the  gods.  But 
Euhemerus,  in  his  sacred  history,  says  that  Ju- 
piter himself,  after  that  he  received  the  govern- 
ment, erected  temples  in  honour  of  himself  in 
many  places.  For  in  going  about  the  world,  as 
he  came  to  each  place,  he  united  the  chiefs  of 
the  people  to  himself  in  friendship  and  the  right 
of  hospitality ;  and  that  the  remembrance  of 
this  might  be  preserved,  he  ordered  that  tem- 
ples should  be  built  to  him,  and  annual  festivals 
be  celebrated  by  those  connected  with  him  in  a 
league  of  hospitality.  Thus  he  spread  the  wor- 
ship of  himself  through  all  lands.  But  at  what 
time  they  lived  can  easily  be  inferred.  For 
Thallus  writes  in  his  history,  that  Belus,  the 
king  of  the  Assyrians,  whom  the  Babylonians 
worsliip,  and  who  was  the  contemporary  and 
friend  of  Saturnus,  was  three  hundred  and 
twenty-two  years  before  the  Trojan  war,  and  it 
is  fourteen  hundred  and  seventy  years  since  the 
taking  of  Troy.  From  which  it  is  evident,  that 
it  is  not  more  than  eighteen  hundred  years  from 
the  time  when  mankind  fell  into  error  by  the 
institution  of  new  forms  of  divine  worship. 

CHAP.    XXV.  OF    THE     GOLDEN    AGE,    OF     IMAGES, 

AND    PROMETHEUS,    WHO    FIRST    FASHIONED    MAN. 

The  poets,  therefore,  with  good  reason  say 
that  the  golden  age,  which  existed  in  the  reign 
of  Saturnus,  was  changed.  For  at  that  time  no 
gods  were  worshipped,  but  they  knew  of  one 
God  only.  After  that  they  subjected  themselves 
to  frail  and  earthly  things,  worshipping  idols  of 
wood,  and  brass,  and  stone,  a  change  took 
place  from  the  golden  age  to  that  of  iron.  For 
having  lost  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  broken 
off  that  one  bond  of  human  society,  they  began 
to  harass  one  another,  to  plunder  and  subdue. 
But  if  they  would  raise  their  eyes  aloft  and 
behold  God,  who  raised  them  up  to  the  sight  of 
heaven  and  Himself,  they  never  would  bend  and 
prostrate  themselves  byworshipping  earthly  things, 
whose  folly  Lucretius  severely  rebukes,  saying  : ' 

"  And  they  abase  their  souls  with  fear  of  the  gods,  and 
weigh  and  press  them  down  to  the  earth." 

Wherefore  they  tremble,  and  do  not  under- 
stand   how    foolish   it   is  to    fear   those    things 


'  De  Nat.  Dear.,  vi.  52. 

2  Quare  tremunt.     Another  reading  is,  "qua  reddunt,"  which  is 
unintelligible. 


which  you  have  made,  or  to  hope  for  any  pro- 
tection from  those  things  which  are  dumb  and 
insensible,  and  neither  see  nor  hear  the  sup- 
pliant. What  majesty,  therefore,  or  deity  can 
they  have,  which  were  in  the  power  of  a  man, 
that  they  should  not  be  made,  or  that  they 
should  be  made  into  some  other  thing,  and  are 
so  even  now?  For  they  are  liable  to  injury  and 
might  be  carried  off  by  theft,  were  it  not  that 
they  are  protected  by  the  law  and  the  guardian- 
ship of  man.  Does  he  therefore  appear  to  be 
in  possession  of  his  senses,  who  sacrifices  to 
such  deities  the  choicest  victims,  consecrates 
gifts,  offers  costly  garments,  as  if  they  who  are 
without  motion  could  use  them?  With  reason, 
then,  did  Dionysius  the  tyrant  of  Sicily  plunder 
and  deride  the  gods  of  Greece  when  he  had 
taken  possession  of  it  as  conqueror ;  and  after 
the  sacrilegious  acts  which  he  had  committed, 
he  returned  to  Sicily  with  a  prosperous  voyage, 
and  held  the  kingdom  even  to  his  old  age  :  nor 
were  the  injured  gods  able  to  punish  him. 

How  much  better  is  it  to  despise  vanities,  and 
to  turn  to  God,  to  maintain  the  condition  which 
you  have  received  from  God,  to  maintain  your 
name  !  For  on  this  account  he  is  called  antliro- 
posy-  because  he  looks  upward.  But  he  looks 
upward  who  looks  up  to  the  true  and  living  God, 
who  is  in  heaven ;  who  seeks  after  the  Maker 
and  Parent  of  his  soul,  not  only  with  his  percep- 
tion and  mind,  but  also  with  his  countenance 
and  eyes  raised  aloft.  But  he  who  enslaves  him- 
self to  earthly  and  humble  things,  plainly  pre- 
fers to  himself  that  which  is  below  him.  For 
since  he  himself  is  the  workmanship  of  God, 
whereas  an  image  is  the  workmanship  of  man, 
theliuman  workmanship  cannot  be  preferred  to 
the  divine ;  and  as  God  is  the  parent  of  man, 
so  is  the  man  of  the  statue.  Therefore  he  is 
foolish  and  senseless  who  adores  that  which  he 
himself  has  made,  of  which  detestable  and  fool- 
ish handicraft  Prometheus  was  the  author,  who 
was  born  from  lapetus  the  uncle  of  Jupiter. 
For  when  first  of  all  Jupiter,  having  obtained 
supreme  dominion,  wished  to  establish  himself 
as  a  god,  and  to  found  temples,  and  was  seeking 
for  some  one  who  was  able  to  imitate  the  human 
figure,  at  that  time  Prometheus  lived,  who  fash- 
ioned the  image  of  a  man  from  thick  clay  with 
such  close  resemblance,  that  the  novelty  and 
cleverness  of  the  art  was  a  wonder.  At  length 
the  men  of  his  own  time,  and  afterwards  the 
poets,  handed  him  down  as  the  maker  of  a  true 
and  living  man  ;  and  we,  as  often  as  we  praise 
wrought  statues,  say  that  they  live  and  breathe. 
And  he  indeed  was  the  inventor  of  earthenware 
images.  But  posterity,  following  him,  both 
carved  them  out  of  marble,  and  moulded  them 


3  ai'SitoTTo?,  man  ;   said  to  be  compounded  of  aru),  rpema,  and  mJj, 
to  turn  the  face  upwards.     [Needlessly  repeated  from  p.  41,  su/ra.] 


THE   EPITOME   OF   THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


2^  I 


out  of  bronze  ;  then  in  process  of  time  orna- 
ment was  added  of  gold  and  ivory,  so  that  not 
only  the  likenesses,  but  also  the  gleam  itself, 
might  dazzle  the  eyes.  Thus  ensnared  by  beau- 
ty, and  forgetful  of  true  majesty,  sensible  beings 
considered  that  insensible  objects,  rational  beings 
that  irrational  objects,  living  beings  that  lifeless 
objects,  were  to  be  worshipped  and  reverenced 
by  them. 

CHAP.   XXVI.  —  OF  THE  WORSHIP  OF  THE  ELEMENTS 
AND    STARS. 

Now  let  us  refute  those  also  who  regard  the 
elements  of  the  world  as  gods,  that  is,  the 
heaven,  the  sun,  and  the  moon  ;  for  being  igno- 
rant of  the  Maker  of  these  things,  they  admire 
and  adore  the  works  themselves.  And  this  error 
belongs  not  to  the  ignorant  only,  but  also  to 
philosophers;  since  the  Stoics  are  of  opinion 
that  all  the  heavenly  bodies  are  to  be  considered 
as  among  the  number  of  the  gods,  since  they 
all  have  fixed  and  regular  motions,  by  which 
they  most  constantly  preserve  the  vicissitudes  of 
the  times  which  succeed  them.  They  do  not 
then  possess  voluntary  motion,  since  they  obey 
prescribed  laws,  and  plainly  not  by  their  own 
sense,  but  by  the  workmanship  of  the  supreme 
Creator,  who  so  ordered  them  that  they  should 
complete  unerring  '  courses  and  fixed  circuits, 
by  which  they  might  vary  the  alternations  of 
days  and  nights,  of  summer  and  winter.  But  if 
men  admire  the  effects  of  these,  if  they  admire 
their  courses,  their  brightness,  their  regularity, 
their  beauty,  they  ought  to  have  understood 
how  much  more  beautiful,  more  illustrious,  and 
more  powerful  than  these  is  the  maker  and  con- 
triver Himself,  even  God.  But  they  estimated 
the  Divinity  by  objects  which  fall  under  the 
sight  of  men  ;  ^  not  knowing  that  objects  which 
come  within  the  sight  cannot  be  eternal,  and 
that  those  which  are  eternal  cannot  be  discerned 
by  mortal  eyes. 

CHAP.  XXVII. OF  THE  CREATION,  SIN,  AND  PUN- 
ISHMENT OF  MAN  ;  AND  OF  ANGELS,  BOTH  GOOD 
AND  BAD. 

One  subject  remains,  and  that  the  last :  that, 
since  it  usually  happens,  as  we  read  in  histories, 
that  the  gods  appear  to  have  displayed  their 
majesty  by  auguries,  by  dreams,  by  oracles,  and 
also  by  the  punishments  of  those  who  had  com- 
mitted sacrilege,  I  may  show  what  cause  pro- 
duced this  effect,  so  that  no  one  even  now  may 
fall  into  the  same  snares  into  which  those  of  old 
fell.  When  God,  according  to  His  excellent 
majesty,  had  framed  the  world  out  of  nothing, 


and  had  decked  the  heaven  with  lights,  and  had 
filled  the  earth  and  the  sea  with  living  creatures, 
then  He  formed  man  out  of  clay,  and  fashioned 
him  after  the  resemblance  of  His  own  likeness, 
and  breathed  into  him  that  he  might  live,^  and 
placed  him  in  a  garden  ^  which  He  had  planted 
with  every  kind  of  fruit-bearing  tree,  and  com- 
manded him  not  to  eat  of  one  tree  in  which  He 
had  placed  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil, 
warning  him  that  it  would  come  to  pass,  that  if 
he  did  so  he  would  lose  his  life,  but  that  if  he 
observed  the  command  of  God  he  would  re- 
main immortal.  Then  the  serpent,  who  was  one 
of  the  servants  of  God,  envying  man  because  he 
was  made  immortal,  enticed  him  by  stratagem 
to  transgress  the  command  and  law  of  God. 
And  in  this  manner  he  did  indeed  receive  the 
knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  but  he  lost  the  life 
which  God  had  given  him  to  be  for  ever. 

Therefore  He  drove  out  the  sinner  from  the 
sacred  place,  and  banished  him  into  this  world, 
that  he  might  seek  sustenance  by  labour,  that  he 
might  according  to  his  deserts  undergo  difficul- 
ties and  troubles  ;  and  He  surrounded  the  garden 
itself  with  a  fence  of  fire,  that  none  of  men  even 
till  the  day  of  judgment  might  attempt  secretly  5 
to  enter  into  that  place  of  perpetual  blessedness. 
Then  death  came  upon  man  according  to  the 
sentence  of  God  ;  and  yet  his  life,  though  it  had 
begun  to  be  temporary,  had  as  its  boundary  a 
thousand  years,  and  that  was  the  extent  of  hu- 
man life  even  to  the  deluge.  For  after  the  flood 
the  life  of  men  was  gradually  shortened,  and  was 
reduced  to  a  hundred  and  twenty  years.  But 
that  serpent,  who  from  his  deeds  received  the 
name  of  devil,  that  is,  accuser  or  informer,  did 
not  cease  to  persecute  the  seed  of  man,  whom 
he  had  deceived  from  the  beginning.  At  length 
he  urged  him  who  was  first  born  in  this  world, 
under  the  impulse  of  envy,  to  the  murder  of  his 
brother,  that  of  the  two  men  who  were  first  born 
he  might  destroy  the  one,  and  make  the  other 
a  parricide.^  Nor  did  he  cease  upon  this  from 
infiising  the  venom  of  malice  into  the  breasts  of 
men  through  each  generation,  from  corrupting 
and  depraving  them  ;  in  short,  from  overwhelm- 
ing them  with  such  crimes,  that  an  instance  of 
justice  was  now  rare,  but  men  lived  after  the 
manner  of  the  beasts. 

But  when  God  saw  this.  He  sent  His  angels 
to  instruct  the  race  of  men,  and  to  protect  them 
from  all  evil.  He  gave  these  a  command  to 
abstain  from  earthly  things,  lest,  being  polluted 
by  any  taint,  they  should  be  deprived  of  the 
honour  of  angels.  But  that  wily  accuser,  while 
they  tarried  among  men,  allured  these  also  to 


'  Inerrabiles.     There  is  another  reading,  "  inenarrabiles,"  inde- 
scribable. 

*  Humanis  visibus. 


3  Inspiravit  ad  vitam. 
*  I'aradiso. 
5   Irrepere 

*>  Parrlcidam.     The  word  first  means  the  murderer  of  a  parent  oi 
near  relative;   then  simply  a  murderer. 


THE    EPITOME    OF   THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


pleasures,  so  that  they  might  defile  themselves 
with  women.  Then,  being  condemned  by  the 
sentence  of  God,  and  cast  forth  on  account  of 
their  sins,  they  lost  both  the  name  and  substance 
of  angels.  Tiuis,  having  become  ministers  of 
the  devil,  that  they  might  have  a  solace  of  their 
ruin,  they  betook  themselves  to  the  ruining  of 
men,  for  whose  protection  they  had  come.' 

CHAP.  XXVIII. OF   THE    DEMONS,  AND    THEIR   EVIL 

PR.A.CTICES. 

These  are  the  demons,  of  whom  the  poets  often 
speak  in  their  poems,  whom  Hesiod  calls  the 
guardians  of  men.  For  they  so  persuaded  men 
by  their  enticements  and  deceits,  that  they  be- 
lieved that  the  same  were  gods.  In  fine,  Socrates 
used  to  give  out  that  he  had  a  demon  as  the 
guardian  and  director  of  his  life  from  his  first 
childhood,  and  that  he  could  do  nothing  without 
his  assent  and  command.  They  attach  them- 
selves, therefore,  to  individuals,  and  occupy 
houses  under  the  name  of  Genii  or  Penates. 
To  these  temples  are  built,  to  these  libations 
are  daily  offered  as  to  the  Lares,  to  these  hon- 
our is  paid  as  to  the  averters  of  evils.  These 
from  the  beginning,  that  they  might  turn  away 
men  from  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God,  intro- 
duced new  superstitions  and  worship  of  gods. 
These  taught  that  the  memory  of  dead  kings 
should  be  consecrated,  temples  be  built,  and 
images  made,  not  that  they  might  lessen  the 
honour  of  God,  or  increase  their  own,  which 
they  lost  by  sinning,  but  that  they  might  take 
away  life  from  men,  deprive  them  of  the  hope 
of  true  light,  lest  men  should  arrive  at  that  heav- 
enly reward  of  immortality  from  which  they  fell. 
They  also  brought  to  light  astrology,  and  augury, 
and  divination ;  and  though  these  things  are  in 
themselves  false,  yet  they  themselves,  the  authors 
of  evils,  so  govern  and  regulate  them  that  they 
are  believed  to  be  true.  They  also  invented  the 
tricks  of  the  magic  art,  to  deceive  the  eyes.  By 
their  aid  it  comes  to  pass,  that  that  which  is 
appears  not  to  be,  and  that  which  is  not  appears 
to  be.  They  themselves  invented  necromancies, 
responses,  and  oracles,  to  delude  the  minds  of 
men  with  lying  divination  by  means  of  ambigu- 
ous issues.  They  are  present  in  the  temples  and 
at  all  sacrifices ;  and  by  the  exhibition  of  some 
deceitful  prodigies,  to  the  surprise  of  those  who 
are  present,  they  so  deceive  men,  that  they  be- 
lieve that  a  divine  power  is  present  in  images 
and  statues.  They  even  enter  secretly  into  bod- 
ies, as  being  slight  spirits  ;  and  they  excite  dis- 
eases in  the  vitiated  limbs,  which  when  appeased 
with  sacrifices  and  vows  they  may  again  remove. 
They  send  dreams   either  full   of  terror,^  that 

'  [This  IS  a  curious  enlargement  of  the  idea  as  taught  elsewhere. 
See  vol.  ii   p.  142,  this  series,  j 

^  Plena  terroris.     Another  reading  is,  "  aut  plane  terrores." 


they  themselves  may  be  invoked,  or  the  issues 
of  which  may  correspond  with  the  truth,  that 
they  may  increase  the  veneration  paid  to  them- 
selves. Sometimes  also  they  put  forth  something 
of  vengeance  against  the  sacrilegious,  that  who- 
ever sees  it  may  become  more  timid  and  super- 
stitious. Thus  by  their  frauds  they  have  drawn 
darkness  over  the  human  race,  that  truth  might 
be  oppressed,  and  the  name  of  the  supreme  and 
matchless  God  might  be  forgotten. 

CHAP.  XXIX. OF  THE   PATIENCE  AND  PROVIDENCE 

OF    GOD. 

But  some  one  says  :  Why,  then,  does  the  true 
God  permit  these  things  to  be  done  ?  Why  does 
He  not  rather  remove  or  destroy  the  wicked? 
Why,  in  truth,  did  He  from  the  beginning  give 
power  ^  to  the  demon,  so  that  there  should  be 
one  who  might  corrupt  and  destroy  all  things? 
I  will  briefly  say  why  He  willed  that  this  should 
be  so.  I  ask  whether  virtue  is  a  good  or  an  evil. 
It  cannot  be  denied  that  it  is  a  good.  If  virtue 
is  a  good,  vice,  on  the  contrary,  is  an  evil.  If 
vice  is  an  evil  on  this  account,  because  it  opposes 
virtue,  and  virtue  is  on  this  account  a  good,  be- 
cause it  overthrows  vice,  it  follows  that  virtue 
cannot  exist  without  vice  ;  and  if  you  take  away 
vice,  the  merits  of  virtue  will  be  taken  away. 
For  there  can  be  no  victory  without  an  enemy. 
Thus  it  comes  to  pass,  that  good  cannot  exist 
without  an  evil. 

Chrysippus,  a  man  of  active  mind,  saw  this 
when  discussing  the  subject  of  providence,  and 
charges  those  with  folly  who  think  that  good 
is  caused  by  God,  but  say  that  evil  is  not  thus 
caused.  Aulus  Gellius-*  has  interpreted  his  senti- 
ment in  his  books  of  Attic  Nights  ;  thus  saying  : 
"They  to  whom  it  does  not  appear  that  the  world 
was  made  for  the  sake  of  (iod  and  men,  and  that 
human  affairs  are  governed  by  providence,  think 
that  they  use  a  weighty  argument  when  they  thus 
speak  :  If  there  were  a  providence,  there  would 
be  no  evils.  For  they  say  that  nothing  is  less  in 
agreement  with  providence,  than  that  in  this 
world,  on  account  of  which  it  is  said  that  God 
made  men,5  the  power  of  troubles  and  evils 
should  be  so  great.  In  reply  to  these  things, 
Chrysippus,  when  he  was  arguing,  in  his  fourth 
book  respecting  providence,  said  :  Nothing  can 
be  more  foolish  than  those  who  think  that  good 
things  could  have  existed,  if  there  were  not  evils 
in  the  same  place.  For  since  good  things  are 
contrary  to  evil,  they  must  of  necessity  be  op- 
posed to  each  other,  and  must  stand  resting,  as 
it  were,  on  mutual  and  opposite  support.*^  Thus 
there  is  no  contrary  without  another  contrary. 


3  fipY>Jc.     Others  read  ha.i.)j.ova.ft\i.aVf  "  the  power  of  demons." 
*  Lib.  vi.  I. 

5  Propter  quern   homines   fecisse   dicatur   Deus.      Others   read, 
"  Qiiem  propter  homines,"  etc. 

^  Quasi  mutuo  adversoque  fulta  nisu  consistere. 


THE    EPITOME    OF   THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


233 


For  how  could  there  be  any  perception  of  justice, 
unless  there  were  injuries?  or  what  else  is  jus- 
tice, but  the  removal  of  injustice  ?  In  like  man- 
ner, the  nature  of  fortitude  cannot  be  understood 
except  by  placing  '  beside  it  cowardice,  or  the 
nature  of  self-control  except  by  intemperance. 
Likewise,  in  what  manner  would  there  be  pru- 
dence, unless  there  were  the  contrary,  impru- 
dence? On  the  same  principle,  he  says,  why 
do  the  foolish  men  not  require  this  also,  that 
there  should  be  truth  and  not  falsehood  ?  For 
there  exist  together  good  and  evil  things,  pros- 
perity and  trouble,  pleasure  and  pain.  For  the 
one  being  bound  to  the  other  at  opposite  poles, 
as  Plato  says,  if  you  take  away  one,  you  take 
away  both."  You  see,  therefore,  that  which  I 
have  often  said,  that  good  and  evil  are  so  con- 
nected with  one  another,  that  the  one  cannot 
exist  without  the  other.  Therefore  God  acted 
with  the  greatest  foresight  in  placing  the  subject- 
matter  of  virtue  in  evils  which  He  made  for  this 
purpose,  that  He  might  establish  for  us  a  con- 
test, in  which  He  would  crown  the  victorious 
with  the  reward  of  immortahty.^ 


CHAP.    XXX. 


OF    FALSE    WISDOM. 


I  have  taught,  as  I  imagine,  that  the  honours 
paid  to  gods  are  not  only  impious,  but  also  vain, 
either  because  they  were  men  whose  memory 
was  consecrated  after  death ;  or  because  the 
images  themselves  are  insensible  and  deaf,  inas- 
much as  they  are  formed  of  earth,  and  that  it  is 
not  right  for  man,  who  ought  to  look  up  to 
heavenly  things,  to  subject  himself  to  earthly 
things ;  or  because  the  spirits  who  claim  to 
themselves  those  acts  of  religious  service  are  un- 
holy and  impure,  and  on  this  account,  being  con- 
demned by  the  sentence  of  God,  fell  to  the  earth, 
and  that  it  is  not  lawful  to  submit  to  the  power 
of  those  to  whom  you  are  superior,  if  you  wish 
to  be  a  follower  of  the  true  God.  It  remains 
that,  as  we  have  spoken  of  false  religion,  we 
should  also  discuss  the  subject  of  false  wisdom, 
which  the  philosophers  profess,  —  men  endued 
with  the  greatest  learning  and  eloquence,  but  far 
removed  from  the  truth,  because  they  neither 
know  God  nor  the  wisdom  of  God.  And  although 
they  are  clever  and  learned,  yet,  because  their 
wisdom  is  human,  I  shall  not  fear  to  contend 
with  them,  that  it  may  be  evident  that  falsehood 
can  be  easily  overcome  by  truth,  and  earthly 
things  by  heavenly. 

They  thus  define  the  nature  of  philosophy. 
Philosophy  is  the  love  or  pursuit  of  wisdom. 
Therefore  it  is  not  wisdom  itself;  for  that  which 
loves  must  be  different  from  that  which  is  loved. 


'  Appositione.     Others  read  "  oppositione." 

^  ( Philosophically,  nol  dogmatically,  asserted.  God's  wisdom  in 
permittmi;  evil  (which  originated  in  the  fall  of  free  intellects)  to  last 
for  a  season,  will  vindicate  itself  in  judgment.] 


If  it  is  the  pursuit  of  wisdom,  not  even  thus  is 
philosophy  identical  with  wisdom.  For  wisdom 
is  the  object  itself  which  is  sought,  but  the  pur- 
suit is  that  which  seeks  it.  Therefore  the  very 
definition  or  meaning  of  the  word  plainly  shows 
that  philosophy  is  not  wisdom  itself.  I  will  say 
that  it  3  is  not  even  the  pursuit  of  wisdom,  in 
which  wisdom  is  not  comprised.  For  who  can 
be  said  to  devote  himself  to  the  pursuit  of  that 
to  which  he  can  by  no  means  attain?  He  who 
gives  himself  to  the  pursuit  of  medicine,  or 
grammar,  or  oratory,  may  be  said  to  be  studious 
of  that  art  which  he  is  learning ;  but  when  he 
has  learned,  he  is  now  said  to  be  a  physician,  a 
grammarian,  or  an  orator.  Thus  also  those  who 
are  studious  of  wisdom,  after  they  had  learned 
it,  ought  to  have  been  called  wise.  But  since 
they  are  called  students  of  wisdom  as  long  as 
they  live,  it  is  manifest  that  that  is  not  the  pur- 
suit, because  it  is  impossible  to  arrive  at  the  ob- 
ject itself  which  is  sought  for  in  the  pursuit, 
unless  by  chance  they  who  pursue  wisdom  even 
to  the  end  of  life  are  about  to  be  wise  in  another 
world.  Now  every  pursuit  is  connected  with 
some  end.  That,  therefore,  is  not  a  right  pursuit 
which  has  no  end. 

CHAP.    XXXI. OF    KNOWLEDGE    AND    SUPPOSITION. 

Moreover,  there  are  two  things  which  appear 
to  fall  under  the  subject  of  philosophy  —  knowl- 
edge and  supposition  ;  and  if  these  are  taken 
away,  philosophy  altogether  falls  to  the  ground. 
But  the  chief  of  the  philosophers  themselves  have 
taken  away  both  from  philosophy.  Socrates  took 
away  knowledge,  Zeno  supposition.  Let  us  see 
whether  they  were  right  in  doing  so.  Wisdom 
is,  as  Cicero  defined  it,'*  the  knowledge  of  divine 
and  human  things.  Now  if  this  definition  is  true, 
wisdom  does  not  come  within  the  power  of  man. 
For  who  of  mortals  can  assume  this  to  himself, 
to  profess  that  he  knows  divine  and  human 
things  ?  I  say  nothing  of  human  affairs  ;  for  al- 
though they  are  connected  with  divine,  yet,  since 
they  belong  to  man,  let  us  grant  that  it  is  possi- 
ble for  man  to  know  them.  Certainly  he  cannot 
know  divine  things  by  himself,  since  he  is  a  man  ; 
whereas  he  who  knows  them  must  be  divine,  and 
therefore  God.  But  man  is  neither  divine  nor 
God.  Man,  therefore,  cannot  thoroughly  know 
divine  things  by  himself.  No  on§,  therefore,  is 
wise  but  God,  or  certainly  that  man  whom  God 
has  taught.  But  they,  because  they  are  neither 
gods,  nor  taught  by  God,  cannot  be  wise,  that 
is,  accjuainted  with  divine  and  human  things. 
Knowledge,  therefore,  is  rightly  taken  away  by 
Socrates  and  the  Academics.  Supposition  also 
does  not  agree  with  the  wise  man.     For  every 


3  Philosophy. 
<  De  UJfic,  ii.  2. 


234 


THE    EPITOME    OF   THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


one  supposes  that  of  which  he  is  ignorant.  Now, 
to  suppose  that  you  know  that  of  which  you  are 
ignorant,  is  rashness  and  folly.  Supposition, 
therefore,  was  rightly  taken  away  by  Zeno.  If, 
theretbre.  there  is  no  knowledge  in  man,  and 
there  ought  to  be  no  supposition,  philosophy  is 
cut  up  by  the  roots. 

CH.\P.    XXXII.  —  OF  THE    SECTS    OF    PHILOSOPHERS, 
AND    THEIR    DISAGREEMENT. 

To  this  is  added,  that  it '  is  not  uniform  ;  but 
being  divided  into  sects,  and  scattered  into  many 
and  discordant  opinions,  it  has  no  fixed  state. 
For  since  they  all  separately  attack  and  harass 
one  another,  and  there  is  none  of  them  which  is 
not  condemned  of  folly  in  the  judgment  of  the 
rest,  while  the  members  are  plainly  at  variance 
with  one  another,  the  whole  body  of  philosophy 
is  brought  to  destruction.  Hence  the  Academy 
afterwards  originated.  For  when  the  leading 
men  of  that  sect  saw  that  philosophy  was  alto- 
gether overthrown  by  philosophers  mutually  op- 
posing each  other,  they  undertook  war  against 
all,  that  they  might  destroy  all  the  arguments  of 
all ;  while  they  themselves  assert  nothing  except 
one  thing —  that  nothing  can  be  known.  Thus, 
having  taken  away  knowledge,  they  overthrew 
the  ancient  i)hilosophy.  But  they  did  not  even 
themselves  retain  the  name  of  philosophers,  since 
they  admitted  their  ignorance,  because  to  be  ig- 
norant of  all  things  is  not  only  not  the  part  of 
a  philosopher,  but  not  even  of  a  man.  Thus  the 
philosophers,  because  they  have  no  defence,  must 
destroy  one  another  with  mutual  wounds,  and 
philosophy  itself  must  altogether  consufne  and 
put  an  end  to  itself  by  its  own  arms.  But  they 
say  it  is  only  natural  philosophy  which  thus  gives 
way.  How  is  it  with  moral  ?  Does  that  rest  on 
any  firm  foundation?  Let  us  see  whether  phi- 
losophers are  agreed  in  this  part  at  any  rate,  which 
relates  to  the  condition  of  life. 

CHAP.  XXXIII.  —  WHAT   IS   THE   CHIEF  GOOD   TO    BE 
SOUGHT  IN  LIFE. 

What  is  the  chief  good  must  be  an  object  of 
inquiry,  that  our  whole  life  and  actions  may  be 
directed  to  it.  When  inquiry  is  made  respecting 
the  chief  good  of  man,  it  ought  to  be  settled  to 
be  of  such  a  kind,  first,  that  it  have  reference 
to  man  alone  ;  in  the  next  place,  that  it  belong 
peculiarly  to  the  mind  ;  lastly,  that  it  be  sought 
by  virtue.  Let  us  see,  therefore,  whether  the 
chief  good  which  the  philosophers  mark  out 
be  such  that  it  has  reference  neither  to  a  dumb 
animal  nor  to  the  body,  and  cannot  be  attained 
without  virtue. 

Aristippus,  the  founder  of  the  Cyrenaic  sect, 
who  thought  that  bodily  pleasure  was  the  chief 


i.e.,  philosophy. 


good,  ought  to  be  removed  from  the  number  of 
philosophers,  and  from  the  society  of  men,  be- 
cause he  compared  himself  to  a  beast.  The 
chief  good  of  Hieronymus  is  to  be  without  pain, 
that  of  Diodorus  to  cease  to  be  in  pain.  But 
the  other  animals  avoid  pain  ;  and  when  they 
are  without  pain,  or  cease  to  be  in  pain,  are  glad. 
What  distinction,  then,  will  be  given  to  man,  if 
his  chief  good  is  judged  to  be  common  with  the 
beasts  ?  Zeno  thought  that  the  chief  good  was 
to  live  agreeably  to  nature.  But  this  definition 
is  a  general  one.  For  all  animals  live  agreeably 
to  nature,  and  each  has  its  own  nature, 

Epicurus  maintained  that  it  was  pleasure  of 
the  soul.  What  is  pleasure  of  the  soul  but  joy, 
in  which  the  soul  for  the  most  part  luxuriates, 
and  unbends  itself  either  to  sport  or  to  laughter  ? 
But  this  good  befalls  even  dumb  animals,  which, 
when  they  are  satisfied  with  pasture,  relax  them- 
selves to  joy  and  wantonness.  Dinomachus  and 
Callipho  approved  of  honourable  pleasure  ;  but 
they  either  said  the  same  that  Epicurus  did,  that 
bodily  pleasure  is  dishonourable  ;  or  if  they  con- 
sidered bodily  pleasures  to  be  partly  base  and 
partly  honourable,  then  that  is  not  the  chief 
good  which  is  ascribed  to  the  body.  The  Peri- 
patetics make  up  the  chief  good  of  goods  of  the 
soul,  and  body,  and  fortune.  The  goods  of  the 
soul  may  be  approved  of;  but  if  they  require 
assistance  for  the  completion  of  happiness,  they 
are  plainly  weak.  But  the  goods  of  the  body 
and  of  fortune  are  not  in  the  power  of  man  ;  nor 
is  that  now  the  chief  good  which  is  assigned  to 
the  body,  or  to  things  placed  without  us,  because 
this  double  good  extends  even  to  the  cattle,  which 
have  need  of  being  well,  and  of  a  due  supply  of 
food.  The  Stoics  are  believed  to  have  enter- 
tained much  better  views,  who  said  that  virtue 
was  the  chief  good.  But  virtue  cannot  be  the 
chief  good,  since,  if  it  is  the  endurance  of  evils 
and  of  labours,  it  is  not  happy  of  itself;  but  it 
ought  to  effect  and  produce  the  chief  good,  be- 
cause it  cannot  be  attained  without  the  greatest 
difficulty  and  labour.  But,  in  truth,  Aristotle 
wandered  far  from  reason,  who  connected  honour 
with  virtue,  as  though  it  were  possible  for  virtue 
at  any  time  to  be  separated  from  honour,  or  to 
be  united  with  baseness. 

Herillus  the  Pyrrhonist  made  knowledge  the 
chief  good.  This  indeed  belongs  to  man,  and 
to  the  soul  only,  but  it  may  happen  to  him  with- 
out virtue.  For  he  is  not  to  be  considered  happy 
who  has  either  learnt  anything  by  hearing,  or  has 
gained  the  knowledge  of  it  by  a  little  reading ; 
nor  is  it  a  definition  of  the  chief  good,  because 
there  may  be  a  knowledge  either  of  bad  things, 
or  at  any  rate  of  things  that  are  useless.  And 
if  it  is  the  knowledge  of  good  and  useful  things 
which  you  have  acquired  by  labour,  nevertheless 
it  is  not  the  chief  good,  because  knowledge  is 


THE   EPITOME   OF   THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


>5 


not  sought  on  its  own  account,  but  on  account 
of  something  else.  For  the  arts  are  learnt  on 
this  account,  that  they  may  be  to  us  the  means  of 
gaining  support,  or  a  source  of  glory,  or  even 
of  pleasure  ;  and  it  is  plain  that  these  things 
cannot  be  the  chief  goods.  Therefore  the  phi- 
losophers do  not  observe  the  rule  even  in  moral 
philosophy,  inasmuch  as  they  are  at  variance  with 
one  another  on  the  main  point '  itself,  that  is,  in 
that  discussion  by  which  the  life  is  moulded. 
For  the  precepts  cannot  be  equal,  or  resembling 
one  another,  when  some  train  men  to  pleasure, 
others  to  honour,  others  indeed  to  nature,  others 
to  knowledge  ;  some  to  the  pursuit,  others  to  the 
avoiding  of  riches ;  some  to  entire  insensibility 
to  pain,  others  to  the  endurance  of  evils  :  in  all 
which,  as  I  have  shown  before,  they  turn  aside 
from  reason,  because  they  are  ignorant  of  God. 

CHAP.  XXXIV.  THAT  MEN   ARE    BORN   TO    JUSTICE. 

Let  us  now  see  what  is  proposed  to  the  wise 
man  as  the  chief  good.-  That  men  are  born  to 
justice  is  not  only  taught  by  the  sacred  writings, 
but  is  sometimes  acknowledged  even  by  these 
same  philosophers.  Thus  Cicero  says :  "  But 
of  all  things  which  fall  under  the  discussion  of 
learned  men,  nothing  assuredly  is  more  excel- 
lent than  that  it  should  be  clearly  understood 
that  we  are  born  to  justice."  This  is  most  true.^ 
For  we  are  not  born  to  wickedness,  since  we  are 
a  social  and  sociable  animal.  The  wild  beasts 
are  produced  to  exercise  their  fierceness ;  for 
they  are  unable  to  live  in  any  other  way  than  by 
prey  and  bloodshed.  These,  however,  although 
pressed  by  extreme  hunger,  nevertheless  refrain 
from  animals  of  their  own  kind.  Birds  also  do 
the  same,  which  must  feed  upon  the  carcases  of 
others.  How  much  more  is  it  befitting,  that 
man,  who  is  united  with  man  both  in  the  inter- 
change of  language  and  in  communion  of  feel- 
ing, should  spare  man,  and  love  him  !  For  this 
is  justice. 

But  since  wisdom  has  been  given  to  man 
alone,  that  he  may  understand  God,  and  this 
alone  makes  the  difference  between  man  and  the 
dumb  animals,  justice  itself  is  bound  up  in  two 
duties.  He  owes  the  one  to  God  as  to  a  father, 
the  other  to  man  as  to  a  brother ;  for  we  are 
produced  by  the  same  God.  Therefore  it  has 
been  deservedly  and  rightly  said,  that  wisdom 
is  the  knowledge  of  divine  and  human  affairs. 
For  it  is  right  that  we  should  know  what  we  owe 
to  God,  and  what  to  man  ;  namely,  to  God  re- 
ligion, to  man  affection.  But  the  former  belongs 
to  wisdom,  the  latter  to  virtue  ;  and  justice  com- 
prises both.     If,  therefore,  it  is  evident  that  man 


'  In  ipso  cardine.     [Horace,  Sat.,  book  ii.  6,  71-76.] 

*  Some  editions  repeat  the  words  "  summum  bonum,"  but  these 

words  appear  to  obstruct  the  sense. 

^  \\.c,  philosopliically  ;  our  moral  constitution  dictating  what  is 

just.] 


is  born  to  justice,  it  is  necessary  that  the  just 
man  should  be  subject  to  evils,  that  he  may  ex- 
ercise the  virtue  with  which  he  is  endued.  For 
virtue  is  the  enduring  of  evils.  He  will  avoid 
pleasures  as  an  evil :  he  will  desjDise  riches,  be- 
cause they  are  frail ;  and  if  he  has  them,  he  will 
liberally  bestow  them,  to  preserve  the  wretched  : 
he  will  not  be  desirous  of  honours,  because  they 
are  short  and  transitory ;  he  will  do  injury  to  no 
one ;  if  he  shall  suffer,  he  will  not  retaliate ; 
and  he  will  not  take  vengeance  upon  one  who 
plunders  his  property.  For  he  will  deem  it  un- 
lawful to  injure  a  man ;  and  if  there  shall  be 
any  one  who  would  compel  him  to  depart  from 
God,  he  will  not  refuse  tortures  nor  death. 
Thus  it  will  come  to  pass,  that  he  must  neces- 
sarily live  in  poverty  and  lowliness,  and  in  in- 
suits,  or  even  tortures. 

CHAP.    XXXV. THAT    IMMORTALITY    IS    THE    CHIEF 

GOOD. 

What,  then,  will  be  the  advantage  of  justice 
and  virtue,  if  they  shall  have  nothing  but  evil  in 
life?  But  if  virtue,  which  despises  all  earthly 
goods,  most  wisely  endures  all  evils,  and  endures 
death  itself  in  the  discharge  of  duty,  cannot  be 
without  a  reward,  what  remains  but  that  immor- 
tality alone  is  its  reward?  For  if  a  hapjjy  life 
falls  to  the  lot  of  man,  as  the  philosophers 
will  have  it,  and  in  this  j^oint  alone  they  do  not 
disagree,  therefore  also  immortality  falls  to  him. 
For  that  only  is  hajjpy  which  is  incorruptible  ;  that 
only  is  incorrui^tible  which  is  eternal.  There- 
fore immortality  is  the  chief  good,  because  it 
belongs  both  to  man,  and  to  the  soul,  and  to 
virtue.  We  are  only  directed  to  this  ;  we  are 
born  to  the  attainment  of  this.  Therefore  God 
proposes  to  us  virtue  and  justice,  that  we  may 
obtain  that  eternal  reward  for  our  labours.  But 
concerning  that  immortality  ••  itself  we  will  speak 
in  the  proper  place.  There  remains  the  phi- 
losophy of  Logic, 5  which  contributes  nothing  to 
a  happy  life.  For  wisdom  does  not  consist  in 
the  arrangement  of  speech,  but  in  the  heart  and 
the  feeling.  But  if  natural  philosoj^hy  is  super- 
fluous, and  this  of  logic,  and  the  philosophers 
have  erred  in  moral  philosophy,  which  alone  is 
necessary,  because  they  have  been  unable  in 
any  way  to  find  out  the  chief  good  ;  therefore 
all  philosophy  is  found  to  be  empty  and  useless, 
which  was  unable  to  comj^rehend  the  nature  of 
man,  or  to  fulfil  its  duty  and  office. 

CHAP.       XXXVI.  OF      THE       PHILOSOPHER.S,  

NAMELY,    EPICURUS   AND    PYTHAGORAS. 

Since  I  have  spoken  briefly  of  philosophy, 
now  also   I  will  speak  a  few  things   about  the 


*  Non  mortalitate. 

5  KayiK-t)   philosophia.     Under  this   is   included   everything  con- 
nected with  the  system  of  speaking. 


236 


THE    EPITOME    OF   THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


philosophers.  This  is  especially  the  doctrine  of 
Epicurus,  that  there  is  no  providence.  And  at 
the  same  time  he  does  not  deny  the  existence 
of  gods.  In  both  respects  he  acts  contrary  to 
reason.  For  if  there  are  gods,  it  follows  that 
there  is  a  providence.  For  otherwise  we  can 
form  no  intelligible  idea  of  God,  for  it  is  His 
peculiar  province  to  foresee.'  But  Epicurus 
says  He  takes  no  care  about  anything.  There- 
fore He  disregards  not  only  the  affairs  of  men, 
but  also  heavenly  things.  How,  therefore,  or 
from  what,  do  you  affirm  that  He  exists?  For 
when  you  have  taken  away  the  divine  providence 
and  care,  it  would  naturally  follow  that  you 
should  altogether  deny  the  existence  of  God ; 
whereas  now  you  have  left  Him  in  name,  but  in 
reality  you  have  taken  Him  away.  Whence, 
then,  did  the  world  derive  its  origin,  if  God  takes 
no  care  of  anything?  There  are,  he  says,  mi- 
nute atoms,  which  can  neither  be  seen  nor 
touched,  and  from  the  fortuitous  meeting  of 
these  all  things  arose,  and  are  continually  aris- 
ing. If  they  are  neither  seen  nor  perceived  by 
any  part  of  the  body,  how  could  you  know  of 
their  existence  ?  In  the  next  place,  if  they  ex- 
ist, with  what  mind  do  they  meet  together  to 
effect  anything?  If  they  are  smooth,  they  can- 
not cohere  :  if  they  are  hooked  and  angular, 
then  they  are  divisible ;  for  hooks  and  angles 
project,  and  can  be  cut  off.  But  these  things 
are  senseless  and  unprofitable.  Why  should  I 
mention  that  he  also  makes  souls  capable  of 
extinction?  who  is  refuted  not  only  by  all  phi- 
losophers and  general  persuasion,  but  also  by 
the  answers  of  bards,  by  the  predictions  of  the 
Sibyls,  and  lastly,  by  the  divine  voices  of  the 
prophets  themselves  ;  so  that  it  is  wonderful  that 
Epicurus  alone  existed,  who  should  place  the 
condition  of  man  on  a  level  with  the  flocks  and 
beasts. 

What  of  Pythagoras,  who  was  first  called  a 
philosopher,  who  judged  that  souls  were  indeed 
immortal,  but  that  they  passed  into  other  bod- 
ies, either  of  cattle,  or  of  birds,  or  of  beasts? 
Would  it  not  have  been  better  that  they  should 
be  destroyed,  together  with  their  bodies,  than 
thus  to  be  condemned  to  pass  into  the  bodies 
of  other  animals?  Would  it  not  be  better  not 
to  exist  at  all,  than,  after  having  had  the  form 
of  a  man,  to  live  as  a  swine  or  a  dog?  And  the 
foolish  man,  to  gain  credit  for  his  saying,  said 
that  he  himself  had  been  Euphorbus  in  the  Tro- 
jan war,  and  that,  when  he  had  been  slain,  he 
passed  into  other  figures  of  animals,  and  at  last 
became  Pythagoras.  O  happy  man  !  to  whom 
alone  so  great  a  memory  was  given  ;  or  rather 
unhappy,  who,  when  changed  into  a  sheep,  was 
not  permitted  to  be  ignorant  of  what  he  was  ! 

'  Providere. 


And  would  to  Heaven  that  he  alone  had  been 
thus  senseless  !  He  found  also  some  to  believe 
him,  and  some  indeed  among  the  learned,^  to 
whom  the  inheritance  of  folly  passed. 

CHAP.    XXXVII. OF    SOCRATES     AND    HIS    CONTRA- 
DICTION. 

After  him  Socrates  held  the  first  place  in  phi- 
losophy, who  was  pronounced  most  wise  even 
by  the  oracle,  because  he  confessed  that  he 
knew  one  thing  only,  —  namely,  that  he  knew 
nothing.  And  on  the  authority  of  this  oracle  it 
was  right  that  the  natural  philosophers  should 
restrain  themselves,  lest  they  should  either  in- 
quire into  those  things  which  they  could  not 
know,  or  should  think  that  they  knew  things 
which  they  did  not  know.  Let  us,  however,  see 
whether  Socrates  was  most  wise,  as  the  Pythian 
god  proclaimed.  He  often  made  use  of  this 
proverb,  that  that  which  is  above  us  has  also  no 
reference  to  us.  He  has  now  passed  beyond 
the  limits  of  his  opinion.  For  he  who  said  that 
he  knew  one  thing  only,  found  another  thing  to 
speak  of,  as  though  he  knew  it ;  but  that  in  vain. 
For  God,  who  is  plainly  above  us,  is  to  be  sought 
for ;  and  religion  is  to  be  undertaken,  which 
alone  separates  us  from  the  brutes,  which  indeed 
Socrates  not  only  rejected,  but  even  derided,  in 
swearing  by  a  goose  and  a  dog,  as  if  in  truth  he 
could  not  have  sworn  by  yEsculapius,  to  whom 
he  had  vowed  a  cock.  Behold  the  sacrifice  of 
a  wise  man  !  And  because  he  was  unable  to 
offer  this  in  his  own  person,  since  he  was  at  the 
point  of  death,  he  entreated  his  friends  to  per- 
form the  vow  after  his  death,  lest  forsooth  he 
should  be  detained  as  a  debtor  in  the  lower  re- 
gions. He  assuredly  both  pronounced  that  he 
knew  nothing,  and  made  good  his  statement.^ 

CHAP.    XXXVIII.  —  OF    PLATO,  WHOSE  DOCTRINE    AP- 
PROACHES   MORE    NEARLY    TO    THE   TRUTH. 

His  disciple  Plato,  whom  Tully  speaks  of  as  the 
god  of  philosophers,  alone  of  all  so  studied  phi- 
losophy that  he  approached  nearer  to  the  truth  ; 
and  yet,  because  he  was  ignorant  of  God,  he  so 
failed  in  many  things,  that  no  one  fell  into  worse 
errors,  especially  because  in  his  books  respect- 
ing the  state  he  wished  all  things  to  be  common 
to  all.  This  is  endurable  concerning  property, 
though  it  is  unjust.  For  it  ought  not  to  be  an 
injury  to  any  one,  if  he  possesses  more  than  an- 
other through  his  own  industry  ;  or  to  be  a  profit 
to  any  one,  if  through  his  own  fault  he  possesses 
less.  But,  as  I  have  said,  this  is  capable  of  being 
endured  in  some  way.     Shall  there  be  a  com- 


'  Inter  doctos  homines.  Others  read  "  indoctos  homines,"  but 
this  does  not  convey  so  good  a  meaning. 

3  [(jther  and  more  creditable  explanations  are  given.  Socrates 
recognised  the  rites  of  his  countrymen.  See  Tayler  Lewis  in  a  noble 
chapter,  Plato,  etc.,  p.  250.] 


THE    EPITOME    OF    THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


'^n 


munity  of  wives  also,  and  of  children?  Shall 
there  be  no  distinction  of  blood,  or  certainty  of 
race?  Shall  there  be  neither  families,  nor  rela- 
tionships, nor  affinities,  but  all  things  confused 
and  indiscriminate,  as  in  herds  of  cattle?  Shall 
there  be  no  self-restraint  in  men,  no  chastity  in 
women?  What  conjugal  affection  can  there  be 
in  these,  between  whom  on  either  side  there  is 
no  sure  or  peculiar  '  love  ?  Who  will  be  dutiful 
towards  a  father,  when  he  knows  not  from  whom 
he  was  born  ?  Who  will  love  a  son,  whom  he 
will  reckon  as  not  his  own?^  Moreover,  he 
opened  ^  the  senate  house  to  women,  and  en- 
trusted to  them  v/arfare,  magistracies,  and  com- 
mands.'* But  how  great  will  be  the  calamity  of 
that  city,  in  which  women  shall  discharge  the 
duties  of  men  !  But  of  this  more  fully  at  another 
opportunity. 

Zeno,  the  master  of  the  Stoics,  who  praises 
virtue,  judged  that  pity,  which  is  a  very  great  vir- 
tue, should  be  cut  away,  as  though  it  were  a  dis- 
ease of  the  mind,  whereas  it  is  at  the  same  time 
dear  to  God  and  necessary  for  men.  For  who 
is  there  who,  when  placed  in  any  evil,  would  be 
unwilling  to  be  pitied,  and  would  not  desire  the 
assistance  of  those  who  might  succour  them, 
which  is  not  called  forth  so  as  to  render  aid,  ex- 
cept by  the  feeling  of  pity  ?  Although  he  calls 
this  humanity  and  piety,  he  does  not  change  the 
matter  itself,  only  the  name.  This  is  the  affec- 
tion which  has  been  given  to  man  alone,  that  by 
mutual  assistance  we  might  alleviate  our  weak- 
ness ;  and  he  who  removes  this  affection  reduces 
us  to  the  life  of  the  beasts.  For  his  assertion  that 
all  faults  are  equal,  proceeds  from  that  inhumanity 
with  which  also  he  assails  pity  as  a  disease.  For 
he  who  makes  no  difference  in  faults,  either  thinks 
that  light  offences  ought  to  be  visited  with  severe 
punishments,  which  is  the  part  of  a  cruel  judge, 
or  that  great  offences  should  be  visited  with  slight 
punishments,  which  is  the  part  of  a  worthless 
judge.  In  either  case  there  is  injury  to  the  state. 
For  if  the  greatest  crimes  are  lightly  punished, 
the  boldness  of  the  wicked  will  increase,  and  go 
on  to  deeds  of  greater  daring ;  and  if  a  punish- 
ment of  too  great  severity  is  inflicted  for  slight 
offences,  inasmuch  as  no  one  can  be  exempt  from 
fault,  many  citizens  will  incur  peril,  \\\\o  by  cor- 
rection min:ht  become  better. 


CHAP.     XXXIX. 


—  OF    VARIOUS     PHILOSOPHERS,    AND 
OF   THE    ANTIPODES. 


These  things,  truly,  are  of  small  importance, 
but  they  arise  from  the  same  falsehood.    Xenoph- 


'  Proprius. 

*  Alienum. 

3  Reseravit.     Others  read  "  reservavit." 

*  [A  republic  of  "philosophers"  {credula  ge>is)  was  set  up  in 
France  (a.d.  1793),  to  prove  their  idiotic  incompetency  for  practical 
affairs.] 


anes  said  that  the  orb  of  the  moon  is  eighteen 
times  larger  than  this  earth  of  ours  ;  and  that 
within  its  compass  is  contained  another  earth, 
which  is  inhabited  by  men  and  animals  of  every 
kind.  About  the  antipodes  also  one  can  neither 
hear  nor  speak  without  laughter.  It  is  asserted 
as  something  serious,  that  we  should  believe  that 
there  are  men  who  have  their  feet  opposite  to 
ours.  The  ravings  of  Anaxagoras  are  more  tol- 
erable, who  said  that  snow  was  black.  And  not 
only  the  sayings,  but  the  deeds,  of  some  are  ri- 
diculous. Democritus  neglected  his  land  which 
was  left  to  him  by  his  father,  and  suffered  it  to 
become  a  public  pasture.  Diogenes  with  his 
company  of  dogs, 5  who  professes  that  great  and 
perfect  virtue  in  the  contempt  of  all  things,  pre- 
ferred to  beg  for  his  support,  rather  than  to  seek 
it  by  honest  labour,  or  to  have  any  property. 
Undoubtedly  the  life  of  a  wise  man  ought  to  be 
to  others  an  example  of  living.  If  all  should 
imitaif  the  wisdom  of  these,  how  will  states  ex- 
ist? But  perhaps  the  same  Cynics  were  able  to 
afford  an  example  of  modesty,  who  lived  with 
their  wives  in  public.  I  know  not  how  they  could 
defend  virtue,  who  took  away  modesty. 

Nor  was  Aristippus  better  than  these,  who,  I 
believe,  that  he  might  please  his  mistress  Lais, 
instituted  the  Cyrenaic  system,  by  which  he 
placed  the  end  of  the  chief  good  in  bodily 
pleasure,  that  authority  might  not  be  wanting 
to  his  faults,  or  learning  to  his  vices.  Are  those 
men  of  greater  fortitude  to  be  more  approved, 
who,  that  they  might  be  said  to  have  despised 
death,  died  by  their  own  hands?  Zeno,  Em- 
pedocles.  Chrysippus,  Cleanthcs,  Democritus, 
and  Cato,  imitating  these,  did  not  know  that 
he  who  put  himself  to  death  is  guilty  of  murder, 
according  to  the  divine  right  and  law.  For  it 
was  God  who  placed  us  in  this  abode  of  flesh  : 
it  was  He  who  gave  us  the  temporary  habitation 
of  the  body,  that  we  should  inhabit  it  as  long  as 
He  pleased.  Therefore  it  is  to  be  considered 
impious,  to  wish  to  depart  from  it  without  the 
command  of  God.  Therefore  violence  must  not 
be  applied  to  nature.  He  knows  how  to  destroy^ 
His  own  work.  And  if  any  one  shall  apply  im- 
pious hands  to  that  work,  and  shall  tear  asunder 
the  bonds  of  the  divine  workmanship,  he  endeav- 
ours to  flee  from  God,  whose  sentence  no  one 
will  be  able  to  escape,  whether  alive  or  dead. 
Therefore  they  are  accursed  and  impious,  whom 
I  have  mentioned  above,  who  even  taught  what 
are  the  befitting  reasons  for  voluntary  death  ;  so 
that  it  was  not  enough  of  guilt  that  they  were 
self-murderers,  unless  they  instructed  others  also 
to  this  wickedness.' 


5  i.e.,  the  Cynics. 

6  Resolvut. 

7  [.\  succinct  statement  of  the  sixth  command  in  its  bearing  on 
suicide.] 


23^ 


THE    EPITOME    OF    THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


CHAP.    XL. OF    THE     FOOLISHNESS     OF    THE    PHI- 
LOSOPHERS. 

There  are  innumerable  sayings  and  doings  of 
the  philosophers,  by  which  their  foolishness  may 
be  shown.  Therefore,  since  we  are  unable  to 
enumerate  them  all,  a  few  will  be  sufficient.  It 
is  enough  that  it  is  understood  that  the  philoso- 
phers were  neither  teachers  of  justice,  of  which 
they  were  ignorant,  nor  of  virtue,  of  which  they 
falsely  boast.  For  what  can  they  teach,  who 
often  confess  their  own  ignorance?  I  omit  to 
mention  Socrates,  whose  opinion  is  well  known. 
Anaxagoras  proclaims  that  all  things  are  over- 
spread with  darkness.  Empedocles  says  that  the 
paths  for  finding  out  the  truth  of  the  senses  are 
narrow.  Democritus  asserts  that  truth  lies  sunk 
in  a  deep  well ;  and  because  they  nowhere  find 
it,  they  therefore  affirm  that  no  wise  man  has  as 
yet  existed.  Since,  therefore,  human  wisdom 
has  no  existence  (Socrates  says  in  the  writings 
of  Plato),  let  us  follow  that  which  is  diving,  and 
let  us  give  thanks  to  God,  who  has  revealed  and 
delivered  it  to  us ;  and  let  us  congratulate  our- 
selves, that  through  the  divine  bounty  we  possess 
the  truth  and  wisdom,  which,  though  sought  by 
so  many  intellects  through  so  many  ages,  phi- 
losophy '  was  not  able  to  discover. 

CHAP.    XLI.  —  OF  TRUE    RELIGION   AND   WISDOM. 

Now,  since  we  have  refuted  false  religion, 
which  is  in  the  worship  of  the  gods,  and  false 
wisdom,  which  is  in  the  philosophers,  let  us  come 
to  true  religion  and  wisdom.  And,  indeed,  we 
must  speak  of  them  both  conjointly,  because 
they  are  closely  connected.  For  to  worship  the 
true  God,  that  and' nothing  else  is  wisdom.  For 
that  God  who  is  supreme  and  the  Maker  of  all 
things,  who  made  man  as  the  image  of  Himself, 
on  this  account  conferred  on  him  alone  of  all 
animals  the  gift  of  reason,  that  he  might  pay 
back  honour  to  Him  as  his  Father  and  his  Lord, 
and  by  the  exercise  of  this  piety  and  obedience 
might  gain  the  reward  of  immortality.  This  is 
a  true  and  divine  mystery.  But  among  those,^ 
because  they  are  not  true,  there  is  no  agreement. 
Neither  are  sacred  rites  performed  in  philosophy, 
nor  is  philosophy  treated  of  in  sacred  things  ; 
and  on  this  account  their  religion  is  false,  be- 
cause it  does  not  possess  wisdom  ;  and  on  this 
account  their  wisdom  is  false,  because  it  does 
not  possess  religion.  But  where  both  are  joined 
together,  there  the  truth  must  necessarily  be  ; 
so  that  if  it  is  asked  what  the  truth  itself  is,  it 
may  be  rightly  said  to  be  either  wise  religion  or 
religious  wisdom. 


'  Philosophia  non  potuit  invenire.  Other  editions  have,  "  philo- 
sophiam  nemo  potuit  invenire."  ["  The  world  by  wisdom  (o-o<|)ia) 
knew  not  God,"  etc.;  i  Cor.  i.  2i.] 

^  i.e.,  the  philosophers  before  mentioned. 


CHAP.    XLII. OF    RELIGIOUS    WISDOM  :    THE    NAME 

OF    CHRIST    KNOWN    TO    NONE,    EXCEPT    HIMSELF 
AND    HIS    FATHER. 

I  will  now  say  what  wise  religion,  or  religious 
wisdom,  is.  God,  in  the  beginning,  before  He 
made  the  world,  from  the  fountain  of  His  own 
eternity,  and  from  the  divine  and  everlasting 
Spirit,3  begat  for  Himself  a  Son  incorruptible, 
faithful,  corresponding  to  His  Father's  excellence 
and  majesty.  He  is  virtue.  He  is  reason.  He  is 
the  word  of  God,  He  is  wisdom.  With  this 
artificer,  as  Hermes  says,  and  counsellor,  as  the 
Sibyl  says.  He  contrived  the  excellent  and  won- 
drous fabric  of  this  world.  In  fine,  of  all  the 
angels,  whom  the  same  God  formed  from  His 
own  breath,'*  He  alone  was  admitted  into  a  par- 
ticipation of  His  supreme  power.  He  alone  was 
called  God.  For  all  things  were  through  Him, 
and  nothing  was  without  Him.  In  fine,  Plato, 
not  altogether  as  a  philosopher,  but  as  a  seer, 
spoke  concerning  the  first  and  second  God,  per- 
haps following  Trismegistus  in  this,  whose  words 
I  have  translated  from  the  Greek,  and  subjoined  : 
"  The  Lord  and  Maker  of  all  things,  whom  we 
have  thought  to  be  called  God,  created  5  a  second 
God,  who  is  visible  and  sensible.  But  by  sensi- 
ble I  mean,  not  that  He  Himself  receives  sensa- 
tion, but  that  He  causes  sensation  and  sight. 
When,  therefore.  He  had  made  this,  the  first, 
and  one,  and  only  one.  He  appeared  to  Hun 
most  excellent,  and  full  of  all  good  qualities." 
The  Sibyl  also  says  that  God  the  guide  of  all 
was  made  by  God ;  and  another,  that 

"  God  the  Son  of  God  must  be  known," 

as  those  examples  which  I  have  brought  forward 
in  my  books  declare.  Him  the  prophets,  filled 
with  the  inspiration  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  pro- 
claimed ;  of  whom  especially  Solomon  in  the 
book  of  Wisdom,  and  also  his  father,  the  writer 
of  divine  hymns  —  both  most  renowned  kings, 
who  preceded  the  times  of  the  Trojan  war  by 
a  hundred  and  eighty  years  ^  —  testify  that  He 
was  born  of  God.  His  name  is  known  to  none, 
except  to  Himself  and  the  Father,  as  John 
teaches  in  the  Revelation.''  Hermes  says  that 
His  name  cannot  be  uttered  by  mortal  mouth. 
Yet  by  men  He  is  called  by  two  names — Jesus, 
which  is  Saviour,  and  Christ,  which  is  King.  He 
is  called  Saviour  on  this  account,  because  He  is 
the  health  and  safety  of  all  who  believe  in  God 
through  Him.  He  is  called  Christ  on  this 
account,  because  He  Himself  will  come  from 


3  [This  refers  to  the  Spirit  of  the  Father,  as  Cyprian  (vol.  v.  p. 
516),  ■'  My  iieart  hath  hreatk€d  omX  a  good  Word."] 

••  De  siiis  spiruibus. 

5  [Plato  does  not  speak  dogmatically,  but  with  a  marvellous  intui- 
tion of  truth.     The  Son  is  "  begotten,  not  made."! 

^  This  is  an  error.  Both  David  and  Solomon  lived  after  the  sup- 
posed taking  of  Troy. 

7  Rev.  xix.  12. 


THE   EPITOME   OF   THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


239 


heaven  at  the  end  of  this  dispensation  '  to  judge 
the  world,  and,  having  raised  the  dead,  to  estab- 
hsh  for  Himself  an  everlasting  kingdom. 

CHAP.    XLIII. OF    THE     NAME     OF    JESUS     CHRIST, 

AND    HIS   TWOFOLD    NATIVITY. 

But  lest  by  any  chance  there  should  be  any 
doubt   in  your   mind  why   we   call    Him    Jesus  i 
Christ,  who  was  born  of  God  before  the  world,  j 
and  who  was  born  of  man  three  hundred  years 
ago,  I  will  briefly  explain  to  you  the  reason. 
The  same  person  is  the  son  of  God  and  of  man. 
For  He  was  twice  born  :   first  of  God,  in  the 
spirit,  before  the  origin  of  the  world  ;  afterwards 
in  the  flesh  of  man,  in  the  reign  of  Augustus  ; 
and  in  connection  with  this  fact  is  an  illustrious 
and  great  mystery,  in  which  is  contained  both 
the  salvation  of  men  and  the  religion  of  the  Su- 
preme God,  and  all  truth.     For  when  first  the 
accursed  and  impious  worship  of  gods  crept  in 
through  the  treachery  of  the  demons,  then  the 
religion    of  God    remained   with    the    Hebrews 
alone,  who,  not  by  any  law,  but  after  the  man- 
ner of  their  fathers,  observed  the  worship  handed 
down  to  them  by  successive  generations,^  even 
until  the  time  when  they  went  forth  out  of  Egypt 
under  the  leadership  of  Moses,  the  first  of  all 
the  prophets,  through  whom  the  law  was  given 
to  them  from  God;  and  they  were  afterwards 
called  Jews.     Therefore  they  served  God,  being 
bound  by  the  chains  of  the  law.     But  they  also, 
by  degrees  going  astray  to  profane  rites,  under- 
took the  worship  of  strange  gods,  and,  leaving 
the  worship  of  their  fathers,  sacrificed  to  sense- 
less images.    Therefore  God  sent  to  them  proph- 
ets filled  with  the  Divine  Spirit,  to  upbraid  them 
with    their   sins    and    proclaim    repentance,    to 
threaten  them  with  the  vengeance  which  would 
follow,  and  announce  that  it  would  come  to  pass, 
if  they  persisted  in   the  same  faults,  that  He 
would  send  another  as  the  bearer  of  a  new  law ; 
and  having  removed  the  ungrateful  people  from 
their  inheritance.  He  would  assemble  to  Him- 
self a  more  faithful  people  from  foreign  nations. 
But  they  not  only  persisted  in  their  course,  but 
even  slew  the  messengers  themselves.    Therefore 
He  condemned  them  on  account  of  these  deeds  : 
nor  did   He  any  longer  send  messengers  to  a 
stubborn  people  ;  but  He  sent  His  own  Son,  to 
call  all  nations  to  the  favour  of  God.     Nor,  how- 
ever, did  He  shut  them  o\it,  impious  and  ungrate- 
ful as  they  were,  from  the  hope  of  salvation  ;  but 
He  sent  Him  to  them  before  all  others,^  that  if 
they  should  by  chance  oljey,  they  might  not  lose 
that  which  they  had  received  ;  but  if  they  should 
refuse  to  receive  their  God,  then,  the  heirs  being 


removed,^  the  Gentiles  would  come  into  posses- 
sion. Therefore  the  supreme  Father  ordered 
Him  to  descend  to  the  earth,  and  to  put  on  a 
human  body,  that,  being  subject  to  the  sufferings 
of  the  flesh,  He  might  teach  virtue  and  patience 
not  only  by  words,  but  also  by  deeds.  There- 
fore He  was  born  a  second  time  as  man,  of  a 
virgin,  without  a  father,  that,  as  in  His  first 
spiritual  birth,  being  born  of  God  alone,  He 
was  made  a  sacred  spirit,  so  in  His  second  and 
fleshly  birth,  being  born  of  a  mother  only,  He 
might  become  holy  flesh,  that  through  Him  the 
flesh,  which  had  become  subject  to  sin,  might 
be  freed  from  destruction. 


CHAP.  XLIV. THE   TWOFOLD    NATIVITY    OF   CHRIST 

IS   PROVED    FROM   THE    PROPHETS. 

That  these  things  should  thus  take  place  as  I 
have  set  them  fortli,  the  prophets  had  before  pre- 
dicted.     In  the  writings  of  Solomon  it  is  thus 
written  :  5  "  The  womb  of  a  virgin  was  strength- 
ened, and    conceived :    and    a    virgin    was    im- 
pregned,  and  became  a  mother  in  great  pity." 
In  Isaiah^  it  is  thus  written  :  "  Behold,  a  virgin 
shall  conceive,  and  bear  a  son,  and  ye  shall  call 
His  name  Immanuel ;  "  which,  being  interpreted, 
is  God  with  us.7     For  He  was  with  us  on  the 
earth,  when  He  assumed  flesh  ;  and  He  was  no 
less  God  in  man,  and  man  in  God.     That  He 
was  both  God  and  man  was  declared  before  by 
the  prophets.     That  He  was  God,  Isaiah  *^  thus 
declares  :  "  They  shall  fall  down  unto  Thee,  they 
shall  make  supplication  unto  Thee  ;  since  God 
is  in  Thee,  and  we  knew  it  not,  even  the  God  of 
Israel.     They  shall  be  ashamed  and  confounded, 
all  of  them  who  oppose  themselves  to  Thee,  and 
shall  go  to  confusion."     Also  Jeremiah  :  '^  "  This 
is  our  God,  and  there  shall  none  other  be  com- 
pared unto  Him ;  He  hath  found  out  all  the  way 
of  knowledge,  and  hath  given  it  unto  Jacob  His 
servant,  and  to  Israel  His  beloved.     Afterward 
He  was  seen  upon  earth,  and  dwelt  among  men." 
Likewise  that  He  was  man,  the  same  Jeremiah  ■° 
says  :  "  And  He  is  man,  and  who  knew  Him  ?  " 
Isaiah  also  thus  speaks  :  "  "And  the  Lord  shall 
send  them  a  man  who  shall  save  them,  and  with 
judgment  shall  He  heal  them."    Also  Moses  him- 
self in  the  book  of  Numbers:'^  "There  shall 
come  a  star  out  of  Jacob,  and  a  man  shall  arise 
out  of  Israel."     For  this  cause,  therefore,  being 
God,  He  took  upon  Him  flesh,  that,  becoming  a 
mediator  '3  between  God  and  man,  having  over- 


*  In  sjeculi  hujus  consummatione. 

2  Per  successioncs. 

3  Potissimum, 


*  Hxredibus  abdicatis, 

5  See  Instit.,  iv.  12. 

6  Isa.  vii.  14. 

7  Matt.  i.  23. 

8  Isa.  xlv.  14-16. 

9  Haruch  iii.  35-37.  .  ,  v    c     . 

'0  xvii.  9.     This  and  the  following  quotations  are  from  the  beptua- 
gint. 

"  Isa.  xix.  20. 

I-  Num.  xxiv.  17.     The  prophecy  of  Balaam. 

'■J  luter  deum  et  hominera  medius  factus. 


240 


THE   EPITOME    OF   THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


come  death,  He  might  by  His  guidance  lead  man 
to  God. 

CHAP.  XLV.  —  THE   POWER   AND  WORKS   OF   CHRIST 
ARE    PROVED    FROM    THE    SCRIPTURES. 

We  have  spoken  of  His  nativity ;  now  let  us 
speak  of  His  power  and  works,  which,  when  He 
wrought  them  among  men,  the  Jews,  seeing  them 
to  be  great  and  wonderful,  supposed  that  they 
were  done  by  the  influence  of  magic,  not  know- 
ing that  all  those  things  which  were  done  by 
Him  had  been  foretold  by  the  prophets.  He 
gave  strength  to  the  sick,  and  to  those  languish- 
ing under  various  diseases,  not  by  any  healing 
remedy,  but  instantaneously,  by  the  force  and 
power  of  His  word ;  He  restored  the  weak.  He 
made  the  lame  to  walk.  He  gave  sight  to  the 
blind.  He  made  the  dumb  to  speak,  the  deaf  to 
hear ;  He  cleansed  the  polluted  and  unclean.  He 
restored  their  right  mind  to  those  who  were 
maddened  with  the  attack  of  demons.  He  re- 
called to  life  and  light  those  who  were  dead  or 
now  buried.  He  also  fed  and  satisfied  '  five 
thousand  men  with  five  loaves  and  two  fishes. 
He  also  walked  upon  the  sea.  He  also  in  a 
tempest  commanded  the  wind  to  be  still,  and 
immediately  there  was  a  calm  ;  all  which  things  we 
find  predicted  both  in  the  books  of  the  prophets 
and  in  the  verses  of  the  Sibyls. 

When  a  great  multitude  resorted  to  Him  on 
account  of  these  miracles,  and,  as  He  truly  was, 
believed  Him  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  and  sent 
from  God,  the  priests  and  rulers  of  the  Jews, 
filled  with  envy,  and  at  the  same  time  excited 
with  anger,  because  He  reproved  their  sins  and 
injustice,  conspired  to  put  Him  to  death  ;  and 
that  this  would  happen,  Solomon  had  foretold  a 
little  more  than  a  thousand  years  before,  in  the 
book  of  Wisdom,  using  these  words  :  ^  "  Let  us 
defraud  the  righteous,  for  he  is  unpleasant  to  us, 
and  upbraideth  us  with  our  offences  against  the 
law.  He  maketh  his  boast  that  he  has  the  knowl- 
edge of  God,  and  he  calleth  hinTself  the  Son  of 
God.  He  is  made  to  reprove  our  thoughts  :  it 
grieveth  us  even  to  look  upon  him  ;  for  his  life 
is  not  like  the  life  of  others,  his  ways  are  of 
another  fashion.  We  are  counted  by  him  as 
triflers  ;  he  withdraweth  himself  from  our  ways, 
as  from  filthiness  ;  he  commendeth  greatly  the 
latter  end  of  the  just,  and  boasteth  that  he  has 
God  for  his  father.  Let  us  see,  therefore,  if  his 
words  be  true  ;  let  us  prove  what  end  he  shall 
have  ;  let  us  examine  him  with  rebukes  and  tor- 
ments, that  we  may  know  his  meekness  and  prove 
his  patience  ;  let  us  condemn  him  to  a  shameful 
death.  Such  things  have  they  imagined,  and 
have  gone  astray  ;  for  their  own  folly  hath  blinded 


'  Saturavit. 

*  Wisd.  ii.  12-22.     See  Instil.,  iv.  16,  p.  117,  su/>ra. 


them,  and  they  do  not  understand  the  mysteries 
of  God." 

Therefore,  being  unmindful  of  these  writings 
which  they  read,  they  incited  the  people  as 
though  against  an  impious  man,  so  that  they 
seized  and  led  Him  to  trial,  and  .with  impious 
words  demanded  His  death.  But  they  alleged 
against  Him  as  a  crime  this  very  thing,  that  He 
said  that  He  was  the  Son  of  God,  and  that  by 
healing  on  the  Sabbath  He  broke  the  law,  which 
He  said  that  He  did  not  break,  but  fulfilled. 
And  when  Pontius  Pilate,  who  then  as  legate  had 
authority  in  Syria,  perceived  that  the  cause  did 
not  belong  to  the  office  of  the  Roman  judge,  he 
sent  Him  to  Herod  the  Tetrarch,  and  permitted 
the  Jews  themselves  to  be  the  judges  of  their 
own  law :  who,  having  received  the  power  of 
punishing  His  guilt,  sentenced  ^  Him  to  the 
cross,  but  first  scourged  and  struck  him  with 
their  hands,  put  on  Him  a  crown  of  thorns,  spat 
upon  His  face,  gave  Him  gall  and  vinegar  to  eat 
and  drink ;  and  amidst  these  things  no  word 
was  heard  to  fall  from  His  lips.  Then  the  exe- 
cutioners, having  cast  lots  over  His  tunic  and 
mantle,  suspended  Him  on  the  cross,  and  affixed 
Him  to  it,  though  on  the  next  day  they  were 
about  to  celebrate  the  Passover,  that  is,  their 
festival.  Which  crime  was  followed  by  prodi- 
gies, that  they  might  understand  the  impiety 
which  they  had  committed  ;  for  at  the  same  mo- 
ment in  which  He  expired,  there  was  a  great 
earthquake,  and  a  withdrawing''  of  the  sun,  so 
that  the  day  was  turned  into  night. 

CHAP.  XLVI. IT    IS    PROVED   FROM    THE    PROPHETS 

THAT   THE    PASSION    AND    DEATH    OF  CHRIST   HAD 
BEEN    FORETOLD. 

And  the  prophets  had  predicted  that  all  these 
things  would  thus  come  to  pass.  Isaiah  thus 
speaks  :  5  "  I  am  not  rebellious,  nor  do  I  oppose  : 
I  gave  my  back  to  the  scourge,  and  my  cheeks 
to  the  hand  :  I  turned  not  away  my  face  from 
the  foulness  of  spitting."  The  same  prophet 
says  respecting  His  silence  :  *^  "  I  was  brought  as 
a  sheep  to  the  slaughter,  and  as  a  lamb  before  its 
shearers  is  dumb,  so  He  opened  not  His  mouth." 
David  also,  in  the  xxxivth  Psalm  :  ^  "  The  abjects 
were  gathered  together  against  me,  and  they 
knew  me  not :  they  were  scattered,  yet  felt 
no  remorse :  they  tempted  me,  and  gnashed 
upon  me  with  their  teeth."  The  same  also  says 
respecting  food  and  drink  in  the  Ixviiith  Psalm  :  ^ 
"  They  gave  me  also  gall  for  my  meat,  and  in 
my  thirst  they  gave  me  vinegar  to  drink."     Also 


3  Addixerunt.     Some  read  "  affixerunt,"  affixed  Him  to  the  cross. 
*  Deliquium  solis.     [Elucidation  IV. J 
5  Isa.  1   3. 
<>  Isa.  liii.  7. 

7  Ps.  XXXV.  15,  16.     See  Instit.,  iv.  i8. 

8  Ps.  Ixix.  21. 


THE   EPITOME   OF   THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


241 


respecting  the  cross  of  Christ :  '  "  And  they 
pierced  my  hands  and  my  feet,  they  numbered 
all  my  bones  :  they  themselves  have  looked  and 
stared  upon  me  ;  they  parted  my  garments  among 
them,  and  cast  lots  upon  my  vesture."  Moses 
also  says  in  Deuteronomy  :  ^  "  And  thy  life  shall 
hang  in  doubt  before  thine  eyes,  and  thou  shalt 
fear  day  and  night,  and  shalt  have  none  assur- 
ance of  thy  life."  Also  in  Numbers  : '  "  God 
is  not  in  doubt  as  a  man,  nor  does  He  suffer 
threats  as  the  son  of  man."  Also  Zechariah 
says  :  ■♦  "  And  they  shall  look  on  me  whom  they 
pierced."  Amos  5  thus  speaks  of  the  obscuring 
of  the  sun  :  "  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord,  the 
sun  shall  go  down  at  noon,  and  the  clear  day 
shall  be  dark ;  and  I  will  turn  your  feasts  into 
mourning,  and  your  songs  into  lamentation." 
Jeremiah ''  also  speaks  of  the  city  of  Jerusalem, 
in  which  He  suffered  :  "  Her  sun  is  gone  down 
while  it  was  yet  day ;  she  hath  been  confounded 
and  reviled,  and  the  residue  of  them  will  I 
deliver  to  the  sword."  Nor  were  these  things 
spoken  in  vain.  For  after  a  short  time  the  Em- 
peror Vespasian  subdued  the  Jews,  and  laid  waste 
their  lands  with  the  sword  and  fire,  besieged  and 
reduced  them  by  famine,  overthrew  Jerusalem, 
led  the  captives  in  triumph,  and  prohibited  the 
others  who  were  left  from  ever  returning  to  their 
native  land.  And  these  things  were  done  by 
God  on  account  of  that  crucifixion  of  Christ, 
as  He  before  declared  this  to  Solomon  in  their 
Scriptures,  saying,^  "And  Israel  shall  be  for 
perdition  and  a  reproach*  to  the  people,  and 
this  house  shall  be  desolate ;  and  every  one  that 
shall  pass  by  shall  be  astonished,  and  shall  say, 
Why  hath  God  done  these  evils  to  this  land,  and 
to  this  house?  And  they  shall  say.  Because  they 
forsook  the  Lord  their  God,  and  persecuted  their 
King,  who  was  dearly  beloved  by  God,  and  cruci- 
fied Him  with  great  degradation,  therefore  hath 
God  brought  upon  them  these  evils."  For  what 
would  they  not  deserve  who  put  to  death  their 
Lord,  who  had  come  for  their  salvation  ? 

CHAP.  XLVII,  —  OF  THE  RESURRECTION  OF  JESUS 
CHRIST,  THE  SENDING  OF  THE  APOSTLES,  AND 
THE    ASCENSION  OF   THE   SAVIOUR   INTO    HEAVEN. 

After  these  things  they  took  His  body  down 
from  the  cross,  and  buried  it  in  a  tomb.  But 
on  the  third  day,  before  daybreak,  there  was  an 
earthquake,  and  the  stone  with  which  they  had 
closed  the  sepulchre  was  removed,  and  He  arose. 
But  nothing  was  found  in  the  sepulchre  except 


the  clothes  in  which  the  body  had  been  wrapped.^ 
But  that  He  would  rise  again  on  the  third  day, 
the  prophets  had  long  ago  foretold.  David,  in 
the  xvth  Psalm  : '°  "  Thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul 
in  hell,  neither  wilt  Thou  suffer  Thine  Holy  One 
to  see  corruption."  Likewise  Hosea  :  "  "  This 
my  Son  is  wise,  therefore  He  shall  not  stay  long 
in  the  anguish  of  His  sons  :  and  I  will  ransom 
Him  from  the  hand  of  the  grave.  Where  is  thy 
judgment,  O  death,  where  is  thy  sting?"  The 
same  again  says  :  '-  "  After  two  days  He  will  re- 
vive us  on  the  third  day." 

Therefore,  after  His  resurrection  He  went  into 
Galilee,  and  again  assembled  His  disciples,  who 
had  fled  through  fear  ;  and  having  given  them 
commands  which  He  wished  to  be  observed,  and 
having  arranged  for  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel 
throughout  the  whole  world.  He  breathed  into 
them  the  Holy  Spirit, '^  and  gave  them  the  power 
of  working  miracles,  that  they  might  act  for  the 
welfare  of  men  as  well  by  deeds  as  words  ;  and 
then  at  length,  on  the  fortieth  day.  He  returned 
to  His  Father,  being  carried  up  into  a  cloud. 
The  prophet  Daniel''*  had  long  before  shown 
this,  saying,  "  I  saw  in  the  night  vision,  and,  be- 
hold, one  like  the  Son  of  man  came  with  the 
clouds  of  heaven,  and  came  to  the  Ancient  of 
days  ;  and  they  who  stood  beside  Him  brought 
Him  near  before  Him.  And  there  was  given 
Him  a  kingdom,  and  glory,  and  dominion,  and 
all  people,  tribes,  and  languages  shall  serve  Him  ; 
and  His  power  is  an  everlasting  one,  which 
shall  not  pass  away,  and  His  kingdom  that 
which  shall  not  be  destroyed."  Also  David  in 
the  cixth  Psalm :  '5  *'  The  Lord  said  unto  my 
Lord,  Sit  Thou  at  my  right  hand,  until  I  make 
Thine  enemies  Thy  footstool." 

CHAP.     XLVIII.  —  OF     THE     DISINHERITING     OF    THE 
JEWS,    AND   THE   ADOPTION   OF   THE   GENTILES. 

Since,  therefore.  He  sits  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  about  to  tread  down  His  enemies,  who  tor- 
tured Him,  when  He  shall  come  to  judge  the 
world,  it  is  evident  that  no  hope  remains  to  the 
Jews,  unless,  turning  themselves  to  repentance, 
and  being  cleansed  from  the  blood  with  which 
they  polluted  themselves,  they  shall  begin  to 
hope  in  Him  whom  they  denied.'^  Therefore 
Esdras  thus  speaks  :  '7  "  This  passover  is  our 
Saviour  and  our  refuge.  Consider  and  let  it 
come  into  your  heart,  that  we  have  to  abase 


•  Ps.  xxii.  16-18. 

^  Deut.  xxviii.  66. 
3  Num.  xxiii.  ig. 

*  Zech.  xii.  lo. 

5  Amos  viii.  9,  10, 

*  Jcr.  XV.  9. 

'  I  Kings  IX.  7-9. 

•  See  Instit.,  iv.  18,  p.  121,  supra. 


9  Exuviae  corporis. 

^^  Ps.  xvi.  10. 

"  Hos.  xiii.  13,  Septuagint  version. 

'^  Hos.  vi.  a. 

'3  [Here  is  an  incidental  token  of  the  orthodoxy  of  our  Christian 
philosopher  as  to  the  Third  Person.  He  is  deficient,  however,  in  prac- 
tically enforcing  the  Spirit's  work  and  our  need  of  His  grace.  This 
may  nave  been  from  a  worthy  motive,  and  according  to  discipline.] 

'■»  Dan.  vii.  13. 

'5   Ps.  ex.  I. 

'<>  Negaverunf,  others  read  "  necaverunt,"  killed. 

"  See  Instil.,  iv.  j8,  p.  121,  supra. 


242 


THE   EPITOME   OF   THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


Him  in  a  figure  :  and  after  these  things  we  have 
hoped  '  in  Him." 

Now  that  the  Jews  were  disinherited,  because 
they  rejected  Christ,  and  that  we,  who  are  of 
the  Gentiles,  were  adopted  into  their  place,  is 
proved  by  the  Scriptures.  Jeremiah  ^  thus 
speaks  :  "  I  have  forsaken  mine  house,  I  have 
given  mine  heritage  into  the  hands  of  her  ene- 
mies. Mine  heritage  is  become  unto  me  as  a 
lion  in  the  forest ;  it  hath  given  forth  its  voice 
against  me  :  therefore  have  I  hated  it."  Also 
Malachi :  ^  "I  have  no  pleasure  in  you,  saith 
the  Lord,  neither  will  I  accept  an  offering  at 
your  hand.  For  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  even 
unto  the  going  down  thereof,  my  name  shall  be 
great  among  the  Gentiles."  Isaiah  also  thus 
speaks  :  ■»  "I  come  to  gather  all  nadons  and 
tongues :  and  they  shall  come  and  see  my 
glory."  The  same  says  in  another  place,5  speak- 
ing in  the  person  of  the  Father  to  the  Son  :  "  I 
the  Lord  have  called  Thee  in  righteousness,  and 
will  hold  Thine  hand,  and  will  keep  Thee,  and 
give  Thee  for  a  covenant  of  my  people,  for  a 
light  of  the  Gentiles ;  to  open  the  eyes  of  the 
blind,  to  bring  out  the  prisoners  from  the  prison, 
and  them  that  sit  in  darkness  out  of  the  prison- 
house." 


CHAP.    XLIX. 


•THAT   GOD   IS   ONE   ONLY. 


If  therefore  the  Jews  have  been  rejected  by 
God,  as  the  faith  due  to  the  sacred  writings 
shows,  and  the  Gentiles,  as  we  see,  brought  in, 
and  freed  from  the  darkness  of  this  present  life 
and  from  the  chains  "of  demons,  it  follows  that 
no  other  hope  is  proposed  to  man,  unless  he 
shall  follow  true  religion  and  true  wisdom,  which 
is  in  Christ,  and  he  who  is  ignorant  of  Him  is 
always  estranged  from  the  truth  and  from  God. 
Nor  let  the  Jews,  or  philosophers,  flatter  them- 
selves respecting  the  Supreme  God.  He  who 
has  not  acknowledged  the  Son  has  been  unable 
to  acknowledge  the  Father.^  I'his  is  wisdom, 
and  this  is  the  mystery  of  the  Supreme  God. 
God  willed  that  He  should  be  acknowledged 
and  worshipped  through  Him.?  On  this  account 
He  sent  the  prophets  beforehand  to  announce 
His  coming,  that  when  the  things  which  had 
been  foretold  were  fulfilled  in  Him,  then  He 
might  be  believed  by  men  to  be  both  the  Son 
of  God  and  God. 

Nor,  however,  must  the  opinion  be  entertained 
that  there  are  two  Gods,  for  the  Father  and 
the  Son  are  one.  For  since  the  Father  loves  the 
:Son,  and  gives  all  things  to  Him,  and  the  Son 

*  Speravimus;  others  "  sperabimus." 

*  Jer.  xii.  7,  8. 
3  Mai.  i.  10,  II. 

*  Isa.  Ixvi.  18. 

5  Isa.  xlii.  6,  7. 

6  [r  John  iv.  13.] 

'  [John  xiv.  6,  13,  and  v.  23.] 


faithfully  obeys  the  Father,  and  wills  nothing  ex- 
cept that  which  the  Father  does,  it  is  plain  that 
so  close  a  relationship  cannot  be  separated,  so 
that  they  should  be  said  to  be  two  in  whom 
there  is  but  one  substance,  and  will,  and  faith. 
Therefore  the  Son  is  through  the  Father,  and 
the  Father  through  the  Son.  One  honour  is  to 
be  given  to  both,  as  to  one  God,  and  is  to  be  so 
divided  through  the  worship  of  the  two,  that  the 
division  itself  may  be  bound  by  an  inseparable 
bond  of  union.  He  will  leave  nothing  to  him- 
self, who  separates  either  the  Father  from  the 
Son,  or  the  Son  from  the  Father.^ 

CHAP.    L.  —  WHY    GOD    ASSUMED    A    MORTAL    BODY, 
AND   SUFFERED    DEATH. 

It  remains  to  answer  those  also,  who  deem 
that  it  was  unbecoming  and  unreasonable  that 
God  should  be  clothed  with  a  mortal  body ; 
that  He  should  be  in  subjection  to  men  ;  that 
He  should  endure  insults ;  that  He  should  even 
suffer  tortures  and  death.  I  will  speak  my  sen- 
timents, and  I  will  sum  up,  as  I  shall  be  able, 
an  immense  subject  in  few  words.  He  who 
teaches  anything,  ought,  as  I  think,  himself  to 
practise  what  he  teaches,  that  he  may  compel 
men  to  obey.  For  if  he  shall  not  practise  them, 
he  will  detract  from  the  faith  due  to  his  precepts. 
Therefore  there  is  need  of  examples,  that  the 
precepts  which  are  given  may  have  firmness, 
and  if  any  one  shall  prove  contumacious,  and 
shall  say  that  they  cannot  be  carried  out  in  prac- 
tice, the  instructor  may  refute  him  by  actual 
fact.'?  Therefore  a  system  of  teaching  cannot 
be  perfect,  when  it  is  delivered  by  words  only ; 
but  it  then  becomes  perfect,  when  it  is  completed 
by  deeds. 

Since  therefore  Christ  was  sent  to  men  as  a 
teacher  of  virtue,  for  the  perfection  of  His  teach- 
ing it  was  plainly  befitting  that  He  should  act  as 
well  as  teach.  But  if  He  had  not  assumed  a 
human  body,  He  would  not  have  been  able  to 
practise  what  He  taught,  —  that  is,  not  to  be 
angry,  not  to  desire  riches,  not  to  be  inflamed 
with  lust,  not  to  fear  pain,  to  despise  death. 
These  things  are  plainly  virtues,  but  they  cannot 
be  done  without  flesh.  Therefore  He  assumed 
a  body  on  this  account,  that,  since  He  taught 
that  the  desires  of  the  flesh  must  be  overcome. 
He  might  in  person  first  practise  it,  that  no  one 
might  allege  the  frailty  of  the  flesh  as  an  excuse. 

CHAP.    LI.  —  OF    THE    DEATH    OF    CHRIST    ON    THE 
CROSS. 

I  will  now  speak  of  the  mystery  of  the  cross, 
lest  any  one  should  happen  to  say.  If  death  must 
be  endured  by  Him,  it  should  have  been  not  one 


*   [i  John  i.  22,  23.] 

9  Praesenti  opere  convincat. 


THE   EPITOME   OF   THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


243 


that  was  manifestly  infamous  and  dishonourable, 
but  one  which  had  some  honour.  I  know,  in- 
deed, that  many,  while  they  dislike  the  name  of 
the  cross,  shrink  from  the  truth,  though  there  is 
in  it  great  reasonableness  and  power.  For  since 
He  was  sent  for  this  purpose,  that  He  might 
open  to  the  lowest  men  the  way  to  salvation,  He 
made  Himself  humble  that  He  might  free  them. 
Therefore  He  underwent  that  kind  of  death 
which  is  usually  inflicted  on  the  humble,  that  an 
opportunity  of  imitation  might  be  given  to  all. 
IVIoreover,  since  He  was  about  to  rise  again,  it 
was  not  allowable  that  His  body  should  be  in 
any  way  mutilated,  or  a  bone  broken,  which  hap- 
pens to  those  who  are  beheaded.  Therefore  the 
cross  was  preferred,  which  reserved  the  body 
with  the  bones  uninjured  for  the  resurrection. 

To  these  grounds  it  was  also  added,  that  hav- 
ing undertaken  to  suffer  and  to  die,  it  was  befit- 
ting that  He  should  be  lifted  up.  Thus  the 
cross  exalted  Him  both  in  fact  and  in  emblem,' 
so  that  His  majesty  and  power  became  known 
to  all,  together  with  His  passion.  For  in  that 
He  extended  His  hands  on  the  cross.  He  plainly 
stretched  out  His  wings  towards  the  east  and 
the  west,  under  which  all  nations  from  either 
side  of  the  world  might  assemble  and  repose. 
But  of  what  great  weight  this  sign  is,  and  what 
power  it  has,  is  evident,  since  all  the  host  of 
demons  is  expelled  and  put  to  flight  by  this  sign. 
And  as  He  Himself  before  His  passion  put  to 
confusion  demons  by  His  word  and  command, 
so  now,  by  the  name  and  sign  of  the  same  pas- 
sion, unclean  spirits,  having  insinuated  them- 
selves into  the  bodies  of  men,  are  driven  out, 
when  racked  and  tormented,  and  confessing 
themselves  to  be  demons,  they  yield  themselves 
to  God,  who  harasses  them.  What  therefore 
can  the  Greeks  expect  from  their  superstitions 
and  with  their  wisdom,  when  they  see  that  their 
gods,  whom  they  do  not  deny  to  be  demons 
also,  are  subdued  by  men  through  the  cross? 

CHAP.     LII.  THE    HOPE     OF     THE     SALVATION     OF 

MEN  CONSISTS  IN  THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THE 
TRUE  GOD,  AND  OF  THE  HATRED  OF  THE 
HEATHENS   AGAINST   THE   CHRISTIANS. 

There  is  therefore  but  one  hope  of  life  for  men, 
one  harbour  of  safety,  one  refuge  of  liberty,  if, 
laying  aside  the  errors  by  which  they  were  held, 
they  open  the  eyes  of  their  mind  and  recognise 
God,  in  whom  alone  is  the  abode  of  truth ; 
despise  earthly  things,  and  those  made  from  the 
ground  ;  esteem  as  nothing  philosophy,  which  is 
foolishness  with  God ;  and  having  undertaken 
true  wisdom,  that  is,  religion,  become  heirs  of 
immortality.  But  indeed  they  are  not  so  much 
opposed  to  the  truth  as  to  their  own  safety  ;  and 

■  Significatione. 


when  they  hear  these  things,  they  abominate 
them  as  some  inexpiable  wickedness.  But  they 
do  not  even  endure  ^  to  hear :  they  think  that 
their  ears  are  polluted  with  impiety  ^  if  they 
hear ;  nor  do  they  now  refrain  from  reproaches, 
but  assail  them  with  the  most  insulting  words  ; 
and  also,  if  they  have  obtained  the  power,  per- 
secute them  as  public  enemies,  yea,  even  as 
worse  than  enemies;  for  enemies,  when  they 
have  been  vanquished,  are  punished  with  death 
or  slavery ;  nor  is  there  any  torturing  after  the 
laying  down  of  arms,  although  those  deserved 
to  suffer  all  things  who  wished  so  to  act,  that 
piety  might  have  place  among  swords. 

Cruelty,  combined  with  innocence,  is  unheard 
of,  nor  is  it  worthy  of  the  condition  of  victorious 
enemies.  What  is  the  so  powerful  cause  of  this 
fury?  Doubtless,  because  they  cannot  contend 
on  the  ground  of  reason,  they  urge  forward  their 
cause  by  means  of  violence ;  and,  with  the  sub- 
ject not  understood,  they  condemn  those  as 
most  pernicious  persons  who  have  declined  to 
make  a  stand  respecting  the  fact  of  their  inno- 
cence. Nor  do  they  deem  it  sufficient  that 
those  whom  they  unreasonably  hate  should  die 
by  a  speedy  and  simple  death  ;  but  they  lacerate 
them  with  refined  tortures,  that  they  may  satisfy 
their  hatred,  which  is  not  produced  by  any  fault, 
but  by  the  truth,  which  is  hateful  to  those  who 
live  wickedly,  because  they  take  it  ill  that  there 
are  some  whom  their  deeds  cannot  please. 
They  desire  in  every  way  to  destroy  these,  that 
they  may  be  able  to  sin  without  restraint  in  the 
absence  of  any  witness. 

CHAP.      LIII. THE      REASONS     OF     THE      HATRED 

AGAINST    THE    CHRISTIANS    ARE     EX.^MINED     AND 
REFUTED. 

But  they  say  that  they  do  these  things  for  the 
defence  of  their  gods.  In  the  first  place,  if  they 
are  gods,  and  have  any  power  and  influence, 
they  have  no  need  of  the  defence  and  protec- 
tion of  men,  but  they  manifestly  defend  them- 
selves. Or  how  is  man  able  to  hope  for  aid 
from  them,  if  they  are  unable  to  avenge  even 
their  own  injuries?  Therefore  it  is  a  vain  and 
foolish  thing  to  wish  to  be  avengers  of  the  gods, 
except  that  their  distrust  is  more  apparent  from 
this.  For  he  who  undertakes  the  protection  of 
the  god  whom  he  worships,  admits  the  worth- 
lessness  of  that  god  ;  but  if  he  worships  him  on 
this  account,  because  he  thinks  him  powerful, 
he  ought  not  to  wish  to  defend  him,  by  wlioni 
he  himself  ought  to  be  defended.  We  there- 
fore act  rightly.  For  when  those  defenders  of 
false  gods,  who  are  rebellious  against  the  true 
God,  persecute   His  name  in  us,  we  resist  not 


2  Ne  audire  quidem  patiuntur;  others  read  "  patientcr." 

3  Sacrilegio. 


244 


THE   EPITOME    OF   THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


either  in  deed  or  in  word,  but  with  meekness, 
and  silence,  and  patience,  we  endure  whatever 
cruelty  is  able  to  contrive  against  us.  For  we 
have  confidence  in  God,  from  whom  we  expect 
that  retribution  will  hereafter  follow.  Nor  is  this 
confidence  ungrounded,  since  we  have  in  some 
cases  heard,  and  in  other  cases  seen,  the  mis- 
erable ends  of  all  those  who  have  dared  to  com- 
mit this  crime.  Nor  has  any  one  had  it  in  his 
power  to  insult  God  with  impunity  ;  but  he  who 
has  been  unwilling  to  learn  by  word  has  learned 
by  his  own  punishment  who  is  the  true  God. 

I  should  wish  to  know,  when  they  compel  men 
to  sacrifice  against  their  will,  what  reasoning  they 
have  with  themselves,  or  to  whom  they  make  that 
offering.  If  it  is  made  to  the  gods,  that  is  not 
worship,  nor  an  acceptable  sacrifice,  which  is 
made  by  those  who  are  displeasing  to  them, 
which  is  extorted  by  injury,  which  is  enforced  by 
pain.  But  if  it  is  done  to  those  whom  they 
compel,  it  is  plainly  not  a  benefit,  which  any  one 
would  not  receive,  he  even  prefers  rather  to 
die.  If  it  is  a  good  to  which  you  call  me,  why 
do  you  invite  me  with  evil?  why  with  blows,  and 
not  with  words?  why  not  by  argument,  but  by 
bodily  tortures?  Whence  it  is  manifest  that  that 
is  an  evil,  to  which  you  do  not  allure  me  willing, 
but  drag  me  refusing.  What  folly  is  it  to  wish 
to  consult  the  good  of  any  one  against  his  will ! 
If  any  one,  under  the  pressure  of  evils,  attempts 
to  have  recourse  to  death,  can  you,  if  you  either 
wrest  the  sword  from  his  hand,  or  cut  the  halter, 
or  drag  him  away  from  the  precipice,  or  pour 
out  the  poison,  boast  yourself  as  the  preserver  of 
the  man,  when  he,  whom  you  think  that  you  have 
preserved,  does  not  thank  you,  and  thinks  that 
you  have  acted  ill  towards  him,  in  averting  from 
him  the  death  which  he  desired,  and  in  not  per- 
mitting him  to  reach  the  end  and  rest  from  his 
labours?  For  a  benefit  ought  not  to  be  weighed 
according  to  the  quality  of  the  action,  but  accord- 
ing to  the  feelings  of  him  who  receives  it.  Why 
should  you  reckon  as  a  benefit  that  which  is  an 
injury  to  me?  Do  you  wish  me  to  worship  your 
gods,  which  I  consider  deadly  to  myself?  If  it 
is  a  good,  I  do  not  envy  it.  Enjoy  your  good 
by  yourself  There  is  no  reason  why  you  should 
wish  to  succour  my  error,  which  I  have  under- 
taken by  my  judgment  and  inclination.  If  it  is 
evil,  why  do  you  drag  me  to  a  participation  in 
evil?  Use  your  own  fortune.  I  prefer  to  die  in 
the  practice  of  that  which  is  good,  than  to  live 
in  evil. 


CHAP.    LIV. 


-OF    THE    FREEDOM    OF 
THE   WORSHIP   OF   GOD. 


RELIGION    IN 


These  things  may  indeed  be  said  with  justice. 
But  who  will  hear,  when  men  of  furious  and  un- 
bridled spirit  think  that  their  authority  is  dimin- 


ished if  there  is  any  freedom  in  the  affairs  of 
men  ?  But  it  is  religion  alone  in  which  freedom 
has  placed  its  dwelling.  For  it  is  a  matter  which 
is  voluntary  above  all  others,  nor  can  necessity 
be  imposed  upon  any,  so  as  to  worship  that  which 
he  does  not  wish  to  worship.'  Some  one  may 
perhaps  pretend,  he  cannot  wish  it.  In  short, 
some,  through  fear  of  torments,  or  overcome  by 
tortures,  have  assented  to  detestable  sacrifices  : 
they  never  do  that  voluntarily  which  they  did 
from  necessity ;  but  when  the  opportunity  is 
again  given  to  them,  and  liberty  restored,  they 
again  betake  themselves  to  God,  and  appease 
Him  with  prayers  and  tears,  repenting  not  of  the 
will,  which  they  had  not,  but  of  the  necessity 
which  they  endured ;  and  pardon  is  not  denied 
to  those  who  make  satisfaction.  What  then  does 
he  accomplish  who  pollutes  the  body,  since  he 
cannot  change  the  will  ? 

But,  in  fact,  men  of  weak  understanding,  if 
they  have  induced  any  man  of  spirit  ^  to  sacrifice 
to  their  gods,  with  incredible  alacrity  insolently 
exult,  and  rejoice,  as  though  they  had  sent  an 
enemy  under  the  yoke.  But  if  any  one,  neither 
frightened  by  threats  nor  by  tortures,  shall  have 
chosen  to  prefer  his  faith  to  his  life,  cruelty  puts 
forth  all  its  ingenuity  against  him,  plans  dreadful 
and  intolerable  things ;  and  because  they  know 
that  death  for  the  cause  of  God  is  glorious,  and 
that  this  is  a  victory  on  our  side,  if,  having  over- 
come the  torturers,  we  lay  down  our  life  in  be- 
half of  the  faith  and  religion,  they  also  themselves 
strive  to  conquer  us.  They  do  not  put  us  to 
death,  but  they  search  out  new  and  unheard-of 
tortures,  that  the  frailty  of  the  flesh  may  yield  to 
pains,  and  if  it  does  not  yield,  they  put  off  fur- 
ther punishment,  and  apply  diligent  care  to  the 
wounds,  that  while  the  scars  are  yet  fresh,  a 
repetition  of  the  torture  may  inflict  more  pain ; 
and  while  they  practise  this  torture  ^  upon  the 
innocent,  they  evidently  consider  themselves 
pious,  and  just,  and  religious  (for  they  are  de- 
lighted with  such  sacrifices  to  their  gods),  but 
they  term  the  others  impious  and  desperate. 
What  perversity  is  this,  that  he  who  is  punished, 
though  innocent,  should  be  called  desperate  and 
impious,  and  that  the  torturer,  on  the  other 
hand,  should  be  called  just  and  pious  ! 

CHAP.    LV.  —  THE    HEATHENS  CHARGE  JUSTICE  WITH 
IMPIETY    IN    FOLLOWING    GOD. 

But  they  say  that  those  are  rightly  and  deserv- 
edly punished,  who  dislike  the  public  rites  of  re- 
ligion handed  down  to  them  by  their  ancestors. 
What  if  those  ancestors  were  foolish  in  undertak- 
ing vain  religious  rites,  as  we  have  shown  before, 


'  [Religious  liberty  maintained  and  introduced  by  the  Gospel. 
Corrupted  Christianity  only  is  responsible  for  the  reverse.] 
^  Fortem;  some  read  "  forte,"  by  chance, 
3  Carnificinam. 


THE   EPITOME   OF   THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


245 


shall  we  be  prohibited  from  following  true  and 
better  things  ?  Why  do  we  deprive  ourselves 
of  liberty,  and  become  enslaved  to  the  errors  of 
others,  as  though  bound  '  to  them  ?  Let  it  be 
permitted  us  to  be  wise,  let  it  be  permitted  us  to 
inquire  into  the  truth.  But,  however,  if  it  pleases 
them  to  defend  the  folly  -  of  their  ancestors,  why 
are  the  Egyptians  suffered  to  escape,  who  wor- 
ship cattle  and  beasts  of  every  kind  as  deities? 
Why  are  the  gods  themselves  made  the  subjects 
of  comic 3  representations?  and  why  is  he  hon- 
oured who  derides  them  most  wittily  ?  Why  are 
philosophers  attended  to,  who  either  say  that 
there  are  no  gods,  or  that,  if  there  are  any,  they 
take  no  interest  in,  and  do  not  regard  the  affairs 
of  men,  or  argue  that  there  is  no  providence  at 
all,  which  rules  the  world? 

But  they  alone  of  all  are  judged  impious  who 
follow  God  and  the  truth.  And  since  this  is  at 
once  justice,  and  wisdom,  they  lay  to  its  charge 
either  impiety  or  folly,  and  do  not  perceive  what 
it  is  which  deceives  them,  when  they  call  evil 
good,  and  good  evil.  Many  indeed  of  the  phi- 
losophers, and  especially  Plato  and  Aristotle, 
spoke  many  things  about  justice,  asserting  and 
extolling  that  virtue  with  the  greatest  praise,  be- 
cause it  gives  to  each  its  due,  because  it  main- 
tains equity  in  all  things ;  and  whereas  the  other 
virtues  are  as  it  were  silent,  and  shut  up  within, 
that  it  is  justice  alone  which  is  neither  concerned  •* 
for  itself  only,  nor  hidden,  but  altogether  shows  it- 
self 5  abroad,  and  is  ready  for  conferring  a  benefit, 
so  as  to  assist  as  many  as  possible  :  as  though  in 
truth  justice  ought  to  be  in  judges  only,  and  those 
placed  in  any  post  of  authority,  and  not  in  all  men. 

And  yet  there  is  no  one  of  men,  not  even  of 
the  lowest  and  of  beggars,  who  is  not  capable 
of  justice.  But  because  they  did  not  know  what  it 
was,  from  what  source  it  proceeded,  and  what 
was  its  mode  of  operation,  they  assigned  to  a  few 
only  that  highest  virtue,  that  is,  the  common 
good  of  all,  and  said  that  it  aimed  at  ^  no  advan- 
tages peculiar  to  itself,  but  only  the  interests  of 
others.  And  not  without  reason  was  Carneades 
raised  up,  a  man  of  the  greatest  talent  and  pene- 
tration, to  refute  their  speech,  and  overthrow  the 
justice,  which  had  no  firm  foundation;  not  because 
he  thought  that  justice  was  to  be  blamed,  but  that 
he  might  show  that  its  defenders  brought  forward 
no  firm  or  certain  argument  respecting  justice. 

CHAP.    LVI.  —  OF  JUSTICE,   WHICH   IS   THE  WORSHIP 
OF  THE   TRUE   GOD. 

For  if  justice  is  the  worship  of  the  true  God 
(for  what  is  so  just  with  respect  to  equity,  so 


'  Addicti. 

^  Stuhitiam.     This  word  is  wanting  in  the  MSS.,  but  this  or  some 
such  word  is  necessary  to  complete  the  sense. 
3  Mimi;   wanting  in  some  editions. 
*  Sibi  tantum  conciliata  sit. 
S  Foras  tota  promincat. 
^  Aucupari. 


pious  with  respect  to  honour,  so  necessary  with 
respect  to  safety,  as  to  acknowledge  God  as  a 
parent,  to  reverence  Him  as  Lord,  and  to  obey 
His  law  or  precepts?),  it  follows  that  the  philos- 
ophers were  ignorant  of  justice,  for  they  neither 
acknowledged  God  Himself,  nor  observed  His 
worship  and  law  ;  and  on  this  account  they  might 
have  been  refuted  by  Carneades,  whose  disputa- 
tion was  to  this  effect,  that  there  is  no  natural 
justice,  and  therefore  that  all  animals  defended 
their  own  interests  by  the  guidance  of  nature  it- 
self, and  therefore  that  justice,  if  it  promotes  the 
advantages  of  others  and  neglects  its  own,  is  to 
be  called  foolishness.  But  if  all  people  who  are 
possessed  of  power,  and  the  Romans  themselves, 
who  are  masters  of  the  whole  world,  were  willing 
to  follow  justice,  and  to  restore  to  every  one  his 
property  which  they  have  seized  by  force  and 
arms,  they  will  return  to  cottages  and  a  condition 
of  want.  And  if  they  did  this,  they  might  indeed 
be  just,  but  they  must  of  necessity  be  considered 
foolish,  who  proceed  to  injure  themselves  for  the 
advantage  of  others.  Then,  if  any  one  should 
find  a  man  who  was  through  a  mistake  offering 
for  sale  gold  as  mountain-brass,  or  silver  as  lead, 
and  necessity  should  compel  him  to  buy  it,  will 
he  conceal  his  knowledge  and  buy  it  for  a  small 
sum,  or  will  he  rather  inform  the  seller  of  its 
value  ?  If  he  shall  inform  him,  he  will  manifestly 
be  called  just ;  but  he  will  also  be  foolish,  for 
conferring  an  advantage  upon  another,  and  in- 
juring himself.  But  it  is  easy  to  Judge  in  a  case 
of  injury.  What  if  he  shall  incur  danger  of  his 
life,  so  that  it  shall  be  necessary  for  him  either 
to  kill  another  or  to  die,  what  will  he  do  ?  It 
may  happen  that,  having  suffered  shipwreck,  he 
may  find  some  feeble  person  clinging  to  a  plank  ; 
or,  his  army  having  been  defeated,  in  his  flight 
he  may  find  a  wounded  man  on  horseback  :  will 
he  thrust  the  one  from  the  plank,  the  other  from 
his  horse,  that  he  himself  may  be  able  to  escape  ? 
If  he  shall  wish  to  be  just,  he  will  not  do  it ;  but 
he  will  also  be  judged  foolish,  who  in  sparing  the 
life  of  another  shall  lose  his  own.  If  he  shall  do 
it,  he  will  indeed  appear  wise,  because  he  will 
provide  for  his  own  interests  ;  but  he  will  also  be 
wicked,  because  he  will  commit  a  wrong. 

CHAP.    LVn.  OF   WISDOM    AND    FOOLISHNESS. 

These  things  indeed  are  said  with  acuteness ; 
but  we  are  able  very  readily  to  reply  to  them. 
For  the  imitation  of  names  causes  it  thus  to 
appear.  For  justice  bears  a  resemblance  to 
foolishness,  and  yet  it  is  not  foolishness ;  and 
at  the  same  time  malice  bears  a  resemblance  to 
wisdom,  and  yet  it  is  not  wisdom.  But  as  that 
malice  is  intelligent  and  shrewd  in  preserving 
its  own  interests,  it  is  not  wisdom,  but  cunning 
and  craftiness  ;  so  likewise  justice  ought  not  to 
be   called    foolishness,  but   innocence,  because 


246 


THE    EPITOME    OF   THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


the  just  man  must  be  wise,  and  the  foolish  man 
unjust.  For  neither  reason  nor  nature  itself 
permits  that  he  who  is  just  should  not  be  wise, 
since  it  is  plain  that  the  just  man  does  nothing 
except  that  which  is  right  and  good,  and  always 
avoids  that  which  is  perverted  '  and  evil.  But 
who  will  be  able  to  distinguish  between  good 
and  evil,  depravity  and  rectitude,  but  he  who 
shall  be  wise  ?  But  the  fool  acts  badly,  because 
he  is  ignorant  of  what  is  good  and  evil.  There- 
fore he  does  wrong,  because  he  is  unable  to  dis- 
tinguish between  things  which  are  perverted  and 
those  which  are  right.  Therefore  justice  cannot 
be  befitting  to  the  foolish  man,  nor  wisdom  to 
the  unjust.  He  is  not  then  a  foolish  person  who 
has  not  thnist  off  a  shipwrecked  man  from  a 
plank,  nor  a  wounded  man  from  his  horse,  be- 
cause he  has  abstained  from  injury,  which  is  a 
sin ;  and  it  is  the  part  of  the  wise  man  to  avoid 
sin. 

But  that  he  should  appear  foolish  at  first  sight 
is  caused  by  this,  that  they  suppose  the  soul  to 
be  extinguished  together  with  the  body ;  and 
for  this  reason  they  refer  all  advantage  to  this 
life.  For  if  there  is  no  existence  after  death, 
it  is  plain  that  he  acts  foolishly  who  spares  the 
life  of  another  to  his  own  loss,  or  who  consults 
the  gain  of  another  more  than  his  own.  If 
death  destroys  the  soul,  we  must  use  our  endeav- 
ours to  live  for  a  longer  time,  and  more  to  our 
own  advantage  ;  but  if  there  remains  after  death 
a  life  of  immortality  and  blessedness,  the  just 
and  wise  man  will  certainly  despise  this  corpo- 
real existence,  with  all  earthly  goods,  because  he 
will  know  what  kind  of  a  reward  he  is  about  to 
receive  from  God.  Therefore  let  us  maintain 
innocency,  let  us  maintain  justice,  let  us  under- 
go the  appearance  of  foolishness,  that  we  may 
be  able  to  maintain  true  wisdom.  And  if  it 
appears  to  men  senseless  and  foolish  to  prefer 
torture  and  death  rather  than  to  sacrifice  to 
gods,  and  to  escape  without  harm,  let  us  how- 
ever strive  to  exhibit  faithfulness  towards  God 
by  all  virtue  and  by  all  jmtience.  Let  not  death 
terrify  us,  nor  pain  subdue  us,  so  as  to  prevent 
the  vigour  of  our  mind  and  constancy  from 
being  preserved  unshaken.  Let  them  call  us 
foolish,  whilst  they  themselves  are  most  foolish, 
and  blind  and  dull,  and  like  sheep  ;  who  do  not 
understand  that  it  is  a  deadly  thing  to  leave 
the  living  God,  and  prostrate  themselves  in  the 
adoration  of  earthly  objects ;  who  do  not  know 
that  eternal  punishment  awaits  those  who  have 
worshipped  senseless  images ;  and  that  those 
who  have  neither  refused  tortures  nor  death  for 
the  worship  and  honour  of  the  true  God  will  ob- 
tain eternal  life.  This  is  the  highest  faith  ;  this 
is  true  wisdom  ;  this  is  perfect  justice.     It  mat- 


'  Pravum. 


ters  nothing  to  us  what  fools  may  judge,  what 
trifling  men  may  think.  We  ought  to  await  the 
judgment  of  God,  that  we  may  hereafter  judge 
those  who  have  passed  judgment  on  us. 

CHAP.  LVIII.  —  OF  THE  TRUE  WORSHIP  OF  GOD,  AND 
SACRIFICE. 

I  have  spoken  of  justice,  what  was  its  nature. 
It  follows  that  I  show  what  is  true  sacrifice  to 
God,  what  is  the  most  just  manner  of  worship- 
ping Him,  lest  any  one  should  think  that  victims, 
or  odours,  or  precious  gifts,  are  desired  by  God, 
who,  if  He  is  not  subject  to  hunger,  and  thirst, 
and  cold,  and  desire  of  all  earthly  things,  does  not 
therefore  make  use  of  all  these  things  which  are 
presented  in  temples  and  to  gods  of  earth  ;  but 
as  corporeal  offerings  are  necessary  for  corporeal 
beings,  so  manifestly  an  incorporeal  sacrifice  is 
necessary  for  an  incorporeal  being.  But  God 
has  no  need  of  those  things  which  He  has  given 
to  man  for  his  use,  since  all  the  earth  is  under 
His  power :  He  needs  not  a  temple,  since  the 
world  is  His  dwelling  ;  He  needs  not  an  image, 
since  He  is  incomprehensible  both  to  the  eyes 
and  to  the  mind  ;  He  needs  not  earthly  lights, 
for  He  was  able  to  kindle  the  light  of  the  sun, 
with  the  other  stars,  for  the  use  of  man.  What 
then  does  God  require  from  man  but  worship  of 
the  mind,  which  is  pure  and  holy?  For  those 
things  which  are  made  by  the  hands,  or  are  out- 
side of  man,  are  senseless,  frail,  and  displeasing. 
This  is  true  sacrifice,  which  is  brought  forth  not 
from  the  chest  but  from  the  heart ;  not  that 
which  is  offered  by  the  hand,  but  by  the  mind. 
This  is  the  acceptable  victim,  which  the  mind 
sacrifices  of  itself.  For  what  do  victims  bestow  ? 
What  does  incense?  What  do  garments ?  What 
does  silver?  What  gold?  What  precious  stones, 
—  if  there  is  not  a  pure  mind  on  the  part  of  the 
worshipper?  Therefore  it  is  justice  only  which 
God  requires.  In  this  is  sacrifice ;  in  this  the 
worship  of  God,  respecting  which  I  must  now 
speak,  and  show  in  what  works  justice  must 
necessarily  be  contained. 

CHAP.     LIX.  —  OF    THE    WAYS    OF    LIFE,    AND    THE 
FIRST   TIMES    OF   THE   WORLD. 

That  there  are  two  ways  ^  of  human  life  was 
unknown  neither  to  philosophers  nor  to  poets, 
but  both  introduced  them  in  a  different  manner. 
The  philosophers  wished  the  one  to  be  the  way 
of  industry,  the  other  of  idleness  ;  but  in  this  re- 
spect they  were  less  correct  in  their  statements, 
that  they  referred  them  to  the  advantages  of  this 
life  only.  The  poets  spoke  better  who  said  that 
one  of  them  was  the  way  of  the  just,  the  other 


2  [The  Diit^  Vite.     A  feature  in  the  primitive  catechising. 
Epistle  of  Barnabas,  vol.  i.  p.  148  ;  also  this  volume,  iii/ra.\ 


See 


THE   EPITOME   OF   THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


247 


of  the  unjust ;  but  they  err  in  this,  that  they  say 
that  they  are  not  in  this  hfe,  but  in  the  shades 
below.      We   manifestly  speak   more   correctly, 
who  say  that  the  one  is  the  way  of  life,  the  other 
that  of  death.     And  here,  however,  we  say  that 
there  are  two  ways ;  but  the  one  on  the  right 
hand,  in  which  the  just  walk,  does  not  lead  to 
Elysium,  but  to  heaven,  for  they  become  im- 
mortal ;  the  other  on  the  left  leads  to  Tartarus,' 
for  the  unjust  are  sentenced  to  eternal  tortures. 
Therefore  the  way  of  justice,  which  leads  to  life, 
is  to  be  held  by  us.     Now  the  first  duty  of  jus- 
tice is  to  acknowledge  God  as  a  parent,  and  to 
fear  Him  as  a  master,  to  love  Him  as  a  father. 
For  the  same  Being  who  begat  us,  who  animated 
us  with  vital  breath,  who  nourishes  and  preserves 
us,  has  over  us,  not  only  as  a  father  but  also  as 
a  master,  authority  to  correct  us,  and  the  power 
of  life  and  death  ;  wherefore  twofold  honour  is 
due  to  Him  from  man,  that  is,  love  combined  with 
fear.     The  second  duty  of  justice  is  to  acknowl- 
edge man  as  a  brother.     For  if  the  same  God 
made  us,  and  produced  all  men  on  equal  terms 
to  justice  and  eternal  life,  it  is  manifest  that  we 
are  united  by  the  relationship  of  brotherhood ; 
and  he  who  does  not  acknowledge  this  is  unjust. 
But  the  origin  of  this  evil,  by  which  the  mutual 
society  of  men,  by  which  the  bond  of  relation- 
ship has  been  torn  asunder,  arises  from  ignorance 
of  the  true  God.     For  he  who  is  ignorant  of  that 
fountain  of  bounty  can  by  no  means  be  good. 
Hence  it  is  that,  from  the  time  when  a  multi- 
tude of  gods  began  to  be  consecrated  and  wor- 
shipped by  men,  justice,  as   the    poets   relate, 
being  put  to  flight,  every  compact  was  destroyed, 
the  fellowship  of  human  justice  was  destroyed. 
Then   every  one,   consulting   his   own   interest, 
reckoned  might  to  be  right,  injured  another,  at- 
tacked  by   frauds,  deceived'  by  treachery,  in- 
creased his  own  advantages  by  the  inconvenience 
of  others,  did  not  spare  relatives,  or  children,  or 
parents,  prepared  poisoned  cups  for  the  destruc- 
tion of  men,  beset  the  ways  with  the  sword,  in- 
fested the  seas,  gave  the  rein  to  his  lust,  wherever 
passion  led  him,  —  in  short,  esteemed  nothing 
sacred  which  his  dreadful  desire  did  not  violate. 
When  these  things  were  done,  then  men  insti- 
tuted laws  for  themselves  to  promote  the  public 
advantage,  that  they  might  meanwhile  i)rotect 
themselves  from  injuries.     But  the  fear  of  laws 
did  not  suppress  crimes,  but  it  checked  licen- 
tiousness.   For  laws  were  able  to  punish  offences, 
they   were   unable    to    punish    the    conscience. 
Therefore  the   things  which  before  were  done 
openly  began  to  be  done  secretly.     Justice  also 
was  evaded  by  stealth,  since  they  who  themselves 
presided   over  the   administration    of  the   laws, 
corrupted  by  gifts  and  rewards,  made  a  traffic 


of  their  sentences,  either  to  the  escape  ^  of  the 
evil  or  to  the  destruction  of  the  good.  To  these 
things  were  added  dissensions,  and  wars,  and  mu- 
tual depredations  ;  and  the  laws  being  crushed, 
the  power  of  acting  with  violence  was  assumed 
without  restraint. 


CHAP.    LX.  OF   THE   DUTIES    OF   JUSTICE. 

When  the  affairs  of  men  were  in  this  condi- 
tion, God  pitied  us,  revealed  and  displayed  Him- 
self   to   us,    that   in    Himself    we   might   learn 
religion,  faith,  purity,  and   mercy ;  that  having 
laid  aside  the  error  of  our  former  life,  together 
with   God    Himself  we   might  know  ourselves, 
whom  impiety  had  disunited  from  Him,  and  we 
niight  choose  *  the  divine  law,  which  unites  hu- 
man  afiairs  with   heavenly,  the    Lord    Himself 
delivering  it  to  us  ;  by  which  law  all  the  errors 
with  which  we   have   been   ensnared,  together 
with  vain  and   impious   superstitions,  might  be 
taken  away.     What  we  owe  to  man,  therefore, 
is   prescribed   by  that   same    divine  law  which 
teaches  that  whatever  you  render  to  man  is  ren- 
dered to  God.     But  the  root  of  justice,  and  the 
entire  foundation  of  equity,  is  that  you  should 
not  do   that  which  you  would  be   unwilling  to 
suffer,  but  should  measure  the  feelings  of  another 
by  your  own.     If  it  is  an  unpleasant  thing  to 
bear  an  injury,  and  he  who  has  done  it  appears 
unjust,   transfer  to  the  person  of  another  that 
which  you  feel  respecting  yourself,  and  to  your 
own   person  that  which   you  judge   respecting 
another,  and  you  will  understand  that  you  act 
as   unjustly   if  you   injure   another   as   another 
would  if  he  should  injure  you.     If  we  consider 
these    things,  we    shall   maintain   innocence,  in 
which  the  first  step  of  justice  is,  as  it  were,  con- 
tained.    For  the  first  thing  is,  not  to   injure; 
the  next  is,  to  be  of  service.     And  as  in  uncul- 
tivated lands,  before  you  begin  to  sow,  the  fields 
must  be  cleansed  by  tearing  up  the  thorns  and 
cutting  off  all  the  roots  of  trunks,  so  vices  must 
first  be  thrust  out  from  our  souls,  and  then  at 
length  virtues  must  be  implanted,  from  which 
the  fruits  of  immortality,  being  engendered  by 
the  word  of  God,  may  spring  up. 

CHAP.    LXI. OF   THE    PASSIONS. 

There  are  three  passions,  or,  so  to  speak,  three 
furies,  which. excite  such  great  perturbations  in 
the  souls  of  men,  and  sometimes  compel  them 
to  offend  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  permit  them 
to  have  regard  neither  for  their  reputation  nor 
for  their  personal  safety  :  these  are  anger,  which 
desires  vengeance  ;  love  of  gain,  which  longs 
for  riches  ;  lust,  which  seeks  for  pleasures.  We 
must  above  all  things  resist  these  vices  :  these 


«  [See  vol.  V.  p.  153,  note  i,  and  pp.  161,  174,  this  series.] 
2  Circumscribere. 


3  In  remissionem.  .      „ 

*  Sumere, "  to  take  by  selection  and  choice. 


248 


THE    EPITOME    OF   THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


trunks  must  be  rooted  up,  that  virtues  may  be 
implanted.  The  Stoics  are  of  opinion  that 
these  passions  must  be  cut  off;  the  Peripatetics 
think  that  they  must  be  restrained.  Neither  of 
them  judge  rightly,  because  they  cannot  entirely 
be  taken  away,  since  they  are  implanted  by 
nature,  and  have  a  sure  and  great  influence  ;  nor 
can  they  be  diminished,  since,  if  they  are  evil, 
we  ought  to  be  without  them,  even  though  re- 
strained and  used  with  moderation  ;  if  they  are 
good,  we  ought  to  use  them  in  their  complete- 
ness." But  we  say  that  they  ought  not  to  be 
taken  away  nor  lessened.  For  they  are  not  evil 
of  themselves,  since  God  has  reasonably  im- 
planted them  in  us  ;  but  inasmuch  as  they  are 
plainly  good  by  nature,  —  for  they  are  given  us 
for  the  protection  of  life,  —  they  become  evil 
by  their  evil  use.  And  as  bravery,  if  you  fight 
in  defence  of  your  country,  is  a  good,  if  against 
your  country,  is  an  evil,  so  the  passions,  if  you 
employ  them  to  good  purposes,  will  be  virtues, 
if  to  evil  uses,  they  will  be  called  vices.  Anger 
therefore  has  been  given  by  God  for  the  restrain- 
ing of  offences,  that  is,  for  controlling  the  dis- 
cipline of  subjects,  that  fear  may  suppress 
licentiousness  and  restrain  audacity.  But  they 
who  are  ignorant  of  its  limits  are  angry  with  their 
equals,  or  even  with  their  superiors.  Hence 
they  rush  to  deeds  of  cruelty,  hence  they  rise  to 
slaughters,  hence  to  wars.  The  love  of  gain 
also  has  been  given  that  we  may  desire  and  seek 
for  the  necessaries  of  life.  But  they  who  are 
unacquainted  with  its  boundaries  strive  insa- 
tiably to  heap  up  riches.  Hence  poisoning, 
hence  defraudings,^  hence  false  wills,  hence  all 
kinds  of  frauds  have  burst  forth.  Moreover, 
the  passion  of  lust  is  implanted  and  innate  in 
us  for  the  procreation  of  children ;  but  they 
who  do  not  fix  its  limits  in  the  mind  use  it 
for  pleasure  only.  Thence  arise  unlawful  loves, 
thence  adulteries  and  debaucheries,  thence  all 
kinds  of  corruption.  These  passions,  therefore, 
must  be  kept  within  their  boundaries  and  directed 
into  their  right  course,  in  which,  even  though 
they  should  be  vehement,  they  cannot  incur 
blame. 

CHAP.  LXII. OF    RESTRAINING   THE    PLEASURES    OF 

THE   SENSES. 

Anger  is  to  be  restrained  when  we  suffer  an 
injury,  that  the  evil  may  be  suppressed  which  is 
imminent  from  a  contest,  and  that  we  may  re- 
tain two  of  the  greatest  virtues,  harmlessness 
and  patience.  Let  the  desire  of  gain  be  broken 
when  we  have  that  which  is  enough.  For  what 
madness  is  it  to  labour  in  heaping  up  those 
things  which  must  pass  to  others,  either  by  rob- 

'  Integris  abutendum  est.  Lactantius  sometimes  uses  "abuti" 
for  "  uti." 

*  Circumscriptiones. 


bery,  or  theft,  or  by  proscription,  or  by  death  ? 
Let  lust  not  go  beyond  the  marriage-bed,  but  be 
subservient  to  the  procreation  of  children.  For 
a  too  great  eagerness  for  pleasure  both  produces 
danger  and  generates  disgrace,  and  that  which 
is  especially  to  be  avoided,  leads  to  eternal 
death.  Nothing  is  so  hateful  to  God  as  an  un- 
chaste mind  and  an  impure  soul.  Nor  let  any 
one  think  that  he  must  abstain  from  this  pleas- 
ure only,  quce  capitur  ex  foeminei  corporis  copu- 
latione,  but  also  from  the  other  pleasures  which 
arise  from  the  rest  of  the  senses,  because  they 
also  are  of  themselves  vicious,  and  it  is  the  part 
of  the  same  virtue  to  despise  them.  The  pleas- 
ure of  the  eyes  is  derived  from  the  beauty  of 
objects,  that  of  the  ears  from  harmonious  and 
pleasant  sounds,  that  of  the  nostrils  from  pleas- 
ant odour,  that  of  taste  from  sweet  food,  —  all 
of  which  virtue  ought  strongly  to  resist,  lest,  en- 
snared by  these  attractions,  the  soul  should  be 
depressed  from  heavenly  to  earthly  things,  from 
things  eternal  to  things  temporal,  from  life  im- 
mortal to  perpetual  punishment.  In  pleasures 
of  the  taste  and  smell  there  is  this  danger,  that 
they  are  able  to  draw  us  to  luxury.  For  he  who 
shall  be  given  up  to  these  things,  either  will  have 
no  property,  or,  if  he  shall  have  any,  he  will  ex- 
pend it,  and  afterwards  live  a  life  to  be  abomi- 
nated. But  he  who  is  carried  away  by  hearing 
(to  say  nothing  respecting  songs,^  which  often 
so  charm  the  inmost  senses  that  they  even  dis- 
turb with  madness  a  settled  state  of  the  mind 
by  certain  elaborately  composed  speeches  and 
harmonious  poems,  or  skilful  disputations)  is 
easily  led  aside  to  impious  worship.  Hence  it 
is  that  they  who  are  either  themselves  eloquent, 
or  prefer  to  read  eloquent  writings,  do  not  read- 
ily believe  the  sacred  writings,  because  they  ap- 
pear unpolished  ;  they  do  not  seek  things  that 
are  true,  but  things  that  are  pleasant ;  nay,  to 
them  those  things  appear  to  be  most  true  which 
soothe  the  ears.  Thus  they  reject  the  truth, 
while  they  are  captivated  by  the  sweetness  of 
the  discourse.  But  the  pleasure  which  has  refer- 
ence to  the  sight  is  manifold.  For  that  which 
is  derived  from  the  beauty  of  precious  objects 
excites  avarice,  which  ought  to  be  far  removed 
from  a  wise  and  just  man ;  but  that  which  is  re- 
ceived from  the  appearance  of  woman  hurries 
a  man  to  another  pleasure,  of  which  we  have 
already  spoken  above. 

CHAP.    LXni. THAT    SHOWS   ARE    MOST    POWERFUL 

TO    CORRUPT   THE    MINDS. 

It  remains  to  speak  of  public  shows,  which, 
since  they  have  a  more  powerful  influence  on 
the  corruption  of  the  mind,  ought  to  be  avoided 
by  the  wise,  and  to  be  altogether  guarded  against. 


3  [See  vol.  ii.  p.  79,  notes  i  and  2.] 


THE    EPITOME    OF   THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


249 


because  it  is  said  that  they  were  instituted  in 
celebration  of  the  honours  of  the  gods.  For 
the  exhibitions  of  shows  are  festivals  of  Saturnus. 
The  stage  belongs  to  Father  Liber ;  but  the  Cir- 
censian  games  are  supposed  to  be  dedicated  to 
Neptunus  :  so  that  now  he  who  takes  part  in 
these  shows  appears  to  have  left  the  worship  of 
God,  and  to  have  passed  over  to  profane  rites. 
But  I  prefer  to  speak  of  the  matter  itself  rather 
than  of  its  origin.  What  is  so  dreadful,  what  so 
foul,  as  the  slaughter  of  man?  Therefore  our 
life  is  protected  by  the  most  severe  laws ;  there- 
fore wars  are  detestable.  Yet  custom  finds  how 
a  man  may  commit  homicide  without  war,  and 
without  laws ;  and  this  is  a  pleasure  to  him,  that 
he  has  avenged  guilt.  But  if  to  be  present  at 
homicide  implies  a  consciousness  of  guilt,  and 
the  spectator  is  involved  in  the  same  guilt  as  the 
perpetrator,  then  in  these  slaughters  of  gladia- 
tors, he  who  is  a  spectator  is  no  less  sprinkled 
with  blood  than  he  who  sheds  it ;  nor  can  he  be 
free  from  the  guilt  of  bloodshed  who  wished  it 
to  be  poured  out,  or  appear  not  to  have  slain, 
who  both  favoured  the  slayer  and  asked  a  reward 
for  him.  What  of  the  stage  ?  Is  it  more  holy, 
—  on  which  comedy  converses  on  the  subject 
of  debaucheries  and  amours,  tragedy  of  incest 
and  parricide?  The  immodest  gestures  also  of 
players,  with  which  they  imitate  disreputable 
women,  teach  the  lusts,  which  they  express  by 
dancing.  For  the  pantomime  is  a  school  of 
corruption,'  in  which  things  which  are  shameful 
are  acted  by  a  figurative  representation,^  that  the 
things  which  are  true  may  be  done  without 
shame.  These  spectacles  are  viewed  by  youths, 
whose  dangerous  age,  which  ought  to  be  curbed 
and  governed,  is  trained  by  these  representations 
to  vices  and  sins.  The  circus,  in  truth,  is  con- 
sidered more  innocent,  but  there  is  greater  mad- 
ness in  this,  since  the  minds  of  the  spectators 
are  transported  with  such  great  madness,  that 
they  not  only  break  out  into  revilings,  but  often 
rise  to  strifes,  and  battles,  and  contentions. 
Therefore  all  shows  are  to  be  avoided,  that  we 
may  be  able  to  maintain  a  tranquil  state  of 
mind.  We  must  renounce  hurtful  pleasures, 
lest,  charmed  by  pestilential  sweetness,  we  fall 
into  the  snares  of  death. 


CHAP.  LXIV. THE  PASSIONS  ARE  TO  BE  SUB- 
DUED, AND  WE  MUST  ABSTAIN  FROM  FORBIDDEN 
THINGS. 

Let  virtue  alone  please  us,  whose  reward  is 
immortal  when  it  has  conquered  pleasure.  But 
when  the  passions  have  been  overcome  and 
pleasures  subdued,  labour  in  suppressing  other 
things  is  easy  to  him  who  is  a  follower  of  God 


'  Mimus  corruptelarum  disciplina  est. 
*  Per  imaginem. 


and  of  truth  :  he  will  never  revile,  who  shall 
hope  for  a  blessing  from  God ;  he  will  not  com- 
mit perjury,  lest  he  should  mock  God ;  but  he 
will  not  even  swear,  lest  at  any  time,  either  by 
necessity  or  through  habit,  he  should  fall  into 
perjury.  He  will  speak  nothing  deceitfully, 
nothing  with  dissimulation  ;  he  will  not  refuse 
that  which  he  has  promised,  nor  will  he  promise 
that  which  he  is  unable  to  perform ;  he  will 
envy  no  one,  since  he  is  content  with  himself 
and  with  his  own  possessions  ;  nor  will  he  take 
away  from,  or  wish  ill  to  another,  upon  whom, 
perhaps,  the  benefits  of  God  are  more  plenteously^ 
bestowed.  He  will  not  steal,  nor  will  he  covet 
anything  at  all  belonging  to  another.  He  will 
not  give  his  money  to  usury,  for  that  is  to  seek 
after  gain  from  the  evils  of  others ;  nor,  how- 
ever, will  he  refuse  to  lend,  if  necessity  shall 
compel  any  one  to  borrow.  He  must  not  be 
harsh  towards  a  son,  nor  towards  a  slave  :  he 
must  remember  that  he  himself  has  a  Father 
and  a  Master.  He  will  so  act  towards  these  as 
he  will  wish  that  others  should  act  towards  him. 
He  will  not  receive  excessive  gifts  from  those 
who  have  less  resources  than  himself;  for  it  is 
not  just  that  the  estates  of  the  wealthy  should  be 
increased  by  the  losses  of  the  wretched. 

It  is  an  old  precept  not  to  kill,  which  ought 
not  to  be  taken  in  this  light,  as  though  we  are 
commanded  to  abstain  only  from  homicide, 
which  is  punished  even  by  public  laws.  But  by 
the  intervention  of  this  command,  it  will  not  be 
permitted  us  to  apply  peril  of  death  by  word, 
nor  to  put  to  death  or  expose  an  infant,  nor  to 
condemn  one's  self  by  a  voluntary  death.  We 
are  likewise  commanded  not  to  commit  adultery  ; 
but  by  this  precept  we  are  not  only  prohibited 
from  polluting  the  marriage  of  another,  which  is 
condemned  even  by  the  common  law  of  nations, 
but  even  to  abstain  from  those  who  prostitute 
their  persons.  For  the  law  of  God  is  above  all 
laws ;  it  forbids  even  those  things  which  are 
esteemed  lawful,  that  it  may  fulfil  justice.  It  is 
a  part  of  the  same  law  not  to  utter  false  witness, 
and  this  also  itself  has  a  wider  meaning.  For 
if  false  witness  by  falsehood  is  injurious  to  him 
against  whom  it  is  spoken,  and  deceives  him  in 
whose  presence  it  is  spoken,  we  must  therefore 
never  speak  falsely,  because  falsehood  always 
deceives  or  injures.  Therefore  he  is  not  a  just 
man  who,  even  without  inflicting  injury,  speaks 
in  idle  discourse.  Nor  indeed  is  it  lawful  for 
him  to  flatter,  for  flattery  is  pernicious  and  de- 
ceitful ;  but  he  will  everywhere  guard  the  truth. 
And  although  this  may  for  the  present  l)e  un- 
l)leasant,  nevertheless,  when  its  advantage  and 
usefulness  shall  appear,  it  will  not  produce  hatred, 
as  the  poet  says,''  but  gratitude. 


3  Proniora  sunt. 

*  Terent.,  And,,  i.  i. 


2^0 


THE    EPITOME    OF   THE    DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


CHAP.      LXV.  —  PRECEFrS     ABOUT     THOSE     THINGS 
WHICH    ARE    COMMANDED,  AND    OF   PITY. 

I  have  spoken  of  those  things  which  are  for- 
bidden ;  I  will  now  briefly  say  what  things  are 
commanded.  Closely  connected  with  harmless- 
ness  is  pity.  For  the  former  does  not  inflict 
injury,  the  latter  works  good  ;  the  former  begins 
justice,  the  latter  completes  it.  For  since  the 
nature  of  men  is  more  feeble  than  that  of  the 
other  animals,  which  God  has  provided  with 
means  of  inflicting  violence,  and  with  defences  for 
repelling  it,  He  has  given  to  us  the  affection  of 
pity,  that  we  might  place  the  whole  protection 
of  our  life  in  mutual  aid.  For  if  we  are  created 
by  one  God,  and  descended  from  one  man,  and 
are  thus  connected  by  the  law  of  consanguinity, 
we  ought  on  this  account  to  love  every  man  ;  and 
therefore  we  are  bound  not  only  to  abstain  from 
the  infliction  of  injury,  but  not  even  to  avenge  it 
when  inflicted  on  us,  that  there  may  be  in  us 
complete  harmlessness.  And  on  this  account 
God  commands  us  to  pray  always  even  for  our 
enemies.  Therefore  we  ought  to  be  an  animal 
fitted  for  companionship  and  society,  that  we 
may  mutually  protect  ourselves  l)y  giving  and 
receiving  assistance.  For  our  frailty  is  liable  to 
many  accidents  and  inconveniences.  Expect 
that  that  which  you  see  has  happened  to  another 
may  happen  to  you  also.  Thus  you  will  at  length 
be  excited  to  render  aid,  if  you  shall  assume  the 
mind  of  him  who,  being  placed  in  evils,  implores 
your  aid.  If  any  one  is  in  need  of  food,  let  us 
bestow  it ;  if  any  one  meets  us  who  is  naked,  let 
us  clothe  him  ;  if  any  one  suffers  injury  from  one 
who  is  more  powerful  than  himself,  let  us  rescue 
him.  Let  our  house  be  open  to  strangers,  or  to 
those  who  are  in  need  of  shelter.  Let  our  de- 
fence not  be  wanting  to  wards,  or  our  protection 
to  the  defenceless.'  To  ransom  captives  is  a 
great  work  of  pity,  and  also  to  visit  and  comfort 
the  sick  who  are  in  poverty.  If  the  helpless  or 
strangers  die,  we  should  not  permit  them  to  lie 
unburied.  These  are  the  works,  these  the  duties, 
of  pity ;  and  if  any  one  undertakes  these,  he 
will  offer  unto  God  a  true  and  acceptable  sacri- 
fice. This  victim  is  more  adapted  for  an  offer- 
ing to  God,  who  is  not  appeased  with  the  blood 
of  a  sheep,  but  with  the  piety  of  man,  whom 
God,  because  He  is  just,  follows  up  with  His 
own  law,  and  with  His  own  condition.  He 
shows  mercy  to  him  whom  He  sees  to  be  mer- 
ciful ;  He  is  inexorable  to  him  whom  He  sees  to 
be  harsh  to  those  who  entreat  him.  Therefore, 
that  we  may  be  able  to  do  all  these  things,  which 
are  pleasing  to  God,  money  is  to  be  despised, 
and  to  be  transferred  to  heavenly  treasures,  where 
neither  thief  can  break  through,  nor  rust  corrupt, 
nor  tyrant  take  away,  but  it  may  be  preserved  for 


Viduis. 


US  under  the  guardianship  of  God  to  our  eternal 

wealth. 

CHAP.    LXVI.  —  OF     FAITH    IN    RELIGION,    AND     OF 
FORTITUDE. 

Faith  also  is  a  great  part  of  justice ;  and  this 
ought  especially  to  be  preserved  by  us,  who  bear 
the  name  of  faith,  especially  in  religion,  because 
God  is  before  and  to  be  preferred  to  man.  And 
if  it  is  a  glorious  thing  to  undergo  death  in  be- 
half of  friends,  of  parents,  and  of  children,  that 
is,  in  behalf  of  man,  and  if  he  who  has  done 
this  obtains  lasting  memory  and  praise,  how 
much  more  so  in  behalf  of  God,  who  is  able  to 
bestow  eternal  life  in  return  for  temporal  death  ? 
Therefore,  when  a  necessity  of  this  kind  happens, 
that  we  are  compelled  to  turn  aside  from  God, 
and  to  pass  over  to  the  rites  of  the  heathens,  no 
fear,  no  terror  should  turn  us  aside  from  guard- 
ing the  faith  delivered  to  us.  Let  God  be  befqre 
our  eyes,  in  our  heart,  by  whose  inward  help  we 
may  overcome  the  pain  of  our  flesh,  and  the 
torments  applied  to  our  body.  Then  let  us 
think  of  nothing  else  but  the  rewards  of  an  im- 
mortal life.  And  thus,  even  though  our  limbs 
should  be  torn  in  pieces,  or  burnt,  we  shall  easily 
endure  all  things  which  the  madness  of  tyrannical 
cruelty  shall  contrive  against  us.  Lastly,  let  us 
strive  to  undergo  death  itself,  not  unwillingly  or 
timidly,  but  willingly  and  undauntedly,  as  those 
who  know  what  glory  we  are  about  to  have  in 
the  presence  of  God,  having  triumphed  over  the 
world  and  coming  to  the  things  promised  us  ; 
with  what  good  things  and  how  great  blessedness 
we  shall  be  compensated  for 'these  brief  evils  of 
punishments,  and  the  injuries  of  this  life.  But 
if  the  opportunity  of  this  glory  shall  be  wanting, 
faith  will  have  its  reward  even  in  peace. 

I'herefore  let  it  be  observed  in  all  the  duties 
of  life,  let  it  be  observed  in  marriage.  For  it 
is  not  sufficient  if  you  abstain  from  another's  bed, 
or  from  the  brothel.  Let  him  who  has  a  wife 
seek  nothing  further,  but,  content  with  her  alone, 
let  him  guard  the  mysteries  of  the  marriage-bed 
chaste  and  undefiled.  For  he  is  equally  an 
adulterer  in  the  sight  of  God  and  impure,  who, 
having  thrown  off  the  yoke,  wantons  in  strange 
pleasure  either  with  a  free  woman  or  a  slave. 
But  as  a  woman  is  bound  by  the  bonds  of  chastity 
not  to  desire  any  other  man,  so  let  the  husband 
be  bound  by  the  same  law,  since  God  has  joined 
together  the  husband  and  the  wife  in  the  union 
of  one  body.  On  this  account  He  has  com- 
manded that  the  wife  shall  not  be  put  away  un- 
less convicted  of  adultery,  and  that  the  bond  of 
the  conjugal  compact  shall  never  be  dissolved, 
unless  unfaithfulness  have  broken  it.^  This  also 
is  added  for  the  completion  of  chastity,  that 

"  [The  law  of  divorce  in  Christian  States.  Sanderson,  v.  iv.  p.  i35-] 


THE   EPITOME   OF   THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


251 


there  should  be  an  absence  not  only  of  the 
offence,  but  even  of  the  thought.  For  it  is 
evident  that  the  mind  is  polluted  by  the  desire, 
though  unaccomplished  ;  and  so  that  a  just  man 
ought  neither  to  do,  nor  to  wish  to  do,  that  which 
is  unjust.  Therefore  the  conscience  must  be 
cleansed  ;  for  God,  who  cannot  be  deceived,  in- 
spects it.  The  breast  must  be  cleared  from 
every  stain,  that  it  may  be  a  temple  of  God, 
which  is  enlightened  not  by  the  gleam  of  gold  or 
ivory,  but  by  the  brightness  of  faith  and  purity. 

CHAP.  LXVII. OF  REPENTANCE,  THE    IMMORTALITY 

OF   THE    SOUL,    AND    OF    PROVIDENCE. 

But  it  is  true  all  these  things  are  difficult  to 
man,  nor  does  the  condition  of  his  frailty  permit 
that  any  one  should  be  without  blemish.  There- 
fore the  last  remedy  is  this,  that  we  have  re- 
course to  repentance,  which  has  not  the  least 
place  among  the  virtues,  because  it  is  a  correc- 
tion of  oneself;  that  when  we  have  happened  to 
fail  either  in  deed  or  in  word,  we  may  immedi- 
ately come  to  a  better  mind,  and  confess  that 
we  have  offended,  and  entreat  pardon  from  God, 
which  according  to  His  mercy  He  will  not  deny, 
except  to  those  who  persist  in  their  error.  Great 
is  the  aid,  great  the  solace  of  repentance.  That 
is  the  healing  of  wounds  and  offences,  that  hope, 
that  the  harbour  of  safety  ;  and  he  who  takes  away 
this  cuts  off  from  himself  the  way  of  salvation, 
because  no  one  can  be  so  just  that  repentance  is 
never  necessary  for  him.  But  we,  even  though 
there  is  no  offence  of  ours,  yet  ought  to  confess 
to  God,  and  to  entreat  pardon  for  our  faults, 
and  to  give  thanks  even  in  evils.  Let  us  always 
offer  this  obedience  to  our  Lord.  For  humility 
is  dear  and  lovely  in  the  sight  of  God ;  for  since 
He  rather  receives  the  sinner  who  confesses  his 
fault,  than  the  just  man  who  is  haughty,  how 
much  more  will  He  receive  the  just  man  who 
confesses,  and  exalt  him  in  His  heavenly  king- 
dom in  proportion  to  his  humility  !  These  are 
the  things  which  the  worshipper  of  God  ought 
to  hold  forth ;  these  are  the  victims,  this  the 
sacrifice,  which  is  acceptable  ;  this  is  true  wor- 
ship, when  a  man  offers  upon  the  altar  of  God 
the  pledges  of  his  own  mind.  That  supreme 
Majesty  rejoices  in  such  a  worshipper  as  this, 
as  it  takes  him  as  a  son  and  bestows  upon  him 
the  befitting  reward  of  immortality,  concerning 
which  I  must  now  speak,  and  refute  the  per- 
suasion of  those  who  think  that  the  soul  is  de- 
stroyed together  with  the  body.  For  inasmuch 
as  they  neither  knew  God  nor  were  able  to 
perceive  the  mystery  of  the  world,  they  did  not 
even  comprehend  the  nature  of  man  and  of  the 
soul.  For  how  could  they  see  the  consequences, 
who  did  not   hold   the   main   point  ? '     There- 

'  Summam.  Lactantius  uses  this  word  to  express  a  compendious 
summary  of  divine  mysteries. 


fore,  in  denying  the  existence  of  a  providence, 
they  plainly  denied  the  existence  of  God,  who 
is  the  fountain  and  source  of  all  things.  It  fol- 
lowed that  they  should  either  affirm  that  those 
things  which  exist  have  always  existed,  or  were 
produced  of  their  own  accord,  or  arose  from  a 
meeting  together  of  minute  seeds. 

It  cannot  be  said  that  that  which  exists,  and 
is  visible,  always  existed ;  for  it  cannot  exist  of 
itself  without  some  beginning.  But  nothing  can 
be  produced  of  its  own  accord,  because  there  is 
no  nature  without  one  who  generates  it.  But 
how  could  there  be  original  ^  seeds,  since  both 
the  seeds  arise  from  objects,^  and,  in  their  turn, 
objects  from  seeds?  Therefore  there  is  no 
seed  which  has  not  origin.  Thus  it  came  to 
pass,  that  when  they  supposed  that  the  world 
was  produced  by  no  providence,  they  did  not 
suppose  that  even  man  was  produced  by  any 
plan.'*  But  if  no  plan  was  made  use  of  in  the 
creation  of  man,  therefore  the  soul  cannot  be 
immortal.  But  others,  on  the  other  hand, 
thought  there  was  but  one  God,  and  that  the 
world  was  made  by  Him,  and  made  for  the 
sake  of  men,  and  that  souls  are  immortal.  But 
though  they  entertained  true  sentiments,  never- 
theless they  did  not  perceive  the  causes,  or 
reasons,  or  issues  of  this  divine  work  and  design, 
so  as  to  complete  the  whole  mysterj^  of  the  truth, 
and  to  comprise  it  within  some  limit.  But  that 
which  they  were  not  able  to  do,  because  they 
did  not  hold  the  truth  in  its  integrity,5  must  be 
done  by  us,  who  know  it  on  the  announcement 
of  God. 

CHAP.    LXVIII. OF     THE    WORLD,    MAN,    AND    THE 

PROVIDENCE    OF   GOD. 

Let  US  therefore  consider  what  was  the  plan 
of  making  this  so  great  and  so  immense  a  work. 
God  made  the  world,  as  Plato  thought,  but  he 
does  not  show  why  He  made  it.  Because  He 
is  good,  he  sscys,  and  envying  no  one,  He  made 
the  things  which  are  good.  But  we  see  that 
there  are  both  good  and  evil  things  in  the  sys- 
tem of  nature.  Some  perverse  person  may  stand 
forth,  such  as  that  atheist  Theodorus  was,  and 
answer  Plato  :  Nay,  because  He  is  evil,  He  made 
the  things  which  are  evil.  How  will  he  refute 
him  ?  If  God  made  the  things  which  are  good, 
whence  have  such  great  evils  burst  forth,  which, 
for  the  most  part,  even  prevail  over  those  wiiich 
are  good?  They  were  contained,  he  says,  in  the 
matter.  If  there  were  evil,  therefore  there  were 
also  good  things  ;  so  that  either  God  made  noth- 
ing, or  if  He  made  only  good  things,  the  evil 
things  which  were  not  made  are  more  eternal  than 


^  Semina  principalia, 

3  Ex  rebus. 

*  Aliqiia  ratlone. 

s  Perpetuo,  i.e.,  without  intermission. 


2^2 


THE   EPITOME   OF   THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


the  good  things  which  had  a  beginning.  There- 
fore the  things  which  at  one  time  began  will  have 
an  end,  and  those  which  always  existed  will  be 
permanent.  Therefore  evils  are  preferable.  But 
if  they  cannot  be  preferable,  they  cannot  indeed 
be  more  eternal.  Therefore  they  either  always 
existed,  and  God  has  been  inactive,'  or  they  both 
flowed  from  one  source.  For  it  is  more  in  ac- 
cordance with  reason  that  God  made  all  things, 
than  that  He  made  nothing. 

Therefore,  according  to  the  sentiments  of 
Plato,  the  same  God  is  both  good,  because  He 
made  good  things,  and  evil,  because  He  made 
evil  things.  And  if  this  cannot  be  so,  it  is  evi- 
dent that  the  world  was  not  made  by  God  on 
this  account,  because  He  is  good.  For  He  com- 
prised all  things,  both  good  and  evil ;  nor  did 
He  make  anything  for  its  own  sake,  but  on 
account  of  something  else.  A  house  is  built 
not  for  this  purpose  only,  that  there  may  be  a 
house,  but  that  it  may  receive  and  shelter  an 
inhabitant.  Likewise  a  ship  is  built  not  for  this 
purpose,  that  it  may  appear  only  to  be  a  ship, 
but  that  men  may  be  able  to  sail  in  it.  Vessels 
also  are  made,  not  only  that  the  vessels  may 
exist,  but  that  they  may  receive  things  which  are 
necessary  for  use.  Thus  also  God  must  have 
made  the  world  for  some  use.  The  Stoics  say 
that  it  was  made  for  the  sake  of  men  ;  and  rightly 
so.  For  men  enjoy  all  these  good  things  which 
the  world  contains  in  itself.  But  they  do  not 
explain  why  men  themselves  were  made,  or  what 
advantage  Providence,  the  Maker  of  all  things, 
has  in  them. 

Plato  also  affirms  that  souls  are  immortal,  but 
why,  or  in  what  manner,  or  at  what  time,  or  by 
whose  instrumentality  they  attain  to  immortality, 
or  what  is  the  nature  of  that  great  mystery,  why 
those  who  are  about  to  become  immortal  are 
previously  born  mortal,  and  then,  having  com- 
pleted the  course^  of  their  temporal  hfe,  and 
having  laid  aside  the  covering  3  of  their  frail 
bodies,  are  transferred  to  that  eternal  blessed- 
ness,—  of  all  this  he  has  no  comprehension. 
Finally,  he  did  not  explain  the  judgment  of  God, 
nor  the  distinction  between  the  just  and  the  un- 
just, but  supposed  that  the  souls  which  have 
plunged  themselves  into  crimes  are  condemned 
thus  far,  that  they  may  be  reproduced  in  the 
lower  animals,  and  thus  atone  for  their  offences, 
until  they  again  return  to  the  forms  of  men,  and 
that  this  is  always  taking  place,  and  that  there 
is  no  end  of  this  transmigration.  In  my  opinion, 
he  introduces  some  sport  resembling  a  dream, 
in  which  there  appears  to  be  neither  plan,  nor 
government  of  God,  nor  any  design. 


CHAP.  LXIX.  THAT  THE  WORLD  WAS  MADE  ON 

ACCOUNT  OF  MAN,  AND  MAN  ON  ACCOUNT  OF 
GOD. 

I  will  now  say  what  is  that  chiefs*  point  which 
not  even  those  who  spoke  the  truth  were  able  to 
connect  together,  bringing  into  one  view  causes 
and  reasons.  The  world  was  made  by  God,  that 
men  might  be  born ;  again,  men  are  born,  that 
they  may  acknowledge  God  as  a  Father,  in  whom 
is  wisdom  ;  they  acknowledge  Him,  that  they 
may  worship  Him,  in  whom  is  justice  ;  they  wor- 
ship Him,  that  they  may  receive  the  reward  of 
immortality  ;  they  receive  immortality,  that  they 
may  serve  God  for  ever.  Do  you  see  how  closely 
connected  the  first  are  with  the  middle,  and  the 
middle  with  the  last?  Let  us  look  into  them 
separately,  and  see  whether  they  are  consistent  5 
with  each  other.  God  made  the  world  on  ac- 
count of  man.  He  who  does  not  see  this,  does 
not  differ  much  from  a  beast.  Who  but  man 
looks  up  to  the  heaven?  who  views  with  admira- 
tion the  sun,  who  the  stars,  who  all  the  works  of 
God?  Who  inhabits  the  earth?  who  receives 
the  fruit  from  it?  Who  has  in  his  power  the 
fishes,  who  the  winged  creatures,  who  the  quad- 
rupeds, except  man?  Therefore  God  made  all 
things  on  account  of  man,  because  all  things 
have  turned  out  for  the  use  of  man. 

The  philosophers  saw  this,  but  they  did  not 
see  the  consequence,  that  He  made  man  himself 
on  His  own  account.  For  it  was  befitting,  and 
pious,  and  necessary,  that  since  He  contrived 
such  great  works  for  the  sake  of  man,  when  He 
gave  him  so  much  honour,  and  so  much  power, 
that  he  should  bear  rule  in  the  world,  man  should 
both  acknowledge  God,  the  Author  of  such  great 
benefits,  who  made  the  world  itself  on  his  ac- 
count, and  should  pay  Him  the  worship  and 
honour  due  to  Him.  Here  Plato  erred  ;  here 
he  lost  the  truth  which  he  had  at  first  laid  hold 
of,  when  he  was  silent  concerning  the  worship 
of  that  God  whom  he  confessed  to  be  the  framer 
and  parent  of  all  things,  and  did  not  understand 
that  man  is  bound  to  God  by  the  ties  of  piety, 
whence  religion  itself  receives  its  name,  and  that 
this  is  the  only  thing  on  account  of  which  souls 
become  immortal.  He  perceived,  however,  that 
they  are  eternal,  but  he  did  not  descend  by  the 
regular  gradations  to  that  opinion.  For  the  mid- 
dle arguments  being  taken  away,  he  rather  fell 
into  the  truth,  as  though  by  some  abrupt  preci- 
pice ;  nor  did  he  advance  further,  since  he  had 
found  the  truth  by  accident,  and  not  by  reason. 
Therefore  God  is  to  be  worshipped,  that  by 
means  of  religion,  which  is  also  justice,  man  may 
receive  from  God  immortality,  nor  is  there  any 
other  reward  of  a  pious  mind ;  and  if  this  is 


'  Otiosus. 

2  Decurso 
lot  race. 

3  Corporum  exuviis 


spatio.     The  expression  is  borrowed  from  a  char- 


*  Siimma. 

i  Ulruninc  illis  ratio  subsistat. 


THE   EPITOME   OF   THE   DIVINE    INSTITUTES. 


253 


invisible,  it  cannot  be  presented  by  the  invisible 
God  with  any  reward  but  that  which  is  invisible. 

CHAP.    LXX. THE    IMMORTALITY    OF    THE    SOUL   IS 

CONFIRMED. 

It  may  in  truth  be  collected  from  many  argu- 
ments that  souls  are  eternal.      Plato  says  that 
that  which  always  moves  by  itself,  and  has  no 
beginning  of  motion,  also  has  no  end  ;  but  that 
the  soul  of  man  always  moves  by  itself,  and  be- 
cause it  is  flexible  for  reflection,  subtle  for  dis- 
covery, easy  of  perception,  adapted  to  learning, 
and   because  it  retains  the  past,  comprehends 
the  present,  foresees  the  future,  and  embraces 
the  knowledge  of  many  subjects  and  arts,  that 
it  is  immortal,  since  it  contains  nothing  which 
is  mixed  with  the  contagion  of  earthly  weight. 
Moreover,  the  eternity  of  the  soul  is  understood 
from  virtue  and  pleasure.     Pleasure  is  common 
to  all  animals,  virtue  belongs  only  to  man ;  the 
former  is  vicious,  the  latter  is  honourable  ;  the 
former  is  in  accordance  with  nature,  the  latter  is 
opposed  to  nature,  unless  the  soul  is  immortal. 
For  in  defence  of  faith  and  justice,  virtue  neither 
fears  want,  nor  is  alarmed  at  exile,  nor  dreads 
imprisonment,  nor  shrinks  from  pain,  nor  refuses 
death  ;  and  because  these  things  are  contrary  to 
nature,  either  virtue  is  foolishness,  if  it  stands  in 
the  way  of  advantages,  and  is  injurious  to  life  ; 
or  if  it  is  not  foolishness,  then  the  soul  is  im- 
mortal,   and   despises    present    goods,   because 
other  things  are  preferable  which  it  attains  after 
the  dissofution  of  the  body.     But  that  is   the 
greatest  proof  of  immortality,  that  man  alone 
has  the  knowledge  of  God.     In  the  dumb  ani- 
mals there  is  no  notion '  of  religion,   because 
they  are  earthly  and    bent  down  to  the  earth. 
Man  is  upright,  and  beholds  the  heaven  for  this 
purpose,  that  he  may  seek  God.     Therefore  he 
cannot  be  other  than  immortal,  who  longs  for 
the  immortal.     He  cannot  be  liable  to  dissolu- 
tion, who  is  connected  ^  with  God  both  in  coun- 
tenance and  mind.     Finally,  man  alone  makes 
use  of  the  heavenly  element,  which  is  fire.     For 
if  light  is  through  fire,  and  life  through  light,  it 
is  evident  that  he  who  has  the  use  of  fire  is  not 
mortal,  since  this  is  closely  connected,  this  is 
intimately  related  to  Him  without  whom  neither 
light  nor  life  can  exist. 

But  why  do  we  infer  from  arguments  that  souls 
are  eternal,  when  we  have  divine  testimonies? 
For  the  sacred  writings  and  the  voices  of  the 
prophets  teach  this.  And  if  this  appears  to  any 
one  insufficient,  let  him  read  the  poems  of  the 
Sibyls,  let  him  also  weigh  the  answers  of  the 
Milesian  Apollo,  that  he  may  understand  that 
Democritus,    and    Epicurus,    and    Dicoearchus 


raved,  who  alone  of  all  mortals  denied  that 
which  is  evident.  Having  proved  the  immor- 
tality of  the  soul,  it  remains  to  teach  by  whom, 
and  to  whom,  and  in  what  manner,  and  at  what 
time,  it  is  given.  Since  fixed  and  divinely  ap- 
pointed times  have  begun  to  be  filled  up,  a 
destruction  and  consummation  of  all  things  must 
of  necessity  take  place,  that  the  world  may  be 
renewed  by  God.  But  that  time  is  at  h.and,  as 
far  as  may  be  collected  from  the  number  of  years, 
and  from  the  signs  which  are  foretold  by  the 
prophets.  But  since  the  things  which  have  been 
spoken  concerning  the  end  of  the  world  and  the 
conclusion  of  the  times  are  innumerable,  those 
very  things  which  are  spoken  are  to  be  laid 
down  without  adornment,  since  it  would  be  a 
boundless  task  to  bring  forward  the  testimonies. 
If  any  one  wishes  for  them,  or  does  not  place 
full  confidence  in  us,  let  him  approach  to  the 
very  shrine  of  the  heavenly  letters,  and  being 
more  fully  instructed  through  their  trustwor- 
thiness, let  him  perceive  that  the  philosophers 
have  erred,  who  thought  either  that  this  world 
was  eternal,  or  that  there  would  be  numberless 
thousands  of  years  from  the  time  when  it  was 
prepared.  For  six  thousand  years  have  not  yet 
been  completed,  and  when  this  number  shall 
be  made  up,  then  at  length  all  evil  will  be  taken 
away,  that  justice  alone  may  reign.  And  how 
this  will  come  to  pass,  I  will  explain  in  few 
words. 


'  Suspicio. 

2  Cu;ii  Deo  communis  est. 


CHAP.    LXXI.  OF   THE    LAST   TIMES. 

These  things  are  said  by  the  prophets,  but  as 
seers,  to  be  about  to  happen.  When  the  last 
end  shall  begin  to  approach  to  the  world,  wick- 
edness will  increase ;  all  kinds  of  vices  and 
frauds  will  become  frequent ;  justice  will  perish  ; 
faith,  peace,  mercy,  modesty,  truth,  will  have  no 
existence  ;  violence  and  daring  will  abound  ;  no 
one  will  have  anything,  unless  it  is  acquired  by 
the  hand,  and  defended  by  the  hand.  If  there 
shall  be  any  good  men,  they  will  be  esteemed  as 
a  prey  and  a  laughing-stock.  No  one  will  ex- 
hibit filial  affection  to  parents,  no  one  will  pity 
an  infant  or  an  old  man  ;  avarice  and  lust  will 
corrupt  all  things.  There  will  be  slaughter  and 
bloodshed.  There  will  be  wars,  and  those  not 
only  between  foreign  and  neighbouring  states, 
but  also  intestine  wars.  States  will  carry  on 
wars  among  themselves,  every  sex  and  age  will 
handle  arms.  The  dignity  of  government  will 
not  be  preserved,  nor  military  discipline  ;  but 
after  the  manner  of  robbery,  there  will  be  dep- 
redation and  devastation.  Kingly  power  will  be 
multiplied,  and  ten  men  will  occupy,  portion  out, 
and  devour  the  world.  There  will  arise  another 
by  far  more  powerful  and  wicked,  who,  having 
destroyed  three,  will  obtain  Asia,  and  having 
reduced  and  subdued  the  others  under  his  own 


/ 


254 


THE   F'^ITOME   OF   THE   DIVINE   INSTITUTES. 


power,  will  harass  all  ^^he  earth.  He  will  appoint 
new  laws,  abrogate  old  ones ;  he  will  make  the 
state  his  own,  ar^d  will   change  the  name  and 

seat  of  the  o-ovc'*^^'^^^^^* 

Then  there '  ■^^'ill  be  a  dreadful  and  detestable 
time  in  whir"h  no  one  would  choose  to  live.     In 
fine  'such    «'il^  be  the  condition  of  things,  that 
lamentat=»on  will  follow  the  living,  and  congratu- 
lation ^'lie  dead.     Cities  and  towns  will  be  de- 
strov^'d,  at  one  time  by  fire  and  the  sword,  at 
anr'ther  by  repeated  earthquakes  ;  now  by  inun- 
d..^tion  of  waters,  now  by  pestilence  and  famine. 
7The  earth  will  produce  nothing,  being   barren 
r  either  through  excessive  cold  or  heat.     All  water 
will  be  partly  changed  into  blood,  partly  vitiated 
by  bitterness,  so  that  none  of  it  can  be  useful  for 
food,    or   wholesome    for   drinking.      To   these 
evils  will  also  be  added  prodigies  from  heaven, 
that  nothing  may  be  wanting  to  men  for  causing 
fear.     Comets  will  frequently  appear.     The  sun 
will   be   overshadowed  with  perpetual  paleness. 
The  moon  will  be  stained  with  blood,  nor  will  it 
repair  the   losses  of  its  light  taken  away.     All 
the  stars  will  fall,  nor  will  the  seasons  preserve 
their  regularity,  winter  and  summer  being  con- 
fused.    Then  both  the  year,  and  the  month,  and 
the  day  will  be    shortened.     And  Trismegistus 
has  declared  that  this  is  the  old  age  and  decline 
of  the  world.     And  when  this  shall  have  come, 
it  must  be  known  that  the  time  is  at  hand  in 
which   God  will   return   to    change   the  world. 
But  in  the  midst  of  these  evils  there  will  arise 
an  impious  king,  hostile  not  only  to   mankind, 
but  also  to  God.     He  will   trample  upon,  tor- 
ment, harass  and  put  to  death  those  who  have 
been  spared  by  that  former  tyrant.     Then  there 
will  be  ever- flowing  tears,  perpetual  wailings  and 
lamentations,  and  useless  prayers  to  God ;  there 
will  be  no  rest  from  fear,  no  sleep  for  a  respite. 
The  day  will  always  increase  disaster,  the  night 
alarm.     Thus  the  world  will  be  reduced  almost 
to  solitude,  certainly  to  fewness  of  men.     Then 
also  the  impious  man  will  persecute  the  just  and 
those  who  are  dedicated  to  God,  and  will  give 
orders  that  he  himself  shall  be  worshipped  as 
God.     For  he  will  say  that  he  is  Christ,  though 
he  will  be  His  adversary.'      That  he  may  be 
believed,  he  will   receive   the   power  of  doing 
wonders,  so  that  fire  may  descend  from  heaven, 
the  sun  retire  from  his  course,  and  the  image 
which  he  shall  have  set  up  may  speak.     And  by 
these  prodigies  he  shall  entice  many  to  worship 
him,  and  to  receive  his  sign  in  their  hand  or 
forehead.     And  he  who  shall  not  worship  him 
and  receive  his  sign  will  die  with  refined  tortures. 
Thus  he  will  destroy  nearly  two  parts,  the  third 
will  flee  into  desolate  solitudes.     But  he,  frantic 
and  raging  with  implacable  anger,  will  lead  an 


army  and  besiege  the  mountain  to  which  the 
righteous  shall  have  fled.  And  when  they  shall 
see  themselves  besieged,  they  will  implore  the 
aid  of  God  with  a  loud  voice,  and  God  shall 
hear  them,  and  shall  send  to  them  a  deliverer. 


CHAP.      LXXII.  OF      CHRIST      DESCENDING     FROM 

HEAVEN     TO    THE    GENERAL   JUDGMENT,    AND    OF 
THE    MILLENARIAN    REIGN. ^ 

Then  the  heaven  shall  be  opened  in  a  tem- 
pest,3  and  Christ  shall  descend  with  great  power, 
and  there  shall  go  before  Him  a  fiery  brightness 
and  a  countless  host  of  angels,  and  all  that  mul- 
titude of  the  wicked  shall  be  destroyed,  and  tor- 
rents of  blood  shall  flow,  and  the  leader  himself 
shall  escape,  and  having  often  renewed  his  army, 
shall  for  the  fourth  time  engage  in   battle,  in 
which,  being  taken,  with  all  the  other  tyrants, 
he  shall  be  delivered  up  to  be  burnt.     But  the 
prince  also  of  the  demons  himself,  the  author 
and  contriver  of  evils,  being  bound  with  fiery 
chains,  shall  be  imprisoned,  that  the  world  may 
receive  peace,  and  the  earth,  harassed  through 
so  many  years,  may  rest.     Therefore  peace  being 
made,  and  every  evil  suppressed,  that  righteous 
King  and  Conqueror  will  institute  a  great  judg- 
ment on  the  earth  respecting  the  living  and  the 
dead,  and  will  deliver  all  the  nations  into  subjec- 
tion to  the  righteous  who  are  alive,  and  will  raise 
the  righteous  dead  to  eternal  life,  and  will  Him- 
self reign  with  them  on  the  earth,  and  will  build 
the  holy  city,  and  this  kingdom  of  the  righteous 
shall  be  for  a  thousand  years.     Throughout  that 
time  the  stars  shall  be  more  brilliant,  and  the 
brightness  of  the  sun  shall  be  increased,  and 
the  moon  shall  not  be  subject  to  decrease.   Then 
the  rain  of  blessing  shall  descend  from  God  at 
morning  and  evening,  and  the  earth  shall  bring 
forth   all   her  fruit  without   the   labour  of  men. 
Honey  shall  drop  from  rocks,  fountains  of  milk 
and  wine  shall  abound.      The  beasts  shall  lay 
aside  their  ferocity  and  become  mild,  the  wolf 
shall  roam  among  the  flocks  without  doing  harm, 
the  calf  shall  feed  with  the  lion,  the  dove  shall 
be  united  with  the  hawk,  the  serpent  shall  have 
no  poison  ;  no  animal  shall  live  by  bloodshed. 
For  God  shall  supply  to  all  abundant  and  harm- 
less 4  food.     But  when  the  thousand  years  shall 
be  fulfilled,  and  the  prince  of  the  demons  loosed, 
the  nations  will  rebel  against  the  righteous,  and 
an  innumerable  multitude  will  come  to  storm 
the  city  of  the  saints.     Then  the  last  judgment 
of  God  will  come  to  pass  against  the  nations. 
For  He  will  shake  the  earth  from  its  founda- 
tions, and  the   cities  shall  be  overthrown,  and 
He  shall  rain  upon  the  wicked  fire  with  orim- 
stone  and  hail,  and  they  shall  be  on  fire,  and 


'  [See  Hippolytus,  vol.  v.  pp.  190-250.] 


2  1  ?ee  vol.  i.  p.  zog.] 

3  In  tempestate;  others  read  "  intempesta  nocte. 

4  Innoceiucm,  "  without  injury  to  any." 


ELUCIDATIONS. 


255 


slay  each  other.  But  the  righteous  shall  for  a 
little  space  be  concealed  under  the  earth,  until 
the  destruction  of  the  nations  is  accomplislied, 
and  after  the  third  day  they  shall  come  forth,  and 
see  the  plains  covered  with  carcases.  Then  there 
shall  be  an  earthquake,  and  the  mountains  shall 
be  rent,  and  valleys  shall  sink  down  to  a  pro- 
found depth,  and  into  this  the  bodies  of  the 
dead  shall  be  heaped  together,  and  its  name 
shall  be  called  Polyandrion.'  After  these  things 
God  will  renew  the  world,  and  transform  the 
righteous  into  the  forms  of  angels,  that,  being 
presented  with  the  garment  of  immortality,  they 
may  serve  God  for  ever ;  and  this  will  be  the 
kingdom  of  God,  which  shall  have  no  end. 
Then  also  the  wicked  shall  rise  again,  not  to  life 
but  to  punishment ;  for  God  shall  raise  these 
also,  when  the  second  resurrection  takes  place, 
that,  being  condemned  to  eternal  torments  and 
delivered  to  eternal  fires,  they  may  suffer  the 
punishments  which  they  deserve  for  their  crimes. 


CHAP. 


LXXIII. THE    HOPE    OF    SAFETY    IS    IN    THE 

RELIGION    AND    WORSHIP   OF    GOD. 


Wherefore,  since  all  these  things  are  true  and 
certain,  in  harmony  with  the  predicted  announce- 
ment of  the  prophets,  since  Trismegistus  and 
Hystaspes  and  the  Sibyls  have  foretold  the  same 


*  A  name  sometimes  given   to   cemeteries,  because  many  men 
(ttoAAoI  avSpis)  are  borne  thither. 


things,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  all  hope  of  life 
and  salvation  is  placed  in  the  religion  of  God 
alone.  Therefore,  unless  a  man  shall  have  re- 
ceived Christ,  whom  God  has  sent,  and  is  about 
to  send  for  our  redemption,  unless  he  shall  have 
known  the  Supreme  God  through  Christ,  unless 
he  shall  have  kept  His  commandments  and  law, 
he  will  fall  into  those  punishments  of  which  we 
have  spoken.  Therefore  frail  things  must  be 
despised,  that  we  may  gain  those  which  are  sub- 
stantial ;  earthly  things  must  be  scorned,  that 
we  may  be  honoured  with  heavenly  things  ;  tem- 
poral things  must  be  shunned,  that  we  may  reach 
those  which  are  eternal.  Let  every  one  train 
himself  to  justice,  mould  himself  to  self-re- 
straint, prepare  himself  for  the  contest,  equip 
himself  for  virtue,  that  if  by  any  chance  an  ad- 
versary shall  wage  war,  he  may  be  driven  from 
that  which  is  upright  and  good  by  no  force,  no 
terror,  and  no  tortures,  may  give  ^  himself  up 
to  no  senseless  fictions,  but  in  his  uprightness 
acknowledge  the  true  and  only  God,  may  cast 
away  pleasures,  by  the  attractions  of  which  the 
lofty  soul  is  depressed  to  the  earth,  may  hold 
fast  innocency,  may  be  of  service  to  as  many  as 
possible,  may  gain  for  himself  incorruptible  treas- 
ures by  good  works,  that  he  may  be  able,  with 
God  for  his  judge,  to  gain  for  the  merits  of  his 
virtue  either  the  crown  of  faith,  or  the  reward 
of  immortality. 


2  Se  substernet. 


ELUCIDATIONS. 
I. 

(Princes  and  kings,  p.  13.) 

How  memorable  the  histories,  moreover,  of  Nebuchadnezzar '  and  his  decrees  ;  of  Darius  ^  and 
his  also  ;  but  especially  of  Cyrus  and  his  great  monumental  edict  1^  The  beautiful  narratives  of  the 
Queen  of  Sheba  and  of  the  Persian  consort  of  Queen  Esther  (probably  Xerxes)  are  also  mani- 
festations of  the  ways  of  Providence  in  giving  light  to  the  heathen  world  through  that  "  nation 
of  priests  "  in  Israel. 

But  Lactantius,  who  uses  the  Sibyls  so  freely,  should  not  have  omitted  to  show  what  Sibylline 
oracles  God  drew  forth  from  "  the  princes  of  this  world  "  also,  by  the  illumination  of  the  pharos 
which  he  established  in  Sion,  "  to  be  a  light  to  lighten  the  Gentiles  "  until  the  great  Epiphany 
should  rise  upon  them  in  "  the  dayspring  from  on  high." 

I  extract  from  a  paradoxical  but  most  entertaining  author,  whom  I  have  often  quoted,  certain 
extracts  from  Philo,  which  I  translate  from  his  note  in  the  Soirees.     Thus  :  — 

"  Agrippa,"  says  Philo,^  "  having  visited  Jerusalem  in  Herod's  time,  was  enchanted  by  the  reli- 
gion of  the  Jews,  and  could  never  cease  to  speak  of  it.  .  .  .  Augustus  ordered  that  every  day, 


'  Dan.  ii.  47,  iii.  29,  and  iv. 


*  Dan.  vi.  25. 


^  Ezra  i,  3. 


*  In  his  Discourse  to  Caligula. 


256  ELUCIDATIONS. 


at  his  own  expense,  and  under  the  legal  forms,  a  bull  and  two  lambs  should  be  offered  in  holo- 
caust to  the  Most  High  God  on  the  altar  at  Jerusalem,  though  he  knew  that  it  contained  no 
image,  whether  exposed  or  within  the  veil ;  for  this  great  prince,  surpassed  by  none  in  the  philo- 
sophic spirit,  felt  the  actual  necessity  in  this  world  of  an  altar  dedicated  to  a  God  invisible." 

Philo  also  says  :  — 

"  Your  great-grandmother  Julia '  also  made  superb  presents  to  the  temple ;  and  although 
women  very  reluctantly  detach  themselves  from  images,  and  rarely  conceive  of  anything  apart 
from  sensation,  this  lady,  nevertheless,  greatly  superior  to  her  sex  in  culture  and  in  natural  endow- 
ments, arrived  at  that  point  in  which  she  preferred  to  contemplate  such  things  in  the  mind  rather 
than  in  sensible  objects,  regarding  these  as  mere  shadows  of  the  realities." 

In  the  same  discourse,  wasting  words  on  Caligula,  Philo  reminds  him  that  Augustus  "  not  only 
admired,  nay,  rather,  he  adored  (e^au/Aa^c  kox  -nrpoa-cKwn,  k.t.X.),  this  custom  of  employing  7io  sort 
of  image  to  represent,  materially,  a  nature  invisible  in  itself ^  Poor  De  Maistre,  who  quotes  this 
testimony  against  images  from  Philo  with  intense  appreciation,  will  yet  sophisticate  himself  and 
others  into  the  very  contrary  in  behalf  of  his  one  predominant  idea  of  (-TrpocrKWT^o-t?)  canine 
self-abasement  to  the  decrees  of  the  Vatican.  On  this  account  I  am  forced  to  consider  him  a 
sophist  as  well  as  a  fanatic ;  but  I  delight  to  render  justice  to  his  genius,  for,  wherever  he  talks 
and  reasons  as  a  Christian  merely,  he  fascinates  and  instructs  me.  He  never  conceived  of 
"Catholicity,"  and  lived  under  the  delusion  of  the  Decretals,  a  disciple  of  the  Jesuits. 


II. 

(Therefore  they  were  neglected  for  many  ages,  p.  116.) 

The  explicit  statements  of  Lactantius,  and  his  profuse  quotations  from  the  Sibyllina,  persuade 
me  that  these  curious  fragments  deserve  a  degree  of  scientific  attention  which  they  have  not  yet 
received.  The  Fathers  all  cite  them,  when  it  must  have  exposed  them  to  scorn  and  overwhelming 
refutation  had  their  quotations  not  been  found  in  the  Sibylline  books  of  their  adversaries.  The 
influence  of  the  Jewish  religion  upon  the  Gentiles  under  the  Babylonian  and  Medo- Persian 
monarchies  must  have  been  considerable,  but  after  Alexander's  time  it  was  vastly  increased. 
Many  versions  of  select  prophets  were  doubtless  produced  in  Greek  before  the  authorized  Septua- 
gint.  These  were  soon  embedded  in  the  Sibyls'  books ;  and  I  cannot  think  the  interpolations  of 
early  Christians  were  all  frauds,  by  any  means.  Their  numerous  marginal  annotations  crept  into 
other  copies  ;  and  very  likely,  in  the  time  of  our  author,  they  were  inextricably  confused  with 
the  text  in  the  greater  part  of  the  "  editions,"  so  to  speak,  then  current  with  booksellers. 

But  in  vol.  viii.  we  shall  have  occasion  to  recur  again  to  this  interesting  inquiry. 

III. 

(We  made  proclamation  before  him  as  children,  p.  117.) 

"Sicut  pueri."  This  is  «<?/ according  to  the  Septuagint,  ws  Tta&iov.  It  is  not  the  Vulgate,  of 
course  ;  but  its  radical  difference  with  that  raises  interesting  inquiries  :  Is  it  a  specimen  of  one 
of  many  African  or  old  Italic  versions?  Does  our  author  endeavour  to  translate  from  the  Septua- 
gint ?  May  he  not  have  had  in  hand  a  copy  of  Isaiah  from  among  those  which  preceded  the 
Septuagint  ? 

The  Septuagint  reading  finds  its  key  in  cap.  lii.  7,  and  in  the  tenth  verse,  where  the  *'  Arm 
of  the  Lord  "  ("  His  Holy  Arm  ")  is  introduced  as  the  personal  Logos  Incarnate.  The  thirteenth 
and  fourteenth  verses  predict  the  amazing  sequel,  and  its  practical  and  blessed  results  ;  and  then 

'  i.e.,  Livia,  wife  and  empress  of  Augustus. 


ELUCIDATIONS.  257 


begins  cap.  liii.,  "Who  hath  believed"  our  message.  To  whom  is  "the  Arm  of  the  Lord"  re- 
vealed? "  Going  before  Him  (i.e.,  as  heralds),  we  have  proclaimed  Him  as  a  child,  and,  as  // 
ive7-e,  a  root  in  a  thirsty  land ;  He  has  no  form  nor  glory,"  etc.  In  other  words,  "  We  have 
prophesied  of  Him  who  is  elsewhere  predicted  ("unto  us  a  child  is  born")  as  one  who  from  His 
childhood  is  as  a  rush  without  water,  —  prematurely  withered,  —  a  man  of  sorrows,  and  the 
Carpenter's  Son." 

It  does  not  hint,  therefore,  the  "  obscurity  "  of  the  Messiah's  birth,  but  rather  what  Irenreus 
insists  upon,  i.e..  His  (premature)  old  age ;  the  worn  and  stricken  appearance  of  senility  in  com- 
parative youth.'  This  is  just  what  the  messengers  (Isa.  lii.  7)  had  said  in  their  proclamation  (Isa. 
Hi.  14)  just  before  :  "  His  visage  was  so  marred  more  than  any  man,  and  His  form  more  than 
the  sons  of  men." 

IV. 

(There  was  darkness,  etc.,  pp.  122,  240.) 

In  former  instances,  where  thought  has  turned  to  Phlegon  the  Trallian,^  I  have  failed  to  refer 
to  an  author  whose  excess  of  candour  sometimes  gives  away  more  than  is  called  for,  in  questions 
on  which  adversaries  have  contrived  to  fasten  undue  importance,  in  order  to  elicit  indiscreet 
defences.  But  it  is  due  to  my  readers  that  I  should  refer  them  to  a  most  learned  work,  to  be 
found  in  public  libraries  only,  by  my  revered  friend  and  instructor  Dr.  Jarvis.  The  sixth  chapter 
(part  ii.)  of  his  Chronological  Introduction  to  Church  History'^  is  devoted  to  this  matter,  and  I 
can  do  no  better  than  give  the  summary  of  its  contents  as  follows  :  — 

"  Who  Phlegon  was  ;  his  work  lost ;  extracts  from  it  by  Julius  Africanus  and  Eusebius  ;  their  works,  con- 
taining these  extracts,  lost ;  all  we  know  is  from  versions  and  later  writers  ;  collation  of  extracts  as  given  by  the 
Armenian  version  of  the  Chronicon  of  Eusebius,  St.  Jerome's  Latin  version,  the  Chronog7-aphia  of  Syncellus, 
and  the  Chronicon  Paschale ;  extract  by  Syncellus  from  Julius  Africanus;  remarks  upon  it;  testimony  of  Origen 
concerning  Phlegon's  account;  of  John  Philoponus  (St.  Maximus)  Malala;  summary  of  the  whole ;  account  of 
Phlegon's  testimony;  not  noticed  by  the  learned  and  voluminous  writers  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries  when 
they  speak  of  the  darkness,  etc. ;  Dr.  Lardner's  judgment*  adopted." 

Lardner's  view,  it  will  be  observed,  is  thus  sustained  by  an  independent  and  most  competent 
critic.  This  decision  puts  honour  on  the  early  writers  :  he  thinks  they  were  unwilling  to  claim 
a  corroboration  from  evidence  about  which  they  were  not  well  assured. 


(Divine  and  ethnic  oracles,  p.  210,  note  2;  p.  112,  note  9.) 

The  whole  subject  of  ethnic  oracles  needs  fresh  study  and  illustration.  Nothing  would  be 
more  fascinating  in  theological  inquiry,  and  Divine  Inspiration  might  be  richly  illustrated  by  it, 
as  anatomical  science  is  clarified  by  "  comparative  anatomy."  I  commend  this  subject  to  men 
of  faith,  learning,  and  intellectual  vigour.  Notably,  let  it  be  observed:  (1)  That  Balaam's  ass 
is  instanced  by  St.  Peter  as  miraculously  enabled  to  rebuke  the  madness  of  his  master ;  and  the 
same  Apostle  shortly  before  gives  us  the  law  as  to  divine  inspiration  in  contrast.^  (2)  Balaam 
himself,  as  mechanically  as  the  beast  he  rode,*"  had  his  own  mouth  opened  (see  Num.  xxiv.  16- 
^9)*  (3)  The  wicked  Caiaphas  in  like  manner  (St.  John  xi.  51,  52)  spake  prophetically,  "not  of 
himself."     (4)  St.  Paul  (Acts  xvii.  28)  quotes  a  heathen  oracle  very  much  as  does  our  author.^ 

'  Vol.  i.  p.  391,  note  12,  this  series.  *  Woi'ks,  ed.  London,  1788,  vol.  vii.  p.  385. 

*  See  vol.  iii.  Elucidation  V.  p.  58.  s  Comp.  2  Pet.  i.  18-21  with  ii.  16, 

*  P.  419.  *  P.  174,  note  a,  supra, 

1  See  p.  140,  note  10,  supra. 


258  ELUCIDATIONS. 


Now,  in  view  of  the  boldness  with  which  the  early  Christians  follow  the  example  of  the  Apostle 
in  quoting  the  Orphica  and  SibyUina,  I  cannot  imagine  that  these  citations  were  not  honestly 
believed  by  them  to  be  oracles  of  a  certain  sort,  by  which  God  permitted  the  heathen  to  be 
enlightened.'  Observe  our  author's  moderate  but  most  pregnant  remark  about  such  inspiration 
(on  p.  170,  supra,  note  8),  ''almost  with  a  divine  voice;"  then  (on  p.  192)  compare  other 
almost  m~,\)\XQ<\  words  of  poor  TuUy  (at  note  2),  and  of  Seneca  also.^ 

Finally,  and  to  close  the  subject,  the  reader  will  readily  forgive  me  for  introducing  the  following 
citations  from  the  "  Warburton  Lecture  "  of  Dr.  Edersheim,  on  Prophecy  and  History '^  in  Relation 
to  the  Messiah.  Discussing  the  pseudepigraphic  writings  (in  Lecture  Eleventh),  he  says  as 
follows  :  •♦  — 

"The  Sibylline  oracles,  in  Greek  hexameters,  consist,  in  their  present  form,  of  twelve  books. 
They  are  full  of  interpolations,  the  really  ancient  portions  forming  part  of  the  first  two  books  and 
the  largest  part  of  book  third  (verses  97-807).  These  sections  are  deeply  imln/ed  7vith  the 
Messianic  spiritA  They  date  from  about  the  year  140  before  our  era,  while  another  small  portion 
of  the  same  book  is  supposed  to  date  from  the  year  32  B.C. 

"  As  regards  the  promise  of  the  Messiah,  we  turn  in  the  first  place,  and  with  special  interest, 
to  the  Sibylline  Oracles.  In  the  third  book  of  these  (such  portions  as  I  shall  quote  date  from 
about  140  B.C.)  the  Messiah  is  described  as  'the  King  sent  from  heaven,  who  would  judge  every 
man  in  blood  and  splendour  of  fire.'  And  the  Vision  of  Messianic  times  opens  with  a  reference 
to  '  the  King  whom  God  will  send  from  the  Sun,'  where  we  cannot  fail  to  perceive  a  reference  to 
the  Seventy-second  Psalm,^  especially  as  we  remember  that  the  Greek  of  the  Seventy,  which  must 
have  been  present  to  the  Hellenist  Sibyl,  fully  adapted  the  Messianic  application  of  the  passage 
to  a  premundane  Messiah.  We  also  think  of  the  picture  drawn  in  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah. 
According  to  the  Sibylline  books,  King  Messiah  was  not  only  to  come,  but  He  was  to  be  specifi- 
cally sent  of  God.  He  is  supermujidane,  a  King  and  a  Judge  7  of  superhuman  glory  and 
splendour.  And,  indeed,  that  a  superhuman  kingdom,  such  as  the  Sibylline  oracles  paint,  should 
have  a  superhuman  king,  seems  only  a  natural  and  necessary  inference.  ...  If,  as  certain  modern 
critics  contend,  the  book  of  Daniel  is  not  authentic,^  but  dates  from  Maccabean  times,  ...  it 
may  well  be  asked  to  what  king  the  Sibylline  oracles  point,  for  they  certainly  date  from  that 
period ;  and  what  is  the  relationship  between  the  (supposed  Maccabean)  prophecies  of  the 
book  of  Daniel  and  the  certainly  Messianic  anticipations  of  the  undoubted  literature  of  that 
period  ?  " 

Dr.  Edersheim  gives  us  the  reference  in  the  margin,  to  which  I  would  call  attention,  as  direct- 
ing to  the  \y\\Q\Q  pseudepigraphic  literature.  ^  But  who  can  wonder,  after  what  we  thus  learn,  that 
Constantine  '°  was  so  profoundly  impressed  with  Virgil's  Pollio  ?  In  spite  of  all  that  has  been  said," 
I  cannot  but  see  Isaiah  in  its  entire  spirit. 

'  See  p.  219,  note  3. 

2  Compare  Cyprian  (vol.  v.  p.  502,  this  series) ,  and  note  his  judicious  reference  to  the  inspiration  of  Balaam  by  the  extreme  instance  of 
the  miraculous  voice  of  a  dumb  beast.     Also,  sec  vol.  ii.  Elucidation  XIII.  p.  346,  this  series. 

3  Republished,  New  York,  Randolph,  1885. 
*  Pp-  339.  343- 

-  Note,  these  are  the  "  really  ancient  "  portions. 
*>  Verses  5,  6,  etc.,  to  the  end. 

7  Ps.  Ixxii.  I,  2. 

8  An  absurdity /a/w^>-/3?rf by  the  faith  and  learning  of  Dr.  Pusey. 

9  Pseiidcpigrapha.  O.  F.  Fritzsche,  I.ips.,  1S71,  Codex  Pseudepigr.  Vet.  Test.,  ed.  1722.;  J.  A.  Fabricius,  Messias  JiidcEoritm, 
Hilgenfeld,  Lips.,  1869;  also  Drummond,  The  Jeiuish  Messiah;  and  compare  Jellinek,  Bei-ha-Mtdrash,  six  parts,  1857-73. 

*°  See  the  Greek  of  Constantine's  quotations  in  Heyne's  Virgil,  excursus  i.  tom.  i.  p.  164, 
"  Heyne  (Lips.,  1788),  vol.  i.  pp.  66-70. 


A    TREATISE    ON    THE    ANGER    OF    GOD. 

ADDRESSED    TO  DONATUS.' 


CHAP.    I. 


■OF   DIVINE   AND   HUMAN  WISDOM. 


I  HAVE  often  observed,  Donatus,  that  many 
persons  hold  this  opinion,  which  some  philoso- 
phers also  have  maintained,  that  God  is  not  sub- 
ject to  anger ;  since  the  divine  nature  is  either 
altogether  beneficent,  and  that  it  is  inconsistent 
with  His  surpassing  and  excellent  power  to  do 
injury  to  any  one  ;  or,  at  any  rate,  He  takes  no 
notice  of  us  at  all,  so  that  no  advantage  comes 
to  us  from  His  goodness,  and  no  evil  from  His 
ill-will.  But  the  error  of  these  men,  because  it 
is  very  great,  and  tends  to  overthrow  the  con- 
dition of  human  life,  must  be  refuted  by  us,  lest 
you  yourself  also  should  be  deceived,  being  in- 
cited by  the  authority  of  men  who  deem  them- 
selves wise.  Nor,  however,  are  we  so  arrogant 
as  to  boast  that  the  truth  is  comprehended  by 
our  intellect ;  but  we  follow  the  teaching  of  God, 
who  alone  is  able  to  know  and  to  reveal  secret 
things.  But  the  philosophers,  being  destitute 
of  this  teaching,  have  imagined  that  the  nature  of 
things  can  be  ascertained  by  conjecture.  But 
this  is  impossible ;  because  the  mind  of  man, 
enclosed  in  the  dark  abode  of  the  body,  is  far 
removed  from  the  perception  of  truth  :  and  in 
this  the  divine  nature  differs  from  the  human, 
that  ignorance  is  the  property  of  the  human, 
knowledge  of  the  divine  nature. 

On  which  account  we  have  need  of  some  light 
to  dispel  the  darkness  by  which  the  reflection 
of  man  is  overspread,  since,  while  we  live  in 
mortal  flesh,  we  are  unable  to  divine  by  our 
senses.  But  the  light  of  the  human  mind  is  God, 
and  he  who  has  known  and  admitted  Him  into 
his  breast  will  acknowledge  the  mystery  of  the 
truth  with  an  enlightened  heart ;  but  when  God 
and  heavenly  instruction  are  removed,  all  things 
are  full  of  errors.  And  Socrates,  though  he  was 
the  most  learned  of  all  the  philosophers,  yet, 
that  he  might  prove  the  ignorance  of  the  others, 
who  thought  that  they  possessed  something, 
rightly  said  that  he  knew  nothing,  except  one 


thing  —  that  he  knew  nothing.  For  he  under- 
stood that  that  learning  had  nothing  certain, 
nothing  true  in  itself;  nor,  as  some  imagine,  did 
he  pretend  ^  to  learning  that  he  might  refute 
others,  but  he  saw  the  truth  in  some  measure. 
And  he  testified  even  on  his  trial  (as  is  related 
by  Plato)  that  there  was  no  human  wisdom.  He 
so  despised,  derided,  and  cast  aside  the  learning 
in  which  the  philosophers  then  boasted,  that  he 
professed  that  very  thing  as  the  greatest  learning, 
that  he  had  learnt  that  he  knew  nothing.  If, 
therefore,  there  is  no  human  wisdom,  as  Socrates 
taught,  as  Plato  handed  down,  it  is  evident  that 
the  knowledge  of  the  truth  is  divine,  and  belongs 
to  no  other  than  to  God.  Therefore  God  must 
be  known,  in  whom  alone  is  the  truth.  He  is 
the  Parent  of  the  world,  and  the  Framer  of  all 
things ;  who  is  not  seen  with  the  eyes,  and  is 
scarcely  distinguished  by  the  mind  ;  whose  re- 
ligion is  accustomed  to  be  attacked  in  many 
ways  by  those  who  have  neither  been  able  to 
attain  true  wisdom,  nor  to  comprehend  the  sys- 
tem of  the  great  and  heavenly  secret. 

CHAP.    II. OF    THE    TRUTH    AND     ITS     STEPS,    AND 

OF    GOD. 

For  since  there  are  many  steps  by  which  the 
ascent  is  made  to  the  abode  of  truth,  it  is  not 
easy  for  any  one  to  reach  the  summit.  For 
when  the  eyes  are  darkened  by  the  brightness  of 
the  truth,  they  who  are  unable  to  maintain  a  firm 
step  fall  back  to  the  level  ground.^  Now  the 
first  step  is  to  understand  false  religions,  and  to 
throw  aside  the  impious  worship  of  gods  which 
are  made  by  the  hand  of  man.  But  the  second 
step  is  to  perceive  with  the  mind  that  there  is 
but  one  Supreme  God,  whose  power  and  provi- 
dence made  the  world  from  the  beginning,  and 
afterwards  continues  to  govern  it.  The  third 
step  is  to  know  His  Servant  and  Messenger,'* 


'   [Of  this  Donatus,  see  {On  the  Persecutors)  cap.  i6,  in/ra;  also 
cap.  35.     He  was  a  confessor  and  sore  sufferer  under  Diocletian.] 


^  Simulavit;  others  read  "  dissimulavit,"  concealed  his  knowledge. 

3  Revolvuntur  in  planum, 

■»  Thus  our  Lord  Himself  speaks,  John  xvii  3:  "This  is  life 
eternal,  tliat  they  may  know  Thee,  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus 
Christ,  whom  Thou  hast  sent."  [The  Jehovah-Angei,  vol,  i.  pp. 
223-226,  this  series,  and  sparsim.~\ 

259 


!6o 


A   TREATISE    ON    THE   ANGER    OF    GOD. 


whom  He  sent  as  His  ambassador  to  the  earth, 
by  whose  teaching  being  freed  from  the  error  in 
which  we  were  held  entangled,  and  formed  to 
the  worship  of  the  true  God,  we  might  learn 
righteousness.  From  all  of  these  steps,  as  I  have 
said,  there  is  a  rapid  and  easy  gliding  to  a  down- 
fall," unless  the  feet  are  firmly  planted  with  un- 
shaken stedfastness. 

We  see  those  shaken  off  from  the  first  step, 
who,  though  they  understand  things  which  are 
false,  do  not,  however,  discover  that  which  is 
true ;  and  though  they  despised  earthly  and  frail 
images,  do  not  betake  themselves  to  the  worship 
of  God,  of  whom  they  are  ignorant.  But  view- 
ing with  admiration  the  elements  of  the  universe, 
they  worship  the  heaven,  the  earth,  the  sea,  the 
sun,  the  moon,  and  the  other  heavenly  bodies. 

But  we  have  already  reproved  their  ignorance 
in  the  second  book  of  the  Divine  Institutes? 
But  we  say  that  those  fall  from  the  second  step, 
who,  though  they  understand  that  there  is  but 
one  Supreme  God,  nevertheless,  ensnared  by  the 
philosophers,  and  captivated  by  false  arguments, 
entertain  opinions  concerning  that  excellent 
majesty  far  removed  from  the  truth  ;  who  either 
deny  that  God  has  any  figure,  or  think  that  He 
is  moved  by  no  affection,  because  every  affection 
is  a  sign  of  weakness,  which  has  no  existence  in 
God.  But  they  are  precipitated  from  the  third 
step,  who,  though  they  know  the  Ambassador 
of  God,  who  is  also  the  Builder  of  the  divine 
and  immortal  temple, ^  either  do  not  receive 
Him,  or  receive  Him  otherwise  than  faith  de- 
mands ;  whom  we  have  partly  refuted  in  the 
fourth  book  of  the  above-named  work.''  And 
we  will  hereafter  refute  more  carefully,  when  we 
shall  begin  to  reply  to  all  the  sects,  which,  while 
they  dispute,^  have  destroyed  the  truth. 

But  now  we  will  argue  against  those  who,  fall- 
ing from  the  second  step,  entertain  wrong  senti- 
ments respecting  the  Supreme  God.  For  some 
say  that  He  neither  does  a  kindness  to  any  one, 
nor  becomes  angry,  but  in  security  and  quietness 
enjoys  the  advantages  of  His  own  immortality. 
Others,  indeed,  take  away  anger,  but  leave  to 
God  kindness  ;  for  they  think  that  a  nature  ex- 
celling in  the  greatest  virtue,  while  it  ought  not 
to  be  malevolent,  ought  also  to  be  benevolent. 
Thus  all  the  philosophers  are  agreed  on  the 
subject  of  anger,  but  are  at  variance  respecting 
kindness.  But,  that  my  speech  may  descend  in 
order  to  the  proposed  subject,  a  division  of  this 
kind  must  be  made  and  followed  by  me,  since 
anger  and  kindness  are  different,  and  opposed 
to  one  another.  F2ither  anger  must  be  attrib- 
uted to  God,  and  kindness  taken  from  Him  ;  or 

*  Ad  ruinam. 

2  Ch.  V.  and  vi.  pp.  47,  48. 

3  The  temple  built  of  living  stones,  1  Pet.  ii.  5. 
■*  Ch.  X.,  etc.,  p.  108. 

S  Dum  disputant;  other  editions  read,  "  dum  dissipant." 


both  alike  must  be  taken  from  Him ;  or  anger 
must  be  taken  away,  and  kindness  attributed  to 
Him ;  or  neither  nmst  be  taken  away.  The 
nature  of  the  case  admits  of  nothing  else  be- 
sides these ;  so  that  the  truth,  which  is  sought 
for,  must  necessarily  be  found  in  some  one  of 
these.  Let  us  consider  them  separately,  that 
reason  and  arrangement  may  conduct  us  to  the 
hiding-place  of  truth. 

CHAP.    III.  —  OF   THE    GOOD   AND    EVIL    THINGS    IN 
HUMAN    AFFAIRS,    AND    OF   THEIR    AUTHOR. 

First,  no  one  ever  said  this  respecting  God, 
that  He  is  only  subject  to  anger,  and  is  not  in- 
fluenced by  kindness.  For  it  is  unsuitable  to 
God,  that  He  should  be  endowed  with  a  power 
of  this  kind,  by  which  He  may  injure  and  do 
harm,  but  be  unable  to  profit  and  to  do  good. 
What  means,  therefore,  what  hope  of  safety,  is 
proposed  to  men,  if  God  is  the  author  of  evils 
only?  For  if  this  is  so,  that  venerable  majesty 
will  now  be  drawn  out,  not  to  the  power  of  the 
judge,  to  whom  it  is  permitted  to  preserve  and 
set  at  liberty,  but  to  the  office  of  the  torturer 
and  executioner.  But  whereas  we  see  that  there 
are  not  only  evils  in  human  affairs,  but  also 
goods,  it  is  plain  that  if  God  is  the  author  of 
evils,  there  must  be  another  who  does  things 
contrary  to  God,  and  gives  to  us  good  things. 
If  there  is  such  a  one,  by  what  name  must  he 
be  called  ?  Why  is  he  who  injures  us  more 
known  to  us  than  He  who  benefits  us?  But  if 
this  can  be  nothing  besides  God,  it  is  absurd 
and  vain  to  suppose  that  the  divine  power,  than 
which  nothing  is  greater  or  better,  is  able  to  in- 
jure, but  unable  to  benefit ;  and  accordingly  no 
one  has  ever  existed  who  ventured  to  assert  this, 
because  it  is  neither  reasonable  nor  in  any  way 
credible.  And  because  this  is  agreed  upon,  let 
us  pass  on  and  seek  after  the  truth  elsewhere. 

CHAP.     IV. OF     GOD     AND     HIS     AFFECTIONS,     AND 

THE    CENSURE    OF    EPICURUS. 

That  which  follows  is  concerning  the  school 
of  Epicurus ;  that  as  there  is  no  anger  in  God, 
so  indeed  there  is  no  kindness.  For  when  Epi- 
curus thought  that  it  was  inconsistent  with  God 
to  injure  and  to  inflict  harm,  which  for  the  most 
part  arises  from  the  affection  of  anger,  he  took 
away  from  Him  beneficence  also,  since  he  saw 
that  it  followed  that  if  God  has  anger.  He  must 
also  have  kindness.  Therefore,  lest  he  should 
concede  to  Him  a  vice,  he  deprived  Him  also 
of  virtue.^  From  this,  he  says.  He  is  happy  and 
uncorrupted,  because  He  cares  about  nothing, 
and  neither  takes  trouble  Himself  nor  occasions 
it  to  another.     Therefore  He  is  not  God,  if  He 

^  [Ne  illi  vitium  concederet  etiam  virtutis  fecit  expertem.j 


A   TREATISE    ON    THE    ANGER    OF    GOD. 


261 


is  neither  moved,  which  is  peculiar  to  a  living 
being,  nor  does  anything  impossible  for  man, 
which  is  peculiar  to  God,  if  He  has  no  will  at 
all,  no  action,  in  short,  no  administration,  which 
is  worthy  of  God.  And  what  greater,  what  more 
worthy  administration  can  be  attributed  to  God, 
than  the  government  of  the  world,  and  especially 
of  the  human  race,  to  which  all  earthly  things 
are  subject? 

What  happiness,  then,  can  there  be  in  God, 
if  He  is  always  inactive,  being  at  rest  and  un- 
moveable  ?  if  He  is  deaf  to  those  who  pray  to 
Him,  and  blind  to  His  worshippers  ?  What  is  so 
worthy  of  God,  and  so  befitting  to  Him,  as  provi- 
dence ?  But  if  He  cares  for  nothing,  and  fore- 
sees nothing,  He  has  lost  all  His  divinity.  What 
else  does  he  say,  who  takes  from  God  all  power 
and  all  substance,  except  that  there  is  no  God 
at  all  ?  In  short,  Marcus  Tullius  relates  that  it 
was  said  by  Posidonius,'  that  Epicurus  under- 
stood that  there  were  no  gods,  but  that  he  said 
those  things  which  he  spoke  respecting  the  gods 
for  the  sake  of  driving  away  odium ;  and  so  that 
he  leaves  the  gods  in  words,  but  takes  them 
away  in  reality,  since  he  gives  them  no  motion, 
no  office.  But  if  this  is  so,  what  can  be  more 
deceitful  than  him  ?  And  this  ought  to  be  for- 
eign to  the  character  of  a  wise  and  weighty  man. 
But  if  he  understood  one  thing  and  spoke  an- 
other, what  else  is  he  to  be  called  than  a  deceiver, 
double-tongued,  wicked,  and  moreover  foolish? 
But  Epicurus  was  not  so  crafty  as  to  say  those 
things  with  the  desire  of  deceiving,  when  he 
consigned  these  things  also  by  his  writings  to 
everlasting  remembrance  ;  but  he  erred  through 
ignorance  of  the  truth.  For,  being  led  from 
the  beginning  by  the  probability^  of  a  single 
opinion,  he  necessarily  fell  into  those  things 
which  followed.  For  the  first  opinion  was,  that 
anger  was  not  consistent  with  the  character  of 
God.  And  when  this  appeared  to  him  to  be 
true  and  unassailable,^  he  was  unable  to  refuse 
the  consequences ;  because  one  affection  being 
removed,  necessity  itself  compelled  him  to  re- 
move from  God  the  other  affections  also.  Thus, 
he  who  is  not  subject  to  anger  is  plainly  uninflu- 
enced by  kindness,  which  is  the  opposite  feeling 
to  anger.  Now,  if  there  is  neither  anger  nor 
kindness  in  Him,  it  is  manifest  that  there  is 
neither  fear,  nor  joy,  nor  grief,  nor  pity.  For 
all  the  affections  have  one  system,  one  motion,-* 
which  cannot  be  the  case  with  God.  But  if 
there  is  no  affection  in  God,  because  whatever 
is  subject  to  affections  is  weak,  it  follows  that 
there  is  in  Him  neither  the  care  of  anything,  nor 
providence. 


'  [T^isciple  of  Panaetius  the  Rhodian,  a  Stoic,  third  century  B.C.] 

2  Verisimilitiidine.  i.e.,  likeness  of  truth. 

3  Inexpugnabile,  impregnable. 
*  Commotio. 


The  disputation  of  the  wise  man  5  extends  thus 
far :  he  was  silent  as  to  the  other  things  which 
follow ;  namely,  that  because  there  is  in  Him 
neither  care  nor  providence,  therefore  there  is 
no  reflection  nor  any  perception  in  Him,  by 
which  it  is  effected  that  He  has  no  existence  at 
all.  Thus,  when  he  had  gradually  descended, 
he  remained  on  the  last  step,  because  he  now 
saw  the  precipice.  But  what  does  it  avail  to 
have  remained  silent,  and  concealed  the  danger? 
Necessity  compelled  him  even  against  his  will  to 
fall.  For  he  said  that  which  he  did  not  mean, 
because  he  so  arranged  his  argument  that  he 
necessarily  came  to  that  point  which  he  wished 
to  avoid.  You  see,  therefore,  to  what  point  he 
comes,  when  anger  is  removed  and  taken  away 
from  God.  In  short,  either  no  one  believes  that, 
or  a  very  few,  and  they  the  guilty  and  the  wicked, 
who  hope  for  impunity  for  their  sins.  But  if 
this  also  is  found  to  be  false,  that  there  is  neither 
anger  nor  kindness  in  God,  let  us  come  to  that 
which  is  put  in  the  third  place. 

CHAP.  V.  —  THE  OPINION  OF  THE  STOICS  CONCERN- 
ING  GOD  ;    OF    HIS   ANGER   AND    KINDNESS. 

The  Stoics  and  some  others  are  supposed  to 
have  entertained  much  better  sentiments  respect- 
ing the  divine  nature,  who  say  that  there  is  kind- 
ness in  God,  but  not  anger.  A  very  pleasing 
and  popular  speech,  that  God  is  not  subject  to 
such  littleness  of  mind  as  to  imagine  that  He  is 
injured  by  any  one,  since  it  is  impossible  for 
Him  to  be  injured  ;  so  that  that  serene  and  holy 
majesty  is  excited,  disturbed,  and  maddened, 
which  is  the  part  of  human  frailty.  For  they 
say  that  anger  is  a  commotion  and  perturbation 
of  the  mind,  which  is  inconsistent  with  God. 
Since,  when  it  falls  upon  the  mind  of  any  one, 
as  a  violent  tempest  it  excit'es  such  waves  that  it 
changes  the  condition  of  the  mind,  the  eyes 
gleam,  the  countenance  trembles,  the  tongue 
stammers,  the  teeth  chatter,  the  countenance  is 
alternately  stained  now  with  redness  spread  over 
it,  now  with  white  paleness.  But  if  anger  is  un- 
becoming to  a  man,  provided  he  be  of  wisdom 
and  authority,  how  much  more  is  so  foul  a  change 
unbecoming  to  God  !  And  if  man,  when  he  has 
authority  and  power,  inflicts  widespread  injury 
through  anger,  sheds  blood,  overthrows  cities, 
destroys  communities,  reduces  provinces  to  deso- 
lation, how  much  more  is  it  to  be  believed  that 
God,  since  He  has  power  over  the  whole  human 
race,  and  over  the  universe  itself,  would  have 
been  about  to  destroy  all  things  if  He  were 
angry. 

Therefore  they  think  that  so  great  and  so  per- 
nicious an  evil  ought  to  be  absent  from  Him. 
And   if  anger  and  excitement  are  absent  from 


5  Epicurus:  it  seems  to  be  spoken  with  some  irony. 


262 


A   TREATISE    ON    THE    ANGER    OF    GOD. 


Him,  because  it  is  disfiguring  and  injurious,  and 
He  inflicts  injury  on  no  one,  they  think  that 
nothing  else  remains,  except  that  He  is  mild, 
cahn,  propitious,  beneficent,  the  preserver.  For 
thus  at  length  He  may  be  called  the  common 
Father  of  all,  and  the  best  and  greatest,  which 
His  divine  and  heavenly  nature  demands.  For 
if  among  men  it  appears  praiseworthy  to  do 
good  rather  than  to  injure,  to  restore  to  life  ' 
rather  than  to  kill,  to  save  rather  than  to  destroy, 
and  innocence  is  not  undeservedly  numbered 
among  the  virtues,  —  and  he  who  does  these 
things  is  loved,  esteemed,  honoured,  and  cele- 
brated with  all  blessings  and  vows,  —  in  short, 
on  account  of  his  deserts  and  benefits  is  judged 
to  be  most  like  to  God ;  how  much  more  right 
is  it  that  God  Himself,  who  excels  in  divine  and 
perfect  virtues,  and  who  is  removed  from  all 
earthly  taint,  should  conciliate  ^  the  whole  race 
of  man  by  divine  and  heavenly  benefits  !  Those 
things  are  spoken  speciously  and  in  a  popular 
manner,  and  they  allure  many  to  believe  them ; 
but  they  who  entertain  these  sentiments  ap- 
proach nearer  indeed  to  the  truth,  but  they 
partly  fail,  not  sufficiently  considering  the  nature 
of  the  case.  For  if  God  is  not  angry  with  the 
impious  and  the  unrighteous,  it  is  clear  that 
He  does  not  love  the  pious  and  the  righteous. 
Therefore  the  error  of  those  is  more  consistent 
who  take  away  at  once  both  anger  and  kind- 
ness. For  in  opposite  matters  it  is  necessary  to 
be  moved  to  both  sides  or  to  neither.  Thus,  he 
who  loves  the  good  also  hates  the  wicked,  and 
he  who  does  not  hate  the  wicked  does  not  love 
the  good  ;  because  the  loving  of  the  good  arises 
from  the  hatred  of  the  wicked,  and  the  hating 
of  the  wicked  has  its  rise  from  the  love  of  the 
good.  There  is  no  one  who  loves  life  without  a 
hatred  of  death,  nor  who  is  desirous  of  light, 
but  he  who  avoids  darkness.  These  things  are 
so  connected  by  nature,  that  the  one  cannot  ex- 
ist without  the  other. 

If  any  master  has  in  his  household  a  good  and 
a  bad  servant,  it  is  evident  that  he  does  not 
hate  them  both,  or  confer  upon  both  benefits 
and  honours ;  for  if  he  does  this,  he  is  both  un- 
just and  foolish.  But  he  addresses  the  one  who 
is  good  with  friendly  words,  and  honours  him, 
and  sets  him  over  his  house  and  household,  and 
all  his  affairs ;  but  punishes  the  bad  one  with 
reproaches,  with  stripes,  with  nakedness,  with 
hunger,  with  thirst,  with  fetters  :  so  that  the  lat- 
ter may  be  an  example  to  others  to  keep  them 
from  sinning,  and  the  former  to  conciliate  them  ; 
so  that  fear  may  restrain  some,  and  honour  may 
excite  others.  He,  therefore,  who  loves  also 
hates,  and  he  who  hates  also  loves  ;  for  there 
are  those  who  ought  to  be  loved,  and  there  are 


'  Vivificare. 
^  Promereri. 


those  who  ought  to  be  hated.  i\nd  as  he  who 
loves  confers  good  things  on  those  whom  he 
loves,  so  he  who  hates  inflicts  evils  upon  those 
whom  he  hates ;  which  argument,  because  it  is 
true,  can  in  no  way  be  refuted.  Therefore  the 
opinion  of  those  is  vain  and  false,  who,  when 
they  attribute  the  one  to  God,  take  away  the 
other,  not  less  than  the  opinion  of  those  who 
take  away  both.  But  the  latter,^  as  we  have 
shown,  in  part  do  not  err,  but  retain  that  which 
is  the  better  of  the  two ;  whereas  the  former,* 
led  on  by  the  accurate  method  of  their  reason- 
ing, fall  into  the  greatest  error,  because  they 
have  assumed  premises  which  are  altogether 
false.  For  they  ought  not  to  have  reasoned 
thus  :  Because  God  is  not  liable  to  anger,  there- 
fore He  is  not  moved  by  kindness  ;  but  in  this 
manner :  Because  God  is  moved  by  kindness, 
therefore  He  is  also  liable  to  anger.  For  if  it 
had  been  certain  and  undoubted  that  God  is 
not  liable  to  anger,  then  the  other  point  would 
necessarily  be  arrived  at.  But  since  the  ques- 
tion as  to  whether  God  is  angry  is  more  open  to 
doubt,  while  it  is  almost  perfectly  plain  that  He 
is  kind,  it  is  absurd  to  wish  to  subvert  that  which 
is  certain  by  means  of  an  uncertainty,  since  it  is 
easier  to  confirm  uncertain  things  by  means  of 
those  which  are  certain. 

CHAP.  VI. THAT  GOD  IS  ANGRY. 

These  are  the  opinions  entertained  by  the  phi- 
losophers respecting  God.  But  if  we  have  discov- 
ered that  these  things  which  have  been  spoken 
are  false,  there  remains  that  one  last  resource, 
in  which  alone  the  truth  can  be  found,  which 
has  never  been  embraced  by  philosophers,  nor 
at  any  time  defended  :  that  it  follows  that  God 
is  angry,  since  He  is  moved  by  kindness.  This 
opinion  is  to  be  maintained  and  asserted  by  us ; 
for  5  this  is  the  sum  and  turning-point  on  which 
the  whole  of  piety  and  religion  depend  :  and  no 
honour  can  be  due  to  God,  if  He  affords  nothing 
to  His  worshippers ;  and  no  fear,  if  He  is  not 
angry  with  him  who  does  not  worship  Him.^ 

CHAP.   VII. OF    MAN,    AND    THE    BRUTE    ANIMALS, 

AND   RELIGION. 

Though  philosophers  have  often  turned  aside 
from  reason  through  their  ignorance  of  the  truth, 
and  have  fallen  into  inextricable  errors  (for  that 
is  wont  to  happen  to  these  which  happens  to  a 
traveller  ignorant  of  the  way,  and  not  confessing 
that  he  is  ignorant,  —  namely,  that  he  wanders 
about,  while  he  is  ashamed  to  inquire  from  those 


3  The  Stoics.     [Encountered  first  by  St.  Paul,  Acts  xvii.  i8.] 

*  The  Epicureans,     [fitd.^ 

5  In  eo  enim  summa  omniset  car-loreligionis  pietatisque  versatur. 

*  I  This  fear  of  the  Lord  is  filial,  not  servile ;  and  this  anger  is 
likewise  twofold,  including  fatherly  and  corrective  indignation,  and 
the  wrath  of  the  magistrate,  which  inflicts  penalty  and  retribution. 
Compare  Ps.  vii.  ii;  also  p.  104,  note  i,  iupra.\ 


A   TREATISE   ON   THE   ANGER    OF  ,GOD. 


263 


whom  he  meets),  no  philosopher,  however,  has 
ever  made  the  assertion  that  there  is  no  differ- 
ence between  man  and  the  brutes.  Nor  has  any 
one  at  all,  provided  that  he  wished  to  appear 
wise,  reduced  a  rational  animal  to  the  level  of 
the  mute  and  irrational ;  which  some  ignorant 
persons  do,  resembling  the  brutes  themselves, 
who,  wishing  to  give  themselves  up  to  the  in- 
dulgence of  their  appetite  and  pleasure,  say  that 
they  are  born  on  the  same  principle  as  all  living 
animals,  which  it  is  impious  for  man  to  say.  For 
who  is  so  unlearned  as  not  to  know,  who  is  so 
void  of  understanding  as  not  to  perceive,  that 
there  is  something  divine  in  man?  I  do  not  as 
yet  come  to  the  excellences  of  the  soul  and  of 
the  intellect,  by  which  there  is  a  manifest  affinity 
between  man  and  God.  Does  not  the  position 
of  the  body  itself,  and  the  fashion  of  the  counte- 
nance, declare  that  we  are  not  on  a  level  with 
the  dumb  creation?  Their  nature  is  prostrated 
to  the  ground  and  to  their  pasture,  and  has  noth- 
ing in  common  witli  the  heaven,  which  they  do 
not  look  upon.  But  man,  with  his  erect  position, 
with  his  elevated  countenance  raised  to  the  con- 
templation of  the  universe,  compares  his  features 
with  God,  and  reason  recognises  reason.' 

And  on  this  account  there  is  no  animal,  as 
Cicero  says,'  except  man,  which  has  any  knowl- 
edge of  God.  For  he  alone  is  furnished  with 
wisdom,  so  that  he  alone  understands  religion ; 
and  this  is  the  chief  or  only  difference  between 
man  and  the  dumb  animals.  For  the  other 
things  which  appear  to  be  peculiar  to  man,  even 
if  there  are  not  such  in  the  dumb  animals,  never- 
theless may  appear  to  be  similar.  Speech  is 
peculiar  to  man  ;  yet  even  in  these  there  is  a 
certain  resemblance  to  speech.  For  they  both 
distinguish  one  another  by  their  voices ;  and 
when  they  are  angry,  they  send  forth  a  sound 
resembling  altercation ;  and  when  they  see  one 
another  after  an  interval  of  time,  they  show  the 
office  of  congratulation  by  their  voice.  To  us, 
indeed,  their  voices  appear  uncouth,^  as  ours 
perhaps  do  to  them  ;  but  to  themselves,  who  un- 
derstand one  another,  they  are  words.  In  short, 
in  every  affection  they  utter  distinct  expressions 
of  voice  *  by  which  they  may  show  their  state  of 
mind.  Laughter  also  is  peculiar  to  man ;  and 
yet  we  see  certain  indications  of  joy  in  other 
animals,  when  they  use  passionate  gestures  5  with 
a  view  to  sports,  hang  down  "^  their  ears,  contract 
their  mouth,  smooth  their  forehead,  relax  their 
eyes  to  sportiveness.  What  is  so  peculiar  to 
man  as  reason  and  the  foreseeing  of  the  future  ? 


'  The  reason  of  man,  man's  rational  nature,  recognises  the  divine 
reason,  i.e.,  God.  [Confert  cum  Deo  vultum  et  rationem  ratio  cog- 
noscit.     Hence  Milton's  "  human  face  divine."] 

2  Dc  Legibus,  i.  8. 

3  Incondita,  "  unformed,  or  rude."     [See  p.  77,  supra.\ 


*  [Vol.  vi.  note  3,  p.  452,  this  series.] 
5  Ad  lus 


jsum  gestiunt 
6  Demulcent. 


But  there  are  animals  which  open  several  outlets 
in  different  directions  from  their  lairs,  that  if  any 
danger  comes  upon  them,  an  escape  may  be 
open  for  them  shut  in ;  but  they  would  not  do 
this  unless  they  possessed  intelligence  and  re- 
flection.    Others  are  provident  for  the  future,  as 

"  Ants,  when  they  plunder  a  great  heap  of  corn,  mindful 
of  the  winter,  and  lay  it  up  in  their  dwelling;  "^ 

again,  — 

"  As  bees,  which  alone  know  a  country  and  fi.xed  abodes ; 
and  mindful  of  the  winter  which  is  to  come,  they 
practise  labour  in  the  summer,  and  lay  up  their 
gains  as  a  common  stock."  ^ 

It  would  be  a  long  task  if  I  should  wish  to 
trace  out  the  things  most  resembling  the  skill 
of  man,  which  are  accustomed  to  be  done  by 
the  seyjarate  tribes  of  animals.  But  if,  in  the 
case  of  all  these  things  which  are  wont  to  be 
ascribed  to  man,  there  is  found  to  be  some 
resemblance  even  in  the  dumb  animals,  it  is 
evident  that  religion  is  the  only  thing  of  which 
no  trace  can  be  found  in  the  dumb  animals,  nor 
any  indication.  For  justice  is  peculiar  to  reli- 
gion, and  to  this  no  other  animal  attains.  For 
man  alone  bears  rule  ;  the  other  animals  are 
subjected  ^  to  him.  But  the  worship  of  God  is 
ascribed  to  justice  ;  and  he  who  does  not  em- 
brace this,  being  far  removed  from  the  nature 
of  man,  will  live  the  life  of  the  brutes  under  the 
form  of  man.  But  since  we  differ  from  the  other 
animals  almost  in  this  respect  alone,  that  we 
alone  of  all  perceive  the  divine  might  and  power, 
while  in  the  others  there  is  no  understanding  of 
God,  it  is  surely  impossible  that  in  this  respect 
either  the  dumb  animals  should  have  more  wis- 
dom, or  human  nature  should  be  unwise,  since 
all  living  creatures,  and  the  whole  system  of 
nature,  are  subject  to  man  on  account  of  his 
wisdom.  Wherefore  if  reason,  if  the  force  of 
man  in  this  respect,  excels  and  surpasses  the 
rest  of  living  creatures,  inasmuch  as  he  alone  is 
capable  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  it  is  evident 
that  religion  can  in  no  way  be  overthrown. 


CHAP.    VIII. 


OF    RELIGION. 


But  religion  is  overthrown  if  we  believe  Epi- 
curus speaking  thus  :  — 

"  For  the  nature  of  gods  must  ever  in  itself  of  necessity 
enjoy  immortality  together  with  supreme  repose, 
far  removed  and  withdrawn  from  our  concerns ; 
since,  exempt  from  every  pain,  exemjit  from  all 
dangers,  strong  in  its  own  resources,  not  wanting 
aught  of  us,  it  is  neither  gained  by  favours  nor 
moved  by  anger."  '° 

Now,  when  he  says  these  things,  does  lie  think 
that  any  worship  is  to  be  paid  to  (".od,  or  does 


7  Virg.,  yEit.,  iv.  402. 
*  Virg.,  Georg.,  iv.  155. 
9  Conciliata  sunt. 
10  Lucret.,  ii.  646. 


/ 


264 


A   TREATISE    ON   THE   ANGER    OF   GOD. 


he  entirely  overthrow  religion  ?  For  if  God  con- 
fers nothing  good  on  any  one,  if  He  repays  the 
obedience  of  His  worshipper  with  no  favour, 
what  is  so  senseless,  what  so  foolish,  as  to  build 
temples,  to  offer  sacrifices,  to  present  gifts,  to 
diminish  our  property,  that  we  may  obtain 
nothing?"  But  (it  will  be  said)  it  is  right  that 
an  excellent  nature  should  be  honoured.  What 
honour  can  be  due  to  a  being  who  pays  no  re- 
gard to  us,  and  is  ungrateful  ?  Can  we  be  bound 
in  any  manner  to  him  who  has  nothing  in  com- 
mon with  us?  "  Farewell  to  God,"  says  Cicero,^ 
"  if  He  is  such  as  to  be  influenced  by  no  favour, 
and  by  no  affection  of  men.  For  why  should  I 
say  '  may  He  be  propitious  ? '  for  He  can  be 
propitious  to  no  one."  What  can  be  spoken 
more  contemptible  with  respect  to  God  ?  Fare- 
well to  Him,  he  says,  that  is,  let  Him  depart 
and  retire,  since  He  is  able  to  profit  no  one. 
But  if  God  takes  no  trouble,  nor  occasions 
trouble  to  another,  why  then  should  we  not 
commit  crimes  as  often  as  it  shall  be  in  our 
power  to  escape  the  notice  of  men,^  and  to 
cheat  the  public  laws  ?  Wherever  we  shall  ob- 
tain a  favourable  opportunity  of  escaping  notice, 
let  us  take  advantage  of  the  occasion  :  let  us 
take  away  the  property  of  others,  either  without 
bloodshed  or  even  with  blood,  if  there  is  nothing 
else  besides  the  laws  to  be  reverenced. 

While  Epicurus  entertains  these  sentiments,  he 
altogether  destroys  religion ;  and  when  this  is 
taken  away,  confusion  and  perturbation  of  life 
will  follow.  But  if  religion  cannot  be  taken 
away  without  destroying  our  hold  of  wisdom, 
by  which  we  are  separated  from  the  brutes,  and 
of  justice,  by  which  the  public  life  may  be  more 
secure,  how  can  religion  itself  be  maintained  or 
guarded  without  fear?  For  that  which  is  not 
feared  is  despised,  and  that  which  is  despised  is 
plainly  not  reverenced.  Thus  it  comes  to  pass 
that  religion,  and  majesty,  and  honour  exist  to- 
gether with  fear ;  but  there  is  no  fear  where  no 
one  is  angry.  Whether,  therefore,  you  take  away 
from  God  kindness,  or  anger,  or  both,  religion 
must  be  taken  away,  without  which  the  life  of 
men  is  full  of  folly,  of  wickedness,  and  enormity. 
For  conscience  greatly  curbs  men,  if  we  believe 
that  we  are  living  in  the  sight  of  God  ;  if  we 
imagine  not  only  that  the  actions  which  we  per- 
form are  seen  from  above,  but  also  that  our 
thoughts  and  our  words  are  heard  by  God,  But 
it  is  profitable  to  believe  this,  as  some  imagine, 
not  for  the  sake  of  the  truth,  but  of  utiHty,  since 
laws  cannot  punish  conscience  unless  some  ter- 
ror from  above  hangs  over  to  restrain  offences. 
Therefore  religion  is  altogether  false,  and  there  is 
no  divinity  ;  but  all  things  are  made  up  by  skilful 


men,  in  order  that  they  may  live  more  uprightly 
and  innocently.  This  is  a  great  question,  and 
foreign  to  the  subject  which  we  have  proposed ; 
but  because  it  necessarily  occurs,  it  ought  to  be 
handled,  however  briefly. 

CHAP.    IX.  —  OF     THE    PROVIDENCE    OF    GOD,    AND 
OF    OPINIONS    OPPOSED    TO    IT. 

When  the  philosophers  of  former  times  had 
agreed  in  their  opinions  respecting  providence, 
and  there  was  no  doubt  but  that  the  world  was 
set  in  order  by  God  and  reason,  and  was  gov- 
erned by  reason,  Protagoras,  in  the  times  of 
Socrates,  was  the  first  of  all  who  said  that  it 
was  not  clear  to  him  whether  there  was  any 
divinity  or  not.  And  this  disputation  of  his  was 
judged  so  impious,  and  so  contrary  to  the 
truth  and  to  religion,  that  the  Athenians  both 
banished  him  from  their  territories,  and  burnt  in 
a  public  assembly  those  books  of  his  in  which 
these  statements  were  contained.  But  there  is 
no  need  to  speak  respecting  his  opinions,  be- 
cause he  pronounced  nothing  certain.  After 
these  things  Socrates  and  his  disciple  Plato,  and 
those  who  flowed  forth  from  the  school  of  Plato 
like  rivulets  into  different  directions,  namely,  the 
Stoics  and  Peripatetics,  were  of  the  same  opin- 
ion as  those  who  went  before  them.^ 

Afterwards  Epicurus  said  that  there  was  in- 
deed a  God,  because  it  was  necessary  that  there 
should  be  in  the  world  some  being  of  surpassing 
excellence,  distinction,  and  blessedness  ;  yet  that 
there  was  no  providence,  and  thus  that  the 
world  itself  was  ordered  by  no  plan,  nor  art,  nor 
workmanship,  but  that  the  universe  was  made 
up  of  certain  minute  and  indivisible  seeds.  But 
I  do  not  see  what  can  be  said  more  repugnant 
to  the  truth.  For  if  there  is  a  God,  as  God  He 
is  manifestly  provident ;  nor  can  divinity  be  at- 
tributed to  Him  in  any  other  way  than  if  He 
retains  the  past,  and  knows  the  present,  and 
foresees  the  future.  Therefore,  in  taking  away 
providence,  he  also  denied  the  existence  of  God. 
But  when  he  openly  acknowledged  the  existence 
of  God,  at  the  same  time  he  also  admitted  His 
providence  ;  for  the  one  cannot  exist  at  all,  or 
be  understood,  without  the  other.  But  in  those 
later  times  in  which  philosophy  had  now  lost  its 
vigour,5  there  lived  a  certain  Diagoras  of  Melos,^ 
who  altogether  denied  the  existence  of  God, 
and  on  account  of  this  sentiment  was  called 
atheist ;  ?  also  Theodorus  ^  of  Gyrene  :  both  of 
whom,  because  they  were  unable  to  discover 
anything  new,  all  things  having  already  been 
said  and  found  out,  preferred  even,  in  opposi- 
tion to  the  truth,  to  deny  that  in  which  all  pre- 


*  i.e..  without  any  result. 

2  /)e  .Vat.  Dear.,  i.  44. 

3  Hominum  conscientiam  fallere. 


4  [A  beautiful  formula  of  the  history  of  Greek  philosophy.] 

5  Defloruerat. 


*>  [Vol.  vi.  p.  421.] 
7  aSeos. 


A   TREATISE   ON   THE   ANGER   OF   GOD. 


265 


ceding  philosophers  had  agreed  without  any 
ambiguity.  These  are  they  who  attacked  provi- 
dence, which  had  been  asserted  and  defended 
through  so  many  ages  by  so  many  intellects. 
What  then  ?  Shall  we  refute  those  trifling  and 
inactive  philosophers  by  reason,  or  by  the  au- 
thority of  distinguished  men,  or  rather  by  both  ? 
But  we  must  hasten  onwards,  lest  our  speech 
should  wander  too  far  from  our  subject. 

CHAP.    X. OF    THE    ORIGIN    OF   THE   WORLD,    AND 

THE  NATURE    OF   AFFAIRS,  AND   THE    PROVIDENCE 
OF   GOD. 

They  who  do  not  admit  that  the  world  was 
made  by  divine  providence,  either  say  that  it  is 
composed  of  first  principles  coming  together  at 
random,  or  that  it  suddenly  came  into  existence 
by  nature,  but  hold,  as  Straton  '  does,  that  nature 
has  in  itself  the  power  of  production  and  of 
diminution,  but  that  it  has  neither  sensibility 
nor  figure,  so  that  we  may  understand  that  all 
things  were  produced  spontaneously,  without  any 
artificer  or  author.  Each  opinion  is  vain  and 
impossible.  But  this  happens  to  those  who  are 
ignorant  of  the  truth,  that  they  devise  anything, 
rather  than  perceive  that  which  the  nature  of  the 
subject-  requires.  First  of  all,  with  respect  to 
those  minute  seeds,  by  the  meeting  together  of 
which  they  say  that  the  whole  world  came  into 
existence, 5  I  ask  where  or  whence  they  are. 
Who  has  seen  them  at  any  time?  Who  has 
perceived  them  ?  Who  has  heard  them  ?  Had 
none  but  Leucippus  •*  eyes  ?  Had  he  alone  a 
mind,  who  assuredly  alone  of  all  men  was  blind 
and  senseless,  since  he  spoke  those  things  which 
no  sick  man  could  have  uttered  in  his  ravings,^ 
or  one  asleep  in  his  dreams  ? 

The  ancient  philosophers  argued  that  all  things 
were  made  up  of  four  elements.^  He  would 
not  admit  this,  lest  he  should  appear  to  tread  in 
the  footsteps  of  others  ;  but  he  held  that  there 
were  other  first  principles  of  the  elements  them- 
selves, which  can  neither  be  seen,  nor  touched, 
nor  be  perceived  by  any  part  of  the  body. 
They  are  so  minute,  he  says,  that  there  is  no 
edge  of  a  sword  so  fine  that  they  can  be  cut  and 
divided  by  it.  From  which  circumstance  he 
gave  them  the  name  of  atoms.  But  it  occurred 
to  him,  that  if  they  all  had  one  and  the  same 
nature,  they  could  not  make  up  different  objects 
of  so  great  a  variety  as  we  see  to  be  present  in 
the  world.  He  said,  therefore,  that  there  were 
smooth  and  rough  ones,  and  round,  and  angu- 
lar, and  hooked.  How  much  better  had  it 
been  to  be  silent,  than  to  have  a  tongue  for  such 

'  [Peripatetic;  succeeded  Theophrastus  B.C.  238.] 

2  Ratio. 

3  Coiisse. 

*  [Leucippus,  anterior  to  n.c.  470,  author  of  the  atomic  theory.] 

5  Delirare  posset. 

6  [See  Tayler  Lewis,  Flato  contra  Atlteos,  p.  119.] 


miserable  and  empty  uses !  And,  indeed,  I 
fear  lest  he  who  thinks  these  things  worthy  of 
refutation,  should  appear  no  less  to  rave.  Let 
us,  however,  reply  as  to  one  who  says  some- 
thing.7  If  they  are  soft  ^  and  round,  it  is  plain 
that  they  cannot  lay  hold  of  one  another,  so  as 
to  make  some  body ;  as,  though  any  one  should 
wish  to  bind  together  millet  into  one  combina- 
tion,'?  the  very  softness  of  the  grains  would  not 
permit  them  to  come  together  into  a  mass.  If 
they  are  rough,  and  angular,  and  hooked,  so  that 
they  may  be  able  to  cohere,  then  they  are  divisi- 
ble, and  capable  of  being  cut ;  for  hooks  and 
angles  must  project,'"  so  that  they  may  possibly 
be  cut  off. 

Therefore  that  which  is  able  to  be  cut  off  and 
torn  away,  will  be  able  both  to  be  seen  and  held. 
"These,"  he  says,  "flutter  about  with  resdess 
motions  through  empty  space,  and  are  carried 
hither  and  thither,  just  as  we  see  little  particles 
of  dust  in  the  sun  when  it  has  introduced  its 
rays  and  light  through  a  window.  From  these 
there  arise  trees  and  herbs,  and  all  fruits  of  the 
earth  ;  from  these,  animals,  and  water,  and  fire, 
and  all  things  are  produced,  and  are  again  re- 
solved into  the  same  elements,"  This  can  be 
borne  as  long  as  the  inquiry  is  respecting  small 
matters.  Even  the  world  itself  was  made  up  of 
these.  He  has  reached  to  the  full  extent  of  per- 
fect madness  :  it  seems  impossible  that  anything 
further  should  be  said,  and  yet  he  found  some- 
thing to  add.  "  Si#ce  everything,"  he  says,  "  is 
infinite,  and  nothing  can  be  empty,  it  follows  of 
necessity  that  there  are  innumerable  worlds." 
What  force  of  atoms  had  been  so  great,  that 
masses  so  incalculable  should  be  collected  from 
such  minute  elements?  And  first  of  all  I  ask. 
What  is  the  nature  or  origin  of  those  seeds? 
For  if  all  things  are  from  them,  whence  shall  we 
say  that  they  themselves  are  ?  What  nature  sup- 
plied such  an  abundance  of  matter  for  the  mak- 
ing of  innumerable  worlds?  But  let  us  grant 
that  he  raved  with  impunity  concerning  worlds ; 
let  us  speak  respecting  this  in  which  we  are, 
and  which  we  see.  He  says  that  all  things  are 
made  from  minute  bodies  which  are  incapable  of 
division. 

If  this  were  so,  no  object  would  ever  need 
the  seed  of  its  own  kind.  Birds  would  be  born 
without  eggs,  or  eggs  without  bringing  forth ; 
likewise  the  rest  of  the  living  creatures  without 
coition  :  trees  and  the  productions  of  the  earth 
would  not  have  their  own  seeds,  which  we  daily 
handle  and  sow.  Why  does  a  corn-field  arise 
from  grain,  and  again  grain  from  a  corn-field? 
In  short,  if  the  meeting  together  and  collecting 


7  i.e.,  something  to  the  purpose. 

8  I-enia;  others  re.id  "  laevia,"  smooth. 

9  Coagmentationem. 

'°  Eminere,  "  to  stand  out  prominently.' 


266 


A  TREATISE  ON  THE  ANGER  OF  GOD. 


of  atoms  would  effect  all  things,  all  things  would 
grow  together  in  the  air,  since  atoms  flutter 
about  through  empty  space.  Why  cannot  the 
herb,  why  cannot  the  tree  or  grain,  arise  or  be 
increased  without  earth,  without  roots,  without 
moisture,  without  seed?  From  which  it  is  evi- 
dent that  nothing  is  made  up  from  atoms,  since 
everything  has  its  own  peculiar  and  fixed  nature, 
its  own  seed,  its  own  law  given  from  the  begin- 
ning. Finally,  Lucretius,  as  though  forgetful  of 
atoms,'  which  he  was  maintaining,  in  order  that 
he  might  refute  those  who  say  that  all  things  are 
produced  from  nothing,  employed  these  argu- 
ments, which  might  have  weighed  against  him- 
self.    For  he  thus  spoke  :  — 

"  If  things  came  from  nothing,  any  kind  might  be  born 
of  anything  ;  nothing  would  require  seed."  ^ 

Likewise  afterwards  :  — 

"  We  must  admit,  therefore,  that  nothing  can  come  from 
nothing,  since  things  require  seed  before  they  can 
severally  be  born,  and  be  brought  out  into  the 
buxom  fields  of  air."  ' 

Who  would  imagine  that  he  had  brain  when 
he  said  these  things,  and  did  not  see  that  they 
were  contrary  to  one  another?  For  that  noth- 
ing is  made  by  means  of  atoms,  is  apparent 
from  this,  that  everything  has  a  definite ''  seed, 
unless  by  chance  we  shall  believe  that  the  nature 
both  of  fire  and  water  is  derived  from  atoms. 
AVhy  should  I  say,  that  if  materials  of  the  great- 
est hardness  are  struck  togpther  with  a  violent 
blow,  fire  is  struck  out?  Are  atoms  concealed 
in  the  steel,  or  in  the  flint?  Who  shut  them  in? 
Or  why  do  they  not  leap  forth  spontaneously  ? 
Or  how  could  the  seeds  of  fire  remain  in  a  ma- 
terial of  the  greatest  coldness  ? 

I  leave  the  subject  of  the  flint  and  steel.  If 
you  hold  in  the  sun  an  orb  of  crystal  filled  with 
water,  fire  is  kindled  from  the  light  which  is  re- 
flected from  the  water,  even  in  the  most  severe 
cold.  Must  we  then  believe  that  fire  is  contained 
in  the  water?  And  yet  fire  cannot  be  kindled 
from  the  sun  even  in  summer.  If  you  shall 
breathe  upon  wax,  or  if  a  light  vapour  shall  touch 
anything  —  either  the  hard  surface  5  of  marble  or 
a  plate  of  metal — water  is  gradually  condensed 
by  means  of  the  most  minute  drops.  Also  from 
the  exhalation  of  the  earth  or  sea  mist  is  formed, 
which  either,  being  dispersed,  moistens  whatever 
it  has  covered,  or  being  collected,  is  carried  aloft 
by  the  wind  to  high  mountains,  and  compressed 
into  cloud,  and  sends  down  great  rains.  Where, 
then,  do  we  say  that  fluids  are  produced?  Is  it 
in  the  vapour  ?  Or  in  the  exhalation  ?  .  Or  in  the 
wind  ?   But  nothing  can  be  formed  in  that  which 


'  rVol.  vi.  p.  445,  note  i8.] 

^  Lucret.,  i.  160. 

'  Ibid.,  i.  206. 

♦  Cerium. 

S  Crustam  marmoris. 


is  neither  touched  nor  seen.  Why  should  I  speak 
of  animals,  in  whose  bodies  we  see  nothing 
formed  without  plan,  without  arrangement,  with- 
out utility,  without  beauty,  so  that  the  most 
skilful  and  careful  marking  out  ^  of  all  the  parts 
and  members  repels  the  idea  of  accident  and 
chance  ?  But  let  us  suppose  it  possible  that  the 
limbs,  and  bones,  and  nerves,  and  blood  should 
be  made  up  of  atoms.  What  of  the  senses,  the 
reflection,  the  memory,  the  mind,  the  natural 
capacity  :  from  what  seeds  can  they  be  com- 
pacted? 7  He  says,  From  the  most  minute. 
There  are  therefore  others  of  greater  size.  How, 
then,  are  they  indivisible  ? 
.  In  the  next  place,  if  the  things  which  are  not 
seen  are  formed  from  invisible  seeds,  it  follows 
that  those  which  are  seen  are  from  visible  seeds. 
Why,  then,  does  no  one  see  them  ?  But  whether 
any  one  regards  the  invisible  parts  which  are  in 
man,  or  the  parts  which  can  be  touched,  and 
which  are  visible,  who  does  not  see  that  both 
parts  exist  in  accordance  with  design  ?  ^  How, 
then,  can  bodies  which  meet  together  without 
design  effect  anything  reasonable  ?  ^  For  we  see 
that  there  is  nothing  in  the  whole  world  which 
has  not  in  itself  very  great  and  wonderful  design. 
And  since  this  is  above  the  sense  and  capacity 
of  man,  to  what  can  it  be  more  rightly  attributed 
than  to  the  divine  providence  ?  If  a  statue,  the 
resemblance  of  man,  is  made  by  the  exercise  of 
design  and  art,  shall  we  suppose  that  man  him- 
self is  made  up  of  fragments  which  come  to- 
gether at  random  ?  And  what  resemblance  to 
the  truth  is  there  in  the  thing  produced,'"  when 
the  greatest  and  most  surpassing  skill  "  can  imi- 
tate nothing  more  than  the  mere  outline  and 
extreme  lineaments'^  of  the  body?  Was  the 
skill  of  man  able  to  give  to  his  production  any 
motion  or  sensibility  ?  I  say  nothing  of  the  ex- 
ercise of  the  sight,  of  hearing,  and  of  smelling, 
and  the  wonderful  uses  of  the  other  members, 
either  those  which  are  in  sight  or  those  which 
are  hidden  from  view.  What  artificer  could  have 
fabricated  either  the  heart  of  man,  or  the  voice, 
or  his  very  wisdom  ?  Does  any  man  of  sound 
mind,  therefore,  think  that  that  which  man  cannot 
do  by  reason  and  judgment,  may  be  accomplished 
by  a  meeting  together  of  atoms  everywhere  ad- 
hering to  each  other?  You  see  into  what  foolish 
ravings  they  have  fallen,  while  they  are  unwilling 
to  assign  to  God  the  making  and  the  care  of  all 
things. 

Let  us,  however,  concede  to  them  that  the 
things  which  are  earthly  are  made  from  atoms  : 
are  the  things  also  which  are  heavenly?     They 


6  Descriptio. 

7  Coagmentari. 

8  Ratio. 

9  Rationale, 
'o  Ficto. 

"  Artificium. 

'2  Umbram  et  extrema  lineamenta. 


A   TREATISE   ON   THE   ANGER   OF   GOD. 


267 


say  that  the  gods  are  without  contamination, 
eternal,  and  blessed ;  and  they  grant  to  them 
alone  an  exemption,  so  that  they  do  not  appear 
to  be  made  up  of  a  meeting  together  of  atoms. 
For  if  the  gods  also  had  been  made  up  of  these, 
they  would  be  liable  to  be  dispersed,  the  seeds 
at  length  being  resolved,  and  returning  to  their 
own  nature.  Therefore,  if  there  is  something 
which  the  atoms  could  not  produce,  why  may 
we  not  judge  in  the  same  way  of  the  others? 
But  I  ask  why  the  gods  did  not  build  for  them- 
selves a  dwelling-place  before  those  first  elements 
produced  the  world?  It  is  manifest  that,  unless 
the  atoms  had  come  together  and  made  the 
heaven,  the  gods  would  still  be  suspended 
through  the  midst  of  empty  space.  By  what 
counsel,  then,  by  what  plan,  did  the  atoms  from 
a  confused  mass  collect  themselves,  so  that  from 
some  the  earth  below  was  formed  into  a  globe, 
and  the  heaven  stretched  out  above,  adorned 
with  so  great  a  variety  of  constellations  that 
nothing  can  be  conceived  more  embellished? 
Can  he,  therefore,  who  sees  such  and  so  great 
objects,  imagine  that  they  were  made  without 
any  design,  without  any  providence,  without  any 
divine  intelligence,  but  that  such  great  and  won- 
derful things  arose  out  of  fine  and  minute  atoms  ? 
Does  it  not  resemble  a  prodigy,  that  there  should 
be  any  human  being  who  might  say  these  things, 
or  that  there  should  be  those  who  might  believe 
them  —  as  Democritus,  who  was  his  hearer,  or 
Epicurus,  to  whom  all  folly  flowed  forth  from 
the  fountain  of  Leucippus  ?  But,  as  others  say, 
the  world  was  made  by  Nature,  which  is  without 
perception  and  figure.'  But  this  is  much  more 
absurd.  If  Nature  made  the  world,  it  must  have 
made  it  by  judgment  and  intelligence  ;  for  it  is 
he  that  makes  something  who  has  either  the  in- 
clination to  make  it,  or  knowledge.  If  nature  is 
without  perception  and  figure,  how  can  that  be 
made  by  it  which  has  both  perception  and  figure, 
unless  by  chance  any  one  thinks  that  the  fabric 
of  animals,  which  is  so  delicate,  could  have  been 
formed  and  animated  by  that  which  is  without 
perception,  or  that  that  figure  of  heaven,  which 
is  prepared  with  such  foresight  for  the  uses  of 
living  beings,  suddenly  came  into  existence  by 
some  accident  or  other,  without  a  builder,  with- 
out an  artificer?^ 

"  If  there  is  anything,"  says  Chrysippus, 
"  which  effects  those  things  which  man,  though 
he  is  endowed  with  reason,  cannot  do,  that  as- 
suredly is  greater,  and  stronger,  and  wiser  than 
man."  But  man  cannot  make  heavenly  things  ; 
therefore  that  which  shall  produce  or  has  pro- 
duced these  things  surpasses  man  in  art,  in 
design,  in  skill,  and  in  power.  Who,  therefore, 
can  it  be  but  God?     But  Nature,  which  they 

'  [See  p.  97,  note  4,  su/'ra.] 

2  [See  Cicero's  judgment,  p.  99,  note  6,  sii/ra.] 


suppose  to  be,  as  it  were,  the  mother  of  all 
things,  if  it  has  not  a  mind,  will  effect  nothing, 
will  contrive  nothing ;  for  where  there  is  no  re- 
flection there  is  neither  motion  nor  efficacy. 
But  if  it  uses  counsel  for  the  commencement  of 
anything,  reason  for  its  arrangement,  art  for  its 
accomplishment,  energy  for  its  consummation, 
and  power  to  govern  and  control,  why  should  it 
be  called  Nature  rather  than  God?  Or  if  a 
concourse  of  atoms,  or  Nature  without  mind, 
made  those  things  which  we  see,  I  ask  why  it 
was  able  to  make  the  heaven,  but  unable  to 
make  a  city  or  a  house  ?3  Why  it  made  moun- 
tains of  marble,  but  did  not  make  columns  and 
statues?  But  ought  not  atoms  to  have  come 
together  to  effect  these  things,  since  they  leave 
no  position  untried?  For  concerning  Nature, 
which  has  no  mind,  it  is  no  wonder  that  it  for- 
got to  do  these  things.  What,  then,  is  the 
case?  It  is  plain  that  God,  when  He  com- 
menced this  work  of  the  world,  —  than  which 
nothing  can  be  better  arranged  with  respect 
to  order,  nor  more  befitting  as  to  utility,  nor 
more  adorned  as  to  beauty,  nor  greater  as  to 
bulk,  —  Himself  made  the  things  which  could 
not  be  made  by  man ;  and  among  these  also 
man  himself,  to  whom  He  gave  a  portion  of 
His  own  wisdom,  and  furnished  him  with  rea- 
son, as  much  as  earthly  frailty  was  capable 
of  receiving,  that  he  might  make  for  himself 
the  things  which  were  necessary  for  his  own 
uses. 

But  if  in  the  commonwealth  of  this  world,  so 
to  speak,  there  is  no  providence  which  rules,  no 
God  who  administers,  no  sense  at  all  prevails  in 
this  nature  of  things.  From  what  source  there- 
fore will  it  be  believed  that  the  human  mind, 
with  its  skill  and  its  intelligence,  had  its  origin? 
For  if  the  body  *of  man  was  made  from  the 
ground,  from  which  circumstance  man  received 
his  name  ;  '*  it  follows  that  the  soul,  which  has 
intelligence,  and  is  the  ruler  of  the  body,  which 
the  limbs  obey  as  a  king  and  commander,  which 
can  neither  be  looked  upon  nor  comprehended, 
could  not  have  come  to  man  except  from  a  wise 
nature.  But  as  mind  and  soul  govern  everybody, 
so  also  does  God  govern  the  world.  For  it  is 
not  probable  that  lesser  and  humble  things  bear 
rule,  but  that  greater  and  highest  things  do  not 
bear  rule.  In  short,  Marcus  Cicero,  in  his  Tus- 
ciilan  Disputations, '=  and  in  his  Cotiso/ation, 
says :  "  No  origin  of  souls  can  be  found  on 
earth.  For  there  is  nothing,  he  says,  mixed 
and  compound  ^  in  souls,  or  which  may  appear 
to  be  produced  and  made  up  from  the  earth ; 
nothing  moist  or  airy,^  or  of  the  nature  of  fire. 

3  [See  Dionysius,  cap.  ii.  p.  85,  vol.  vi.,  this  scries.] 
*  Homo  ab  humo. 
5  [Hook  i.  cap.  27.] 
^  Concretum. 
7  Flabile. 


268 


A   TREATISE   ON   THE   ANGER   OF   GOD. 


For  in  these  natures  there  is  nothing  which  has 
the  force   of  memory,  of  mind  and  reflection, 
which  both  retains  the  past  and  foresees  the 
future,  and  is  able   to   comprise    the   present; 
which  things  alone  are  divine.     For  no  source 
will  ever  be  found  from  which  they  are  able  to 
come  to  man,  unless  it  be  from  God."     Since, 
therefore,  with  the  exception  of  two  or  three 
vain  calumniators,  it  is  agreed  upon  that  the 
world  is  governed  by  providence,  as  also  it  was 
made,  and  there  is  no  one  who  ventures  to  prefer 
the  opinion  of  Diagoras  and  Theodorus,  or  the 
empty    fiction   of  Leucippus,    or  the   levity  of 
Democritus  and  Epicurus,  either  to  the  authority 
of  those  seven   ancient   men  who  were    called 
wise,'  or  to  that  of  Pythagoras  or  of  Socrates  or 
Plato,  and  the  other  philosophers  who  judged 
that  there  is  a  providence  ;  therefore  that  opinion 
also  is  false,  by  which  they  think  that  religion 
was  instituted  by  wise  men  for  the  sake  of  terror 
and  fear,  in  order  that  ignorant  men  might  ab- 
stain from  sins. 

But  if  this  is  true,  it  follows  that  we  are  de- 
rided by  the  wise  men  of  old.     But  if  they  in- 
vented religion  for  the  sake  of  deceiving  us,  and 
moreover  of  deceiving  the  whole  human  race, 
therefore  they  were  not  wise,  because  falsehood 
is  not  consistent  with  the  character  of  the  wise 
man.      But  grant  that  they  were   wise;    what 
great  success  in  falsehood  was  it,  that  they  were 
able  to  deceive  not  only  the  unlearned,  but  Plato 
also,  and  Socrates,  and  so  easily  to  delude  Py- 
thagoras, Zeno,  and  Aristotle,  the  chiefs  of  the 
greatest   sects?      There   is   therefore    a    divine 
providence,  as  those  men  whom  I  have  named 
perceived,  by  the  energy  and  power  of  which 
all  things  which  we  see  were  both  made  and  are 
governed.     For  so  vast  a  system  of  things,^'  such 
arrangement  and  such  regularity  in  preserving 
the  settled  orders  and  times,  could  neither  at 
first  have  arisen  without  a  provident  artificer,  or 
have  existed  so  many  ages  without  a  powerful 
inhabitant,  or  have  been  perpetually  governed 
without   a   skilful   and    intelligent ^    ruler;    and 
reason   itself  declares  this.     For  whatever  ex- 
ists which  has   reason,  must  have  arisen  from 
reason.     Now  reason  is  the  part  of  an  intelli- 
gent and  wise  nature  ;  but  a  wise  and  intelligent 
nature  can  be   nothing   else  than  God.     Now 
the  world,  since  it  has  reason,  by  which  it  is 
both  governed  and  kept  together,  was  therefore 
made  by  (iod.     But  if  God  is  the  maker  and 
ruler  of  the  world,  then  religion  is  rightly  and 
truly  established  ;   for  honour  and  worship  are 
due  to  the  author  and  common  parent  of  all 
things. 


CHAP.    XI. OF    GOD,    AND     THAT   THE     ONE     GOD, 

AND     BY    WHOSE    PROVIDENCE     THE     WORLD     IS 
GOVERNED   AND   EXISTS. 


Since  it  is  agreed  upon  concerning  providence, 
it  follows  that  we  show  whether  it  is  to  be  be- 
lieved that  it  belongs  to  many,  or  rather  to  one 
only.     We  have  sufficiently  taught,  as  1  think,  in 
our   Institutiotis,    that   there   cannot    be    many 
gods  ;  because,  if  the  divine  energy  and  power 
be  distributed  among  several,  it  must  necessarily 
be  diminished.     But  that  which  is  lessened  is 
plainly  mortal ;  but  if  He  is  not  mortal,  He  can 
neither   be   lessened    nor   divided.      Therefore 
there  is  but  one  God,  in  whom  complete  energy 
and  power  can  neither  be  lessened  nor  increased. 
But  if  there  are  many,  while  they  separately  have 
something   of   power   and    authority,    the    sum 
itself   decreases;    nor   will   they  separately   be 
able  to  have  the  whole,  which  they  have  in  com- 
mon with  others:  so  much  will  be  wanting  to 
each  as  the  others  shall  possess.     There  cannot 
therefore  be  many  rulers  in  this  world,  nor  many 
masters  in  one  house,  nor  many  pilots  in  one 
ship,  nor  many  leaders  in  one  herd  or  flock,  nor 
many  queens  in  one  swarm.     But  there  could 
not  have  been  many  suns  in  heaven,  as  there 
are  not  several  souls  in  one  body ;  so  entirely 
does  the  whole  of  nature  agree  in  unity.     But 
if  the  world 

"  Is  nourished  by  a  soul, 
A  spirit  whose  celestial  flame 
Glows  in  each  naember  of  the  frame, 
And  stirs  the  mighty  whole,"  ^ 

it  is  evident  from  the  testimony  of  the  poet,  that 
there  is  one  God  who  inhabits  the  world,  since 
the  whole  body  cannot  be  inhabited  and  gov- 
erned except  by  one  mind.  Therefore  all  di- 
vine power  must  be  in  one  person,  by  whose 
will  and  command  all  things  are  ruled;  and 
therefore  He  is  so  great,  that  He  cannot  be 
described  in  words  by  man,  or  estimated  by  the 
senses.  From  what  source,  therefore,  did  the 
opinion  or  persuasions  respecting  many  gods 
come  to  men?  Without  doubt,  all  those  who 
are  worshipped  as  gods  were  men,  and  were  also 
the  earliest  and  greatest  kings  ;  but  who  is  igno- 
rant that  they  were  invested  with  divine  honours 
after  death,  either  on  account  of  the  virtue  by 
which  they  had  profited  the  race  of  men,  or  that 
they  obtained  immortal  memory  on  account  of 
the  benefits  and  inventions  by  which  they  had 
adorned  human  life?  And  not  only  men,  but 
women  also.  And  this,  both  the  most  ancient 
writers  of  Greece,  whom  they  call  thcologi,  and 
also  Roman  writers  following  and  imitating  the 


«  [P.  lot,  supra;  also  vol.  v.  p.  ii,  note  2.] 
8  Taiita  rerum  magnitudo.  ^^ 

3  Sentiente;  others  read  "  sciente. 


s  Perfuasiove'rmort  editions  read  "  persuasione,"  but  the  mean- 
ing is  not  so  good. 
6  fleoAoyot. 


A   TREATISE   ON   THE   ANGER    OF   GOD. 


269 


Greeks,  teach  ;  of  whom  especially  Euhemerus 
and  our  Ennius,  who  point  out  the  birth- 
days, marriages,  offspring,  governments,  exploits, 
deaths,  and  tombs  '  of  all  of  them.  And  Tul- 
lius,  following  them,  in  his  third  book.  On  the 
Nature  of  the  Gods,  destroyed  the  public  reli- 
gions ;  but  neither  he  himself  nor  any  other  per- 
son was  able  to  introduce  the  true  one,  of 
which  he  was  ignorant.  And  thus  he  himself 
testified  that  that  which  was  false  was  evident ; 
that  the  truth,  however,  lay  concealed.  "  Would 
to  heaven,"  he  says,  "  that  I  could  as  easily  dis- 
cover true  things  as  refute  those  that  are  false  !  "  ^ 
And  this  he  proclaimed  not  with  dissimulation 
as  an  Academic,  but  truly  and  in  accordance 
with  the  feeling  of  his  mind,  because  the  truth 
cannot  be  uprooted  from  human  perceptions  : 
that  which  the  foresight  of  man  was  able  to  at- 
tain to,  he  attained  to,  that  he  might  expose 
false  things.  For  whatever  is  fictitious  and  false, 
because  it  is  supported  by  no  reason,  is  easily 
destroyed.  There  is  therefore  one  God,  the 
source  and  origin  of  all  things,  as  Plato  both 
felt  and  taught  in  the  Tiincvus,  whose  majesty 
he  declares  to  be  so  great,  that  it  can  neither  be 
comprehended  by  the  mind  nor  be  expressed  by 
the  tongue. 

Hermes  bears  the  same  testimony,  whom 
Cicero  asserts  ^  to  be  reckoned  by  the  Egyp- 
tians among  the  number  of  the  gods.  I  speak 
of  him  who,  on  account  of  his  excellence  and 
knowledge  of  many  arts,  was  called  Trismegis- 
tus  ;  and  he  was  far  more  ancient  not  only  than 
Plato,  but  than  Pythagoras,  and  those  seven  wise 
men.-*  In  Xenophon,?  Socrates,  as  he  discourses, 
says  that  "  the  form  of  God  ought  not  to  be  in- 
quired about ; "  and  Plato,  in  his  Book  of  Laws, ^ 
says  :  "What  God  is,  ought  not  to  be  the  subject 
of  inquiry,  because  it  can  neither  be  found  out 
nor  related."  Pythagoras  also  admits  that  there 
is  but  one  God,  saying  that  there  is  an  incorpo- 
real mind,  which,  being  diffused  and  stretched 
through  all  nature,  gives  vital  perception  to  all 
living  creatures ;  but  Antisthenes,  in  his  Physics, 
said  that  there  was  but  one  natural  God,  although 
the  nations  and  cities  have  gods  of  their  own 
people.  Aristotle,  with  his  followers  the  Peri- 
patetics, and  Zeno  with  his  followers  the  Stoics, 
say  nearly  the  same  things.  Truly  it  would  be 
a  long  task  to  follow  up  the  opinions  of  all  sepa- 
rately, who,  although  they  used  different  names, 
nevertheless  agreed  in  one  power  which  governed 
the  world.  But,  however,  though  philosophers 
and  poets,  and  those,  in  short,  who  worship  the 
gods,  often  acknowledge  the  Supreme  God,  yet 


*  Sepulcra;  others  read  "  simulacra." 

2  De  Nat.  Dear.,  i.  32.     [See  p.  29,  note  2,  supra. ^ 

3  Ibid.,  iii.  22. 

*  [P.  268,  note  I,  supra. \ 

5  Mentor., 

6  Lib.  vii. 


IV.  3. 


no  one  ever  inquired  into,  no  one  discussed,  the 
subject  of  His  worship  and  honours ;  with  that 
persuasion,  in  truth,  with  which,  always  believing 
Him  to  be  bounteous  and  incorruptible,  they 
think  7  that  He  is  neither  angry  with  any  one, 
nor  stands  in  need  of  any  worship.  Thus  there 
can  be  no  religion  where  there  is  no  fear.^ 

CHAP.  XII.  —  OF  RELIGION  AND  THE  FEAR  OF  GOD. 

Now,  since  Ave  have  replied  to  the  impious  and 
detestable  wisdom,"?  or  rather  senselessness  of 
some,  let  us  return  to  our  proposed  subject.  We 
have  said  that,  if  religion  is  taken  away,  neither 
wisdom  nor  justice  can  be  retained  :  Avisdom, 
because  the  understanding  of  the  divine  nature, 
in  which  we  differ  from  the  brutes,  is  found  in 
man  alone  ;  justice,  because  unless  God,  who 
cannot  be  deceived,  shall  restrain  our  desires, 
we  shall  live  wickedly  and  impiously.  There- 
fore, that  our  actions  should  be  viewed  by  God, 
pertains  not  only  to  the  usefulness  of  common 
life,  but  even  to  the  truth  ;  because,  if  religion 
and  justice  are  taken  away,  having  lost  our  rea- 
son, we  either  descend  to  the  senselessness  '°  of 
the  herds  ;  or  to  the  savageness  of  the  beasts, 
yea,  even  more  so,  since  the  beasts  spare  ani- 
mals of  their  own  kind,  ^^'hat  will  be  more 
savage,  what  more  unmerciful,  than  man,  if,  the 
fear  of  a  superior  being  taken  away,  he  shall  be 
able  either  to  escape  the  notice  of  or  to  despise 
the  might  of  the  laws?  It  is  therefore  the  fear 
of  God  alone  which  guards  the  mutual  society 
of  men,  by  which  life  itself  is  sustained,  pro- 
tected, and  governed.  But  that  fear  is  taken 
away  if  man  is  persuaded  that  God  is  without 
anger ;  for  that  He  is  moved  and  indignant  when 
unjust  actions  are  done,  not  only  the  common 
advantage,  but  even  reason  itself,  and  truth,  per- 
suade us.  We  must  again  return  to  the  former 
subjects,  that,  as  we  have  taught  that  the  world 
was  made  by  God,  we  may  teach  wliy  it  was 
made. 

CHAP.  XIII.  —  OF  THE   ADVANTAGE  AND  USE  OF  THE 
WORLD   AND    OF   THE    SEASONS. 

If  any  one  considers  the  whole  government 
of  the  world,  he  will  certainly  understand  how 
true  is  the  opinion  of  the  Stoics,  who  say  that 
the  world  was  made  on  our  account.  For  all 
the  things  of  which  the  world  is  composed,  and 
which  it  produces  from  itself,  are  adapted  to  the 
use  of  man.  Man,  accordingly,  uses  fire  for  the 
purpose  of  warmth  and  light,  and  of  softening 
his  food,  and  for  the  working  of  iron ;  he  uses 


'  Arbitrantur;  some  editions  have  "  arbitrabantur,"  which  appears 
preferable. 

8  ["  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom"  (Prov. 
ix.  10).     See  p.  262,  cap.  6,  note  6,  supra.  | 

9  Pnidentix;  another  reading  is  "  jmprudentia:." 
'°  Stultitiam. 


2  TO 


A   TREATISE    ON   THE   ANGER    OF    GOD. 


springs  for  drinking,  and  for  baths  ;  he  uses  rivers 
for  irrigating  the  fields,  and  assigning  boundaries 
to  countries ;  he  uses  the  earth  for  receiving  a 
variety  of  fruits,  the  hills  for  planting  vineyards, 
the  mountains  for  the  use  of  trees  and  fire- 
wood,' the  plains  for  crops  of  grain ;  he  uses 
the  sea  not  only  for  commerce,  and  for  receiv- 
ing supplies  from  distant  countries,  but  also  for 
abundance  of  every  kind  of  fish.  But  if  he 
makes  use  of  these  elements  to  which  he  is 
nearest,  there  is  no  doubt  that  he  uses  the  heav- 
en also,  since  the  offices  even  of  heavenly  things 
are  regulated  for  the  fertility  of  the  earth  from 
which  we  live.  The  sun,  with  its  ceaseless  courses 
and  unequal  intervals,^  completes  its  annual  cir- 
cles, and  either  at  his  rising  draws  forth  the  day 
for  labour,  or  at  his  setting  brings  on  the  night 
for  repose ;  and  at  one  time  by  his  departure 
farther  towards  the  south,  at  another  time  by  his 
approach  nearer  towards  the  north,  he  causes 
the  vicissitudes  of  winter  and  summer,  so  that 
both  by  the  moistures  and  frosts  of  winter  the 
earth  becomes  enriched  for  fruitfulness,  and  by 
the  heats  of  summer  either  the  produce  of  grass  ^ 
is  hardened  by  maturity,  or  that  which  is  in  moist 
places,  being  seethed  and  heated,  becomes  ri- 
pened. The  moon  also,  which  governs  the  time 
of  night,  regulates  her  monthly  courses  by  the 
alternate  loss  and  recovery  of  light,'*  and  by  the 
brightness  of  her  shining  illumines  the  nights 
obscure  with  gloomy  darkness,  so  that  journeys 
in  the  summer  heat,  and  expeditions,  and  works, 
may  be  performed  without  labour  and  inconven- 
ience ;  since 

"  By  night  the  light  stubble,  by  night 
The  dry  meadows  are  better  mown."^ 

The  Other  heavenly  bodies  also,  either  at  their 
rising  or  setting,  supply  favourable  times  ^  by 
their  fixed  positions. ^  Moreover,  they  also  af- 
ford guidance  to  ships,  that  they  may  not  wander 
through  the  boundless  deep  with  uncertain  course, 
since  the  pilot  duly  observing  them  arrives  at  the 
harbour  of  the  shore  at  which  he  aims.^  Clouds 
are  attracted  by  the  breath  of  the  winds,  that 
the  fields  of  sown  grain  may  be  watered  with 
showers,  that  the  vines  may  abound  with  prod- 
uce, and  the  trees  with  fruits.  And  these  things 
are  exhibited  by  a  succession  of  changes  through- 
out the  year,  that  nothing  may  at  any  time  be 
wanting  by  which  the  life  of  men  is  sustained. 
But  9  (it  is  said)  the  same  earth  nourishes  the 
other  hving  creatures,  and  by  the  produce  of  the 


'  Lignorum. 

2  Spatiis.     The  word  properly  refers  to  a  racecourse. 

3  Herbidae  fruges. 

*  Amis.>i  ac  recepti  Uiminis  vicibus. 
5  Virg.,  Georg-.,  i.  289. 

*  Opportunitates  temporum. 

7  Certis  stationibus.     Others  read  "  sationibus,"  for  certain  kinds 
of  sowing;  but  "  static"  is  applied  to  the  stars  by  Seneca  and  Pliny. 
^  Designati. 
9  An  objection  is  here  met  and  answered. 


same  even  the  dumb  animals  are  fed.  Has  not 
God  laboured  also  for  the  sake  of  the  dumb 
animals  ?  By  no  means  ;  because  they  are  void 
of  reason.  On  the  contrary,  we  understand  that 
even  these  themselves  in  the  same  manner  were 
made  by  God  for  the  use  of  man,  partly  for 
food,  partly  for  clothing,  partly  to  assist  him  in 
his  work ;  so  that  it  is  manifest  that  the  divine 
providence  wished  to  furnish  and  adorn  the  life 
of  men  with  an  abundance  of  objects  and  re- 
sources, and  on  this  account  He  both  filled  the 
air  with  birds,  and  the  sea  with  fishes,  and  the 
earth  with  quadrupeds.  But  the  Academics, 
arguing  against  the  Stoics,  are  accustomed  to 
ask  why,  if  God  made  all  things  for  the  sake  of 
men,  many  things  are  found  even  opposed,  and 
hostile,  and  injurious  to  us,  as  well  in  the  sea  as 
on  the  land.  And  the  Stoics,  without  any  regard 
to  the  truth,  most  foolishly  repelled  this.  P'or 
they  say  that  there  are  many  things  among  natu- 
ral productions,'"  and  reckoned  among  animals, 
the  utility  of  which  hitherto  "  escapes  notice,  but 
that  this  is  discovered  in  process  of  the  times, 
as  necessity  and  use  have  already  discovered 
many  things  which  were  unknown  in  former  ages. 
What  utility,  then,  can  be  discovered  in  mice,  in 
beetles,  in  serpents,  which  are  troublesome  and 
pernicious  to  man?  Is  it  that  some  medicine 
lies  concealed  in  them  ?  If  there  is  any,  it  will 
at  some  time  be  found  out,  namely,  as  a  remedy 
against  evils,  whereas  they  complain  that  it  is 
altogether  evil.  They  say  that  the  viper,  when 
burnt  and  reduced  to  ashes,  is  a  remedy  for  the 
bite  of  the  same  beast.  How  much  better  had 
it  been  that  it  should  not  exist  at  all,  than  that 
a  remedy  should  be  required  against  it  drawn 
from  itself? 

They  might  then  have  answered  with  more  con- 
ciseness and  truth  after  this  manner.  When  God 
had  formed  man  as  it  were  His  own  image,  that 
which  was  the  completion  of  His  workmanship, 
Pie  breathed  wisdom  into  him  alone,  so  that  he 
might  bring  all  things  into  subjection  to  his  own 
authority  and  government,  and  make  use  of  all 
the  advantages  of  the  world.  And  yet  He  set 
before  him  both  good  and  evil  things,  inasmuch 
as  He  gave  to  him  wisdom,  the  whole  nature  of 
which  is  employed  in  discerning  things  evil  and 
good  :  for  no  one  can  choose  better  things,  and 
know  what  is  good,  unless  he  at  the  same  time 
knows  to  reject  and  avoid  the  things  which  are 
evil.'^  They  are  both  mutually  connected  with 
each  other,  so  that,  the  one  being  taken  away, 
the  other  must  also  be  taken  away.  Therefore, 
good  and  evil  things  being  set  before  it,  then  at 
length  wisdom  discharges  its  office,  and  desires 


'°  Gignentium. 

"  .^dhuc,  omitted  in  many  manuscripts. 

'-  [1  have  heretofore  noted  the  elements  of  a  theodicy  to  be  found 
in  Lactantius.  j 


A   TREATISE    ON    THE    ANGER    OF    GOD. 


271 


the  good  for  usefulness,  but  rejects  the  evil  for 
safety.  Therefore,  as  innumerable  good  things 
have  been  given  which  it  might  enjoy,  so  also 
have  evils,  against  which  it  might  guard.  For  if 
there  is  no  evil,  no  danger  —  nothing,  in  short, 
which  can  injure  man  —  all  the  material  of  wis- 
dom is  taken  away,  and  will  be  unnecessary  for 
man.  For  if  only  good  things  are  placed  in 
sight,  what  need  is  there  of  reflection,  of  under- 
standing, of  knowledge,  of  reason?  since,  wher- 
ever he  shall  extend  his  hand,  that  is  befitting 
and  adapted  to  nature  ;  so  that  if  any  one  should 
wish  to  place  a  most  exquisite  dinner  before 
infants,  who  as  yet  have  no  taste,  it  is  plain  that 
each  will  desire  that  to  which  either  impulse,  or 
hunger,  or  even  accident,  shall  attract  them  ; 
and  whatever  they  shall  take,  it  will  be  useful 
and  salutary  to  them.  What  injury  will  it  there- 
fore be  for  them  always  to  remain  as  they  are, 
and  always  to  be  infants  and  unacquainted  with 
affairs  ?  But  if  you  add  a  mixture  either  of  bitter 
things,  or  things  useless,  or  even  poisonous,  they 
are  plainly  deceived  through  their  ignorance  of 
good  and  evil,  unless  wisdom  is  added  to  them, 
by  which  they  may  have  the  rejection  of  evil 
things  and  the  choice  of  good  things. 

You  see,  therefore,  that  we  have  greater  need 
of  wisdom  on  account  of  evils  ;  and  unless  these 
things  had  been  proposed  to  us,  we  should  not 
be  a  rational  animal.  But  if  this  account  is  true, 
which  the  Stoics  were  in  no  manner  able  to  see, 
that  argument  also  of  Epicurus  is  done  away. 
God,  he  says,  either  wishes  to  take  away  evils, 
and  is  unable ;  or  He  is  able,  and  is  unwilling ; 
or  He  is  neither  willing  nor  able,  or  He  is  both 
willing  and  able.  If  He  is  willing  and  is  unable. 
He  is  feeble,  which  is  not  in  accordance  with  the 
character  of  God  ;  if  He  is  able  and  unwilling, 
He  is  envious,  which  is  equally  at  variance  with 
God  ;  if  He  is  neither  willing  nor  able,  He  is 
both  envious  and  feeble,  and  therefore  not  God  ; 
if  He  is  both  willing  and  able,  which  alone  is 
suitable  to  God,  from  what  source  then  are  evils  ? 
or  why  does  He  not  remove  them?  I  know  that 
many  of  the  philosophers,  who  defend  provi- 
dence, are  accustomed  to  be  disturbed  by  this 
argument,  and  are  almost  driven  against  their 
will  to  admit  that  God  takes  no  interest  in  any- 
thing, which  Epicurus  especially  aims  at ;  but 
having  examined  the  matter,  we  easily  do  away 
with  this  formidable  argument.  For  God  is  able 
to  do  whatever  He  wishes,  and  there  is  no  weak- 
ness or  envy  in  God.  He  is  able,  therefore,  to 
take  away  evils  ;  but  He  does  not  wish  to  do  so, 
and  yet  He  is  not  on  that  account  envious.  For 
on  this  account  He  does  not  take  them  away, 
because  He  at  the  same  time  gives  wisdom,  as  I 
have  shown  ;  and  there  is  more  of  goodness  and 
pleasure  in  wisdom  than  of  annoyance  in  evils. 
For  wisdom  causes  us  even  to  know  God,  and 


by  that  knowledge  to  attain  to  immortality,  which 
is  the  chief  good.  Therefore,  unless  we  first 
know  evil,  we  shall  be  unable  to  know  good. 
But  Epicurus  did  not  see  this,  nor  did  any  other, 
that  if  evils  are  taken  away,  wisdom  is  in  like 
manner  taken  away ;  and  that  no  traces  of  virtue 
remain  in  man,  the  nature  of  which  consists  in 
enduring  and  overcoming  the  bitterness  of  evils. 
And  thus,  for  the  sake  of  a  slight  gain  '  in  the 
taking  away  of  evils,  we  should  be  deprived  of  a 
good,  which  is  very  great,  and  true,  and  peculiar 
to  us.  It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  all  things  are 
proposed  for  the  sake  of  man,  as  well  evils  as 
also  goods. 

CHAP.    XIV. WHY    GOD   MADE   MAN. 

It  follows  that  I  show  for  what  purpose  God 
made  man  himself.  As  He  contrived  the  world 
for  the  sake  of  man,  so  He  formed  man  himself 
on  His  own  account,  as  it  were  a  priest  of  a  divine 
temple,  a  spectator  of  His  works  and  of  heav- 
enly objects.  For  he  is  the  only  being  who, 
since  he  is  intelligent  and  capable  of  reason,  is 
able  to  understand  God,  to  admire  His  works, 
and  perceive  His  energy  and  power ;  for  on  this 
account  he  is  furnished  with  judgment,  intelli- 
gence, and  prudence.  On  this  account  he 
alone,  beyond  the  other  living  creatures,  has 
been  made  with  an  upright  body  and  attitude, 
so  that  he  seems  to  have  been  raised  up  for  the 
contemplation  of  his  Parent.^  On  this  account 
he  alone  has  received  language,  and  a  tongue 
the  interpreter  of  his  thought,  that  he  may 
be  able  to  declare  the  majesty  of  his  Lord. 
Lastly,  for  this  cause  all  things  were  placed 
under  his  control,  that  he  himself  might  be  under 
the  control  of  God,  their  Maker  and  Creator. 
If  God,  therefore,  designed  man  to  be  a  worship- 
per of  Himself,  and  on  this  account  gave  him  so 
much  honour,  that  he  might  rule  over  all  things  ; 
it  is  plainly  most  just  that  he  should  worship 
Him  3  who  bestowed  upon  him  such  great  gifts, 
and  love  man,  who  is  united  with  us  in  the  par- 
ticipation of  the  divine  justice.  For  it  is  not 
right  that  a  worshipper  of  God  should  be  in- 
jured by  a  worshipper  of  God.  From  which  it 
is  understood  that  man  was  made  for  the  sake 
of  religion  and  justice.  And  of  this  matter 
Marcus  Tullius  is  a  witness  in  his  books  respect- 
ing the  Laws,  since  he  thus  speaks  :  *  "  But  of 
all  things  concerning  which  learned  men  dis- 
pute, nothing  is  of  greater  conse(]uence  than 
that  it  should  be  altogether  understood  that  we 
are  born  to  justice."  And  if  this  is  most  true,  it 
follows  that   God  will  have  all  men  to  be  just, 


'  Propter  exiguum  compendium  sublatorum  malorum. 

'  [I  cease  to  note  this  perpetually  recurrent  thought.  It  had 
profoundly  impressed  our  author  as  an  element  of  natural  religion.] 

i  Et  Deum  colere,  etc.  Some  editions  read,  "  et  cum,  qui  tanta 
pra;stiterit,"  omitting  the  word  "  colere." 

■♦  i.  10. 


272 


A   TREATISE    ON   THE   ANGER    OF   GOD. 


that  is,  to  have  God  and  man  as  objects  of  their 
affection ;  to  honour  God  in  truth  as  a  Father, 
and  to  love  man  as  a  brother :  for  in  these  two 
things  the  whole  of  justice  is  comprised.  But 
he  who  either  fails  to  acknowledge  God  or  acts 
injuriously  to  man,  lives  unjustly  and  contrary  to 
his  nature,  and  in  this  manner  disturbs  the 
divine  institution  and  law. 

CHAP.    XV.  —  WHENCE   SINS   EXTENDED   TO   MAN. 

Here  perhaps  some  one  may  ask,  Whence 
sins  extended  to  man,  or  what  perversion  dis- 
torted the  rule  of  the  divine  institution  to  worse 
things,  so  that,  though  he  was  born  to  justice, 
he  nevertheless  performs  unjust  works.  I  have 
already  in  a  former  place  explained,  that  God 
at  the  same  time  set  before  him  good  and  evil, 
and  that  He  loves  the  good,  and  hates  the  evil 
which  is  contrary  to  this ;  but  that  He  per- 
mitted the  evil  on  this  account,  that  the  good 
also  might  shine  forth,  since,  as  I  have  often 
taught,  we  understand  that  the  one  cannot  exist 
without  the  other ;  in  short,  that  the  world  itself 
is  made  up  of  two  elements  opposing  and  con- 
nected with  one  another,  of  fire  and  moisture, 
and  that  light  could  not  have  been  made  unless 
there  has  also  been  darkness,  since  there  cannot 
be  a  higher  place  without  a  lower,  nor  a  rising 
without  a  setting,  nor  warmth  without  cold,  nor 
softness  without  hardness.  Thus  also  we  are 
composed  of  two  substances  equally  opposed  to 
one  another  —  soul  and  body  :  the  one  of  which 
is  assigned  to  the  heaven,  because  it  is  slight  and 
not  to  be  handled  ;  the  other  to  the  earth,  be- 
cause it  is  capable  of  being  laid  hold  of:  the 
one  is  firm '  and  eternal,  the  other  frail  and  mor- 
tal. Therefore  good  clings  to  the  one,  and  evil 
to  the  other  :  light,  life,  and  justice  to  the  one  ; 
darkness,  death,  and  injustice  to  the  other. 
Hence  there  arose  among  men  the  corruption 
of  their  nature,  so  that  it  was  necessary  that  a 
law  should  be  estabhshed,  by  which  vices  might 
be  prohibited,  and  the  duties  of  virtue  be  en- 
joined. Since,  therefore,  there  are  good  and 
evil  things  in  the  affairs  of  men,  the  nature  of 
which  I  have  set  forth,  it  must  be  that  God  is 
moved  to  both  sides,  both  to  favour  when  He 
sees  that  just  things  are  done,  and  to  anger  when 
He  perceives  unjust  things. 

But  Epicurus  opposes  us,  and  says  :  "  If  there 
is  in  God  the  affection  of  joy  leading  Him  to 
favour,  and  of  hatred  influencing  Him  to  anger. 
He  must  of  necessity  have  both  fear,  and  incli- 
nation, and  desire,  and  the  other  affections  which 
belong  to  human  weakness."  It  does  not  follow 
that  he  who  is  angry  must  fear,  or  that  he  who 
feels  joy  must  grieve ;  in  short,  they  who  are 
liable  to  anger  are  less  timid,  and  they  who  are 


'  Solidum. 


of  a  joyful  temperament  are  less  affected  with 
grief.  What  need  is  there  to  speak  of  the  affec- 
tions of  humanity,  to  which  our  nature  yields? 
Let  us  weigh  the  divine  necessity ;  for  I  am 
unwilling  to  speak  of  nature,  since  it  is  beheved 
that  our  God  was  never  born.  The  affection  of 
fear  has  a  subject-matter  in  man,  but  it  has 
none  in  God.  Man,  inasmuch  as  he  is  liable  to 
many  accidents  and  dangers,  fears  lest  any 
greater  violence  should  arise  which  may  strike, 
despoil,  lacerate,  dash  down,  and  destroy  him. 
But  God,  who  is  liable  neither  to  want,  nor 
injury,  nor  pain,  nor  death,  can  by  no  means 
fear,  because  there  is  nothing  which  can  offer 
violence  to  Him.  Also  the  reason  and  cause  of 
desire  is  manifest  in  man.  For,  inasmuch  as  he 
was  made  frail  and  mortal,  it  was  necessary  that 
another  and  different  sex  should  be  made,  by 
union  \vith  which  offspring  might  be  produced 
to  continue  the  perpetuity  of  his  race.  But  this 
desire  has  no  place  in  God,  because  frailty  and 
death  are  far  removed  from  Him  ;  nor  is  there 
with  Him  any  female  in  whose  union  He  is  able 
to  rejoice ;  nor  does  He  stand  in  need  of  suc- 
cession, since  He  will  live  for  ever.  The  same 
things  may  be  said  respecting  envy  and  passion, 
to  which,  from  sure  and  manifest  causes,  man  is 
liable,  but  to  which  God  is  by  no  means  liable. 
But,  in  truth,  favour  and  anger  and  pity  have 
their  substance  ^  in  God,  and  that  greatest  and 
matchless  power  employs  them  for  the  preser- 
vation of  the  world. 

CHAP.    XVI.  —  OF    GOD,    AND    HIS    ANGER    AND   AF- 
FECTIONS. 

Some  one  will  ask  what  this  substance  is. 
First  of  all,  when  evils  befall  them,  men  in  their 
dejected  state  for  the  most  part  have  recourse  to 
God  :  they  appease  and  entreat  Him,  believing 
that  He  is  able  to  repel  injuries  from  them.  He 
has  therefore  an  occasion  of  exercising  pity ;  for 
He  is  not  so  unmerciful  and  a  despiser  of  men 
as  to  refuse  aid  to  those  who  are  in  distress. 
Very  many,  also,  who  are  persuaded  that  justice 
is  pleasing  to  God,  both  worship  Him  who  is 
Lord  and  Parent  of  all,  and  with  continual 
prayers  and  repeated  vows  offer  gifts  and  sacri- 
fices, follow  up  His  name  with  praises,  striving 
to  gain  His  favour  by  just  and  good  works. 
There  is  therefore  a  reason,  on  account  of  which 
God  may  and  ought  to  favour  them.  For  if 
there  is  nothing  so  befitting  God  as  beneficence, 
and  nothing  so  unsuited  to  His  character  as  to 
be  ungrateful,  it  is  necessary  that  He  should 
make  some  return  for  the  services  of  those  who 
are  excellent,  and  who  lead  a  holy  life,  that  He 
may  not  be  liable  to  the  charge  of  ingratitude, 
which  is  worthy  of  blame  ^  even  in  the  case  of 


"  Materia.     Subjective  existence. 
3  Criminosa. 


A   TREATISE    ON    THE    ANGER    OF    GOD. 


^7Z 


a  man.  But,  on  the  contrary,  others  are  daring ' 
and  wicked,  who  pollute  all  things  with  their  lusts, 
harass  with  slaughters,  practise  fraud,  plunder, 
commit  perjury,  neither  spare  relatives  nor  par- 
ents, neglect  the  laws,  and  even  God  Himself. 
Anger,  therefore,  has  a  befitting  occasion  ^  in 
God. 

For  it  is  not  right  that,  when  He  sees  such 
things,  He  should  not  be  moved,  and  arise  to 
take  vengeance  upon  the  wicked,  and  destroy 
the  pestilent  and  guilty,  so  as  to  promote  the  in- 
terests of  all  good  men.  Thus  even  in  anger 
itself  there  is  also  contained  a  showing  of  kind- 
ness.^  Therefore  the  arguments  are  found  to  be 
empty  and  false,  either  of  those  who,  when  they 
will  not  admit  that  God  is  angry,  will  have  it 
that  He  shows  kindness,  because  this,  indeed, 
cannot  take  place  without  anger ;  or  of  those 
who  think  that  there  is  no  emotion  of  the  mind 
in  God.  And  because  there  are  some  affections 
to  which  God  is  not  liable,  as  desire,  fear,  avarice, 
grief,  and  envy,  they  have  said  that  He  is  entirely 
free  from  all  affection.  For  He  is  not  liable  to 
these,  because  they  are  vicious  affections ;  but 
as  to  those  which  belong  to  virtue,  —  that  is, 
anger  towards  the  wicked,  regard  towards  the 
good,  pity  towards  the  afflicted,  —  inasmuch  as 
they  are  worthy  of  the  divine  power.  He  has 
affections  of  His  own,-*  both  just  and  true.  And 
if  He  is  not  possessed  of  them,  the  life  of  man 
will  be  thrown  into  confusion,  and  the  condition 
of  things  will  come  to  such  disturbance  that 
the  laws  will  be  despised  and  overpowered,  and 
audacity  alone  reign,  so  that  no  one  can  at  length 
be  in  safety  unless  he  who  excels  5  in  strength. 
Thus  all  the  earth  will  be  laid  waste,  as  it  were,  by 
a  common  robbery.  But  now,  since  the  wicked 
expect  punishment,  and  the  good  hope  for  favour, 
and  the  afflicted  look  for  aid,  there  is  place  for 
virtues,  and  crimes  are  more  rare.  But^  it  is 
said,  ofttimes  the  wicked  are  more  prosperous, 
and  the  good  more  wretched,  and  the  just  are 
harassed  with  impunity  by  the  unjust.  We  will 
hereafter  consider  why  these  things  happen.  In 
the  meantime  let  us  explain  respecting  anger, 
whether  there  be  any  in  God ;  whether  He  takes 
no  notice  at  all,  and  is  unmoved  at  those  things 
which  are  done  with  impiety. 

CHAP.    XVII. — OF   GOD,    HIS   CARE  AND   ANGER. 

God,  says  Epicurus,  regards  nothing ;  there- 
fore He  has  no  power.  For  he  who  has  power 
must  of  necessity  regard  affairs.  For  if  He  has 
power,  and  does  not  use  it,  what  so  great  cause 


'  Facinorosi. 

^  Materia. 

3  Gratificatio. 

*  Proprios. 

5  Prsevaleat. 

^  An  objection  is  here  met  and  answered. 


is  there  that,  I  will  not  say  our  race,  but  even 
the  universe  itself,  should  be  contemptible  in 
His  sight?  On  this  account  he  says  He  is  pure^ 
and  happy,  because  He  is  always  at  rest.**  To 
whom,  then,  has  the  administration  of  so  great 
affairs  been  entrusted,^  if  these  things  which  we 
see  to  be  governed  by  the  highest  judgment  are 
neglected  by  God  ?  or  how  can  he  who  lives  and 
perceives  be  at  rest?  For  rest  belongs  either  to 
sleep  or  to  death.  But  sleep  has  not  rest.  For 
when  we  are  asleep,  the  body  indeed  is  at  rest, 
but  the  soul  is  restless  and  agitated  :  it  forms  for 
itself  images  which  it  may  behold,  so  that  it  exer- 
cises its  natural  power  of  motion  by  a  variety  of 
visions,  and  calls  itself  away  from  false  things, 
until  the  limbs  are  satiated,  and  receive  vigour 
from  rest.  Therefore  eternal  rest  belongs  to  death 
alone.  Now  if  death  does  not  affect  God,  it  fol- 
lows that  God  is  never  at  rest.  But  in  what  can 
the  action  of  God  consist,  but  in  the  administra- 
tion of  the  world  ?  But  if  God  carries  on  the  care 
of  the  world,  it  follows  that  He  cares  for  the  life 
of  men,  and  takes  notice  of  the  acts  of  individ- 
uals, and  He  earnestly  desires  that  they  should 
be  wise  and  good.  This  is  the  will  of  God,  this 
the  divine  law ;  and  he  who  follows  and  ob- 
serves this  is  beloved  by  God.  It  is  necessary 
that  He  should  be  moved  with  anger  against  the 
man  who  has  broken  or  despised  this  eternal 
and  divine  law.  If,  he  says,  God  does  harm  to 
any  one,  therefore  He  is  not  good.  They  are 
deceived  by  no  slight  error  who  defame  all  cen- 
sure, whether  human  or  divine,  with  the  name 
of  bitterness  and  malice,  thinking  that  He  ought 
to  be  called  injurious  '°  who  visits  the  injurious 
with  punishment.  But  if  this  is  so,  it  follows 
that  we  have  injurious  laws,  which  enact  punish- 
ment for  offenders,  and  injurious  judges  who 
inflict  capital  punishments  on  those  convicted 
of  crime.  But  if  the  law  is  just  which  awards 
to  the  transgressor  his  due,  and  if  the  judge 
is  called  upright  and  good  when  he  punishes 
crimes,  —  for  he  guards  the  safety  of  good  men 
who  punishes  the  evil,  —  it  follows  that  God, 
when  He  opposes  the  evil,  is  not  injurious ;  but 
he  himself  is  injurious  who  either  injures  an  in- 
nocent man,  or  spares  an  injurious  person  that 
he  may  injure  many. 

I  would  gladly  ask  from  those  who  represent 
God  as  immoveable,"  if  anyone  had  property,  a 
house,  a  household  "^  of  slaves,  and  his  slaves, 
despising  the  forbearance  of  their  master,  should 
attack  all  things,  and  themselves  take  the  enjoy- 
ment of  his  goods,  if  his  household  should 
honour  them,  while  the  master  was  despised  by 


7  Incorruptus, 

'  Quietus. 

9  Cessit. 
■°  Nocentes. 

"  Immobilem:  not  subject  to  emotions. 
'^  Familiam. 


2  74 


A   TREATISE    ON    THE    ANGER    OF    GOD. 


all,  insulted,  and  deserted  :  could  he  be  a  wise 
man  who  should  not  avenge  the  insults,  but 
permit  those  over  whom  he  had  power  to  have 
the  enjoyment  of  his  property?  Can  such  for- 
bearance be  found  in  any  one?  If,  indeed,  it  is 
to  be  called  forbearance,  and  not  rather  a  kind 
of  insensible  stupor.  But  it  is  easy  to  endure 
contempt.  What  if  those  things  were  done 
which  are  spoken  of  by  Cicero  ?  '  "  For  I  ask, 
if  any  head  of  a  family,-  when  his  children  had 
been  put  to  death  by  a  slave,  his  wife  slain  and 
his  house  set  on  fire,  should  not  exact  most 
severe  punishment  from  that  slave,  whether  he 
would  appear  to  be  kind  and  merciful,  or  in- 
human and  most  cruel?"  But  if  to  pardon 
deeds  of  this  kind  is  the  part  of  cruelty  rather 
than  of  kindness,^  it  is  not  therefore  the  part 
of  goodness  in  God  not  to  be  moved  at  those 
things  which  are  done  unjustly.  For  the  world 
is,  as  it  were,  the  house  of  God,  and  men,  as  it 
were,  His  slaves  ;  and  if  His  name  is  a  mockery 
to  them,  what  kind  or  amount  of  forbearance  is 
it  to  give  ^  up  His  own  honours,  to  see  wicked 
and  unjust  things  done,  and  not  to  be  indignant, 
which  is  peculiar  and  natural  to  Him  who  is 
displeased  with  sins  !  To  be  angry,  therefore,  is 
the  part  of  reason  :  for  thus  faults  are  removed, 
and  licentiousness  is  curbed ;  and  this  is  plainly 
in  accordance  with  justice  and  wisdom. 

But  the  Stoics  did  not  see  that  there  is  a  dis- 
tinction between  right  and  wrong,  that  there  is 
a  just  and  also  an  unjust  anger ;  and  because 
they  did  not  find  a  remedy  for  the  matter,  they 
wished  altogether  to  remove  it.  But  the  Peri- 
patetics said  that  it  was  not  to  be  cut  out,  but 
moderated  ;  to  whom  we  have  made  a  sufficient 
reply  in  the  sixth  book  of  the  Institutions. '= 
Now,  that  the  philosophers  were  ignorant  of  the 
nature  of  anger,  is  plain  from  their  definitions, 
which  Seneca  enumerated  in  the  books  which 
he  composed  on  the  subject  of  anger.  "  Anger 
is,"  he  says,  "  the  desire  of  avenging  an  injury." 
Others,  as  Posidonius  says,  describe  it  as  the 
desire  of  punishing  him  by  whom  you  think  that 
you  have  been  unfairly  injured.  Some  have  thus 
defined  it :  "Anger  is  an  incitement  of  the  mind 
to  injure  him  who  either  has  committed  an  in- 
jury, or  who  has  wished  to  do  so."  The  defi- 
nition of  Aristotle  does  not  differ  greatly  from 
ours  ;  ^  for  he  says  that  "  anger  is  the  desire  of 
requiting  pain."  This  is  the  unjust  anger,  con- 
cerning which  we  spoke  before,  which  is  con- 
tained even  in  the  dumb  animals  ;  but  it  is  to  be 
restrained  in  man,  lest  he  should  rush  to  some 
very  great  evil  through  rage.     This  cannot  exist 

■  In  Calal.,  iv.  6. 

2  Paterfamilias,  the  master  of  a  house. 

3  Pietatis. 

*  Ut  cedat. 

-   fCap.  15,  p.  179,  suprn.'\ 

*  [See  p.  277,  note  6,  infra.  But  he  should  say  iiidig>:ation, 
not  auger.\ 


in  God,  because  He  cannot  be  injured  ;  7  but  it 
is  found  in  man,  inasmuch  as  he  is  frail.  For 
the  inflicting^  of  injury  inflames  ^  anguish,  and 
anguish  produces  a  desire  of  revenge.  Where, 
then,  is  that  just  anger  against  offenders?  For 
this  is  evidently  not  the  desire  of  revenge,  inas- 
much as  no  injury  precedes.  I  do  not  speak  of 
those  who  sin  against  the  laws ;  for  although  a 
judge  may  be  angry  with  these  without  incurring 
blame,  let  us,  however,  suppose  that  he  ought 
to  be  of  a  sedate  mind  when  he  sentences  the 
guilty  to  punishment,  because  he  is  the  execu- 
tor '°  of  the  laws,  not  of  his  own  spirit  or  power  ; 
for  so  they  wish  it  who  endeavour  to  extirpate 
anger.  But  I  speak  of  those  in  particular  who 
are  in  our  own  power,  as  slaves,  children,  wives, 
and  pupils ;  for  when  we  see  these  offend,  we 
are  incited  to  restrain  them. 

For  it  cannot  fail  to  be,  that  he  who  is  just 
and  good  is  displeased  with  things  which  are 
bad,  and  that  he  who  is  displeased  with  evil  is 
moved  when  he  sees  it  practised.  Therefore  we 
arise  to  take  vengeance,  not  because  we  have 
been  injured,  but  that  discipline  may  be  pre- 
served, morals  may  be  corrected,  and  licentious- 
ness be  suppressed.  This  is  just  anger  ;  and  as 
it  is  necessary  in  man  for  the  correction  of 
wickedness,  so  manifestly  is  it  necessary  in  God, 
from  whom  an  example  comes  to  man.  For  as 
we  ought  to  restrain  those  who  are  subject  to 
our  power,  so  also  ought  God  to  restrain  the  of- 
fences of  all.  And  in  order  that  He  may  do 
this,  He  must  be  angry ;  because  it  is  natural 
for  one  who  is  good  to  be  moved  and  incited  at 
the  fault  of  another.  Therefore  they  ought  to 
have  given  this  definition  :  Anger  is  an  emotion 
of  the  mind  arousing  itself  for  the  restraining 
of  faults."  For  the  definition  given  by  Cicero, 
"  Anger  is  the  desire  of  taking  vengeance,"  does 
not  differ  much  from  those  already  mentioned.'^ 
But  that  anger  which  we  may  call  either  fury  or 
rage  ought  not  to  exist  even  in  man,  because  it 
is  altogether  vicious ;  but  the  anger  which  re- 
lates to  the  correction  of  vices  ought  not  to  be 
taken  away  from  man ;  nor  can  it  be  taken  away 
from  God,  because  it  is  both  serviceable  for  the 
affairs  of  men,  and  necessary. 

CHAP.    XVIII.  —  OF    THE     PUNISHMENT   OF     FAULTS, 
THAT    IT   CANNOT   TAKE    PLACE    WITHOUT   ANGER. 

What  need  is  there,  they  say,  of  anger,  since 
faults  can  be  corrected  without  this  affection? 
But  there  is  no  one  who  can  calmly  see  any  one 
committing  an  offence.     This  may  perhaps  be 

7  Illssibilis  est.  Others  read  "  stabilis  est,"  he  is  firm.  The 
reading  of  the  text  is  confirmed  by  "  la;sio  "  in  the  next  clause. 

'  Lasio. 

9  Inurit,  "  burns  in." 
'°  Minister. 
■■   [See  note  6,  siipra.\ 
'2  [P.  260,  etc.,  S7ipra.\ 


A   TREATISE   ON   THE   ANGER    OF   GOD. 


275 


possible  in  him  who  presides  over  the  laws,  be- 
cause the  deed  is  not  committed  before  his  eyes, 
but  it  is  brought  before  him  as  a  doubtful  matter 
from  another  quarter.  Nor  can  any  wickedness 
be  so  manifest,  that  there  is  no  place  for  a  de- 
fence ;  and  therefore  it  is  possible  that  a  judge 
may  not  be  moved  against  him  who  may  possibly 
be  found  to  be  innocent ;  and  when  the  detected 
crime  shall  have  come  to  light,  he  now  no  longer 
uses  his  own  opinion,  but  that  of  the  laws.  It 
may  be  granted  that  he  does  that  which  he  does 
without  anger ;  for  he  has  that  which  he  may 
follow.  We,  undoubtedly,  when  an  offence  is 
committed  by  our  household  at  home,  whether 
we  see  or  perceive  it,  must  be  indignant ;  for 
the  very  sight  of  a  sin  is  unbecoming.  For  he 
who  is  altogether  unmoved  either  approves  of 
faults,  which  is  more  disgraceful  and  unjust,  or 
avoids  the  trouble  of  reproving  them,  which  a 
tranquil  spirit  and  a  quiet  mind  despises  and  re- 
fuses, unless  anger  shall  have  aroused  and  in- 
cited it.  But  when  any  one  is  moved,  and  yet 
through  unseasonable  leniency  grants  pardon 
more  frequently  than  is  necessary,  or  at  all 
tunes,  he  evidently  both  destroys  the  life  of 
those  whose  audacity  he  is  fostering  for  greater 
crimes,  and  furnishes  himself  with  a  perpetual 
source  of  annoyances.  Therefore  the  restrain- 
ing of  one's  anger  in  the  case  of  sins  is  faulty. 

Archytas  of  Tarentum  is  praised,  who,  when 
he  had  found  everything  ruined  '  on  his  estate, 
rebuking  the  fault  of  his  bailiff,  said,  "  Wretch,  I 
would  have  beaten  you  to  death  if  I  had  not 
been  angry."  They  consider  this  to  be  a  singu- 
lar example  of  forbearance  ;  but  influenced  by 
authority,  they  do  not  see  how  foolishly  he  spoke 
and  acttd.  For  if  (as  Plato  says)  no  prudent 
man  punishes  because  there  is  an  offence,  but  to 
prevent  the  occurrence  of  an  offence,  it  is  evident 
how  evil  an  example  this  wise  man  put  forth. 
For  if  slaves  shall  perceive  that  their  master  uses 
violence  when  he  is  not  angry,  and  abstains  from 
violence  ^  when  he  is  angry,  it  is  evident  that 
they  will  not  commit  slight  offences,  lest  they 
should  be  beaten ;  but  will  commit  the  greatest 
offences,  that  they  may  arouse  the  anger  of  the 
perverse  man,  and  escape  with  impunity.  PUit  I 
should  praise  him  if,  when  he  was  enraged,  he 
had  given  space  to  his  anger,  that  the  excite- 
ment of  his  mind  might  calm  down  through  the 
interval  of  time,  and  his  chastisement  might  be 
confmed  within  moderate  limits.  Therefore,  on 
account  of  the  magnitude  of  the  anger,  punish- 
ment ought  not  to  have  been  inflicted,  but  to 
have  been  delayed,  lest  it  should  inflict '  upon 
the  offender  pain  greater  than  is  just,  or  occasion 
an  outburst  of  fury  in  the  punisher.     13ut  now. 


'  Corrupta  esse  omnia. 

2  Parccre. 

3  Inurcret,  i.e.,  should  burn  in,  or  brand. 


how  is  it  equitable  or  wise,  that  any  one  should 
be  punished  on  account  of  a  slight  offence,  and 
should  be  unpunished  on  account  of  a  very  great 
one?  But  if  he  had  learned  the  nature  and 
causes  of  things,  he  never  would  have  professed 
so  unsuitable  a  forbearance,  that  a  wicked  slave 
should  rejoice  that  his  master  has  been  angry 
with  him.  For  as  God  has  furnished  the  human 
body  with  many  and  various  senses  which  are 
necessary  for  the  use  of  life,  so  also  He  has 
assigned  to  the  soul  various  affections  by  which 
the  course  of  life  might  be  regulated ;  and  as 
He  has  given  desire  for  the  sake  of  producing 
offspring,  so  has  He  given  anger  for  the  sake  of 
restraining  faults. 

But  they  who  are  ignorant  of  the  ends  of  good 
and  evil  things,  as  they  employ  sensual  desire 
for  the  purposes  of  corruption  and  pleasure,  in 
the  same  manner  make  use  of  anger  and  passion 
for  the  inflicting  of  injury,  while  they  are  angry 
with  those  whom  they  regard  with  hatred.  There- 
fore they  are  angry  even  with  those  who  commit 
no  offence,  even  with  their  equals,  or  even 
with  their  superiors.  Hence  they  daily  rush  to 
monstrous  ■*  deeds ;  hence  tragedies  often  arise. 
Therefore  Archytas  would  be  deservdng  of  praise, 
if,  when  he  had  been  enraged  against  any  citizen 
or  equal  who  injured  him,  he  had  curbed  him- 
self, and  by  forbearance  mitigated  the  impetu- 
osity of  his  fury.  This  self-restraint  is  glorious, 
by  which  any  great  evil  which  impends  is  re- 
strained ;  but  it  is  a  fault  not  to  check  the  faults 
of  slaves  and  children  ;  for  through  their  escap- 
ing without  punishment  they  will  proceed  to 
greater  evil.  In  this  case  anger  is  not  to  be  re- 
strained ;  but  even  if  it  is  in  a  state  of  inactivity,s 
it  must  l)e  aroused.  But  that  which  we  say  re- 
specting man,  we  also  say  respecting  God,  who 
made  man  like  to  Himself.  I  omit  making  men- 
tion of  the  figure  of  God,  because  the  Stoics  say 
that  God  has  no  form,  and  another  great  subject 
will  arise  if  we  should  wish  to  refute  them.  I 
only  speak  respecting  the  soul.  If  it  belongs'' 
to  God  to  reflect,  to  be  wise,  to  understand,  to 
foresee,  to  excel,  and  of  all  animals  man  alone 
has  these  qualities,  it  follows  that  he  was  made 
after  the  likeness  of  God ;  but  on  this  account 
he  goes  on  to  vice,  because,  being  mingled  with 
frailty  derived  from  earth,  he  is  unable  to  pre- 
serve pure  and  uncontaminated  that  which  he 
has  received  from  God,  unless  he  is  imbued  with 
the  precepts  of  justice  by  the  same  God. 

CHAP.  XIX. OF  THE  SOUL  AND  BODY,  AND  OF 

PROVIDENCE. 

But  since  he  is  made  up,  as  we  have  said,  of 
two  parts,  soul  and  body,  the  virtues  are  con- 

*  Immania,  i.e.,  of  an  inhuman  character. 

5  J.uet. 

*>  Deo  subjacct. 


276 


A   TREATISE    ON    THE    ANGER    OF    GOD. 


tained  in  the  one,  and  vices  in  the  other,  and 
they  mutually  oppose  each  other.  For  the  good 
properties  of  the  soul,  which  consist  in  restrain- 
ing lusts,  are  contrary  to  the  body  ;  and  the  good 
properties  of  the  body,  which  consist  in  every 
kind  of  pleasure,  are  hostile  to  the  soul.  But  if 
the  virtue  of  the  soul  shall  have  resisted  the 
desires,  and  suppressed  them,  he  will  be  truly 
like  to  God,  From  which  it  is  evident  that  the 
soul  of  man,  which  is  capable  of  divine  virtue,  is 
not  mortal.  But  there  is  this  distinction,  that 
since  virtue  is  attended  with  bitterness,  and  the 
attraction  of  pleasure  is  sweet,  great  numbers  are 
overcome  and  are  drawn  aside  to  the  pleasant- 
ness ;  but  they  who  have  given  themselves  up  to 
the  body  and  earthly  things  are  pressed  to  the 
earth,  and  are  unable  to  attain  to  the  favour  of 
the  divine  bounty,  because  they  have  polluted 
themselves  with  the  defilements  of  vices.  But 
they  who,  following  God,  and  in  obedience  to 
Him,  have  despised  the  desires  of  the  body,  and, 
preferring  virtue  to  pleasures,  have  preserved 
innocence  and  righteousness,  these  God  recog- 
nises as  like  to  Himself. 

Since,  therefore,  He  has  laid  down  a  most 
holy  law,  and  wishes  all  men  to  be  innocent  and 
beneficent,  is  it  possible  that  He  should  not  be 
angry  when  He  sees  that  His  law  is  despised, 
that  virtue  is  rejected,  and  pleasure  made  the 
object  of  pursuit?  But  if  He  is  the  governor 
of  the  world,  as  He  ought  to  be,  He  surely  does 
not  despise  that  which  is  even  of  the  greatest 
importance  in  the  whole  world.  If  He  has  fore- 
sight, as  it  is  befitting  that  God  should  have,  it 
is  plain  that  He  consults  the  interests  of  the 
human  race,  in  order  that  our  life  may  be  more 
abundantly  supplied,  and  better,  and  safer.  If 
He  is  the  Father  and  God  of  all,  He  is  undoubt- 
edly delighted  with  the  virtues  of  men,  and  pro- 
voked by  their  vices.  Therefore  He  loves  the 
just,  and'  hates  the  wicked.  There  is  no  need 
(one  says)  of  hatred  ;  for  He  once  for  all  has 
fixed  a  reward  for  the  good,  and  punishment  for 
the  wicked.  But  if  any  one  lives  justly  and  in- 
nocendy,  and  at  the  same  time  neither  worships 
God  nor  has  any  regard  for  Him,  as  Aristides, 
and  Timon,'  and  others  of  the  philosophers,  will 
he  escape^  with  impunity,  because,  though  he 
has  obeyed  the  law  of  God,  he  has  neverthe- 
less despised  God  Himself?  There  is  therefore 
something  on  account  of  which  God  may  be 
angry  with  one  rebelling  against  Him,  as  it  were, 
in  reliance  upon  His  integrity.  If  He  can  be 
angry  with  this  man  on  account  of  his  pride,  why 
not  more  so  with  the  sinner,  who  has  despised 
the  law  together  with  the  Lawgiver?     The  judge 


cannot  pardon  offences,  because  he  is  subject  to 
the  will  of  another.  But  God  can  pardon,  be- 
cause He  is  Himself  the  arbitrator  ^  and  judge 
of  His  own  law ;  and  when  He  laid  down  this. 
He  did  not  surely  deprive  Himself  of  all  power, 
but  He  has  the  liberty  of  bestowing  pardon. 

CH.'VP.    XX. OF     OFFENCES,    .'VND    THE    MERCY    OF 

GOD. 

If  He  is  able  to  pardon,  He  is  therefore  able 
also  to  be  angry.  Why,  then,  some  one  will  say, 
does  it  often  occur,  that  they  who  sin  are  pros- 
perous, and  they  who  live  piously  are  wretched? 
Because  fugitives  and  disinherited  *  persons  live 
without  restraint,  and  they  Avho  are  under  the 
discipline  of  a  father  or  master  live  in  a  more 
strict  and  frugal  manner.  For  virtue  is  proved 
and  fixed  5  by  means  of  ills;  vices  by  means 
of  pleasure.  Nor,  however,  ought  he  who  sins 
to  hope  for  lasting  impunity,  because  there  is  no 
lasting  happiness. 

"  But,  in  truth,  the  last  day  is  always  to  be  looked  for 
by  man;  and  no  one  ought  to' be  called  happy  be- 
fore his  death  and  last  funeral  rites,"'' 

as  the  not  inelegant  poet  says.  It  is  the  end 
which  proves  happiness,  and  no  one  is  able  to 
escape  the  judgment  of  God,  either  when  alive  or 
after  death.  For  He  has  the  power  both  to  cast 
down  the  living  from  on  high,  and  to  punish  the 
dead  with  eternal  torments.  Nay,  he  says,  if 
God  is  angry.  He  ought  to  have  inflicted  ven- 
geance at  once,  and  to  have  punished  every  one 
accordiiig  to  his  desert.  But  (it  is  replied)  if 
He  had  done  this,  no  one  would  survive.  For 
there  is  no  one  who  offends  in  no  respect,  and 
there  are  many  things  which  excite  to  the  com- 
mission of  sin  —  age,  intemperance,  want,  oppor- 
tunity, reward.  To  such  an  extent  is  the  frailty 
of  the  flesh  with  which  we  are  clothed  liable  to 
sin,  that  unless  God  were  indulgent  to  this  ne- 
cessity, perhaps  too  few  would  hve.  On  this 
account  He  is  most  patient,  and  restrains  His 
anger.  For  because  there  is  in  Him  perfect 
virtue,  it  follows  of  necessity  that  His  patience 
also  is  perfect,  which  is  itself  also  a  virtue.  How 
many  men,  from  having  been  sinners,  have  after- 
wards become  righteous ;  from  being  injurious, 
have  become  good;  from  being  wicked,  have 
become  temperate  !  How  many  who  were  in 
early  life  base,  and  condemned  by  the  judgment 
of  all,  afterwards  have  turned  out  praiseworthy? 
But  it  is  plain  that  this  could  not  happen  if  pun- 
ishment followed  every  offence. 


'  Others  read  "  Cimon."  If  the  reading  Timon  be  retained,  the 
reference  is  not  to  Timon  who  is  called  "  ihe  Misanthrope,"  but  to 
Timon  the  philosopher  of  Phlius,  who  lived  in  the  time  of  Ptolemy 
Philadelphus,  and  belonged  to  the  sect  of  the  Sceptics. 

-  Cedetne  huic  impune. 


3  Disceptator. 

■4  Abdicati. 

5  Constat. 

<>  Ovid.,  Mctam.,  iii.  153. 

[  "  Ultima  semper 

Expectanda  dies  homini  est;  dicique  beatus 

Ante  obitum  nemo,"  etc.] 


A   TREATISE   ON   THE   ANGER    OF   GOD. 


277 


The  public  laws  condemn  those  who  are  man- 
ifestly guilty  ;  but  there  are  great  numbers 
whose  offences  are  concealed,  great  numbers 
who  restrain  the  accuser  either  by  entreaties  or 
by  reward,  great  numbers  who  elude  justice  by 
favour  or  influence.  But  if  the  divine  censure 
should  condemn  all  those  who  escape  the  pun- 
ishment of  men,  there  would  be  few  or  even  no 
men  on  the  earth.  In  short,  even  that  one 
reason  for  destroying  the  human  race  might 
have  been  a  just  one,  that  men,  despising  the 
living  God,  pay  divine  honour  to  earthly  and 
frail  images,  as  though  they  were  of  heaven,  ador- 
ing works  made  by  human  hands.  And  though 
God  their  Creator  made  them  of  elevated  coun- 
tenance and  upright  figure,  and  raised  them  to 
the  contemplation  of  the  heaven  and  the  knowl- 
edge of  God,  they  have  preferred,  like  cattle,  to 
bend  themselves  to  the  earth.'  For  he  is  low, 
and  curved,  and  bent  downward,  who,  turning 
away  from  the  sight  of  heaven  and  God  his 
Father,  worships  things  of  the  earth,  which  he 
ought  to  have  trodden  upon,  that  is,  things  made 
and  fashioned  from  earth.  Therefore,  amidst 
such  great  impiety  and  such  great  sins  of  men, 
the  forbearance  of  God  attains  this  object,  that 
men,  condemning  the  errors  of  their  past  life, 
correct  themselves.  In  short,  there  are  many 
who  are  just  and  good ;  and  these,  having  laid 
aside  the  worship  of  earthly  things,  acknowledge 
the  majesty  of  the  one  and  only  God.  But  though 
the  forbearance  of  God  is  very  great  and  most 
useful ;  yet,  although  late.  He  punishes  the  guilty, 
and  does  not  suffer  them  to  proceed  further,  when 
He  sees  that  they  are  incorrigible. 

CHAP.  XXI. OF  THE  ANGER  OF  GOD  AND  MAN. 

There  remains  one  question,  and  that  the  last. 
For  some  one  will  perhaps  say,  that  God  is  so 
far  from  being  angry,  that  in  His  precepts  He 
even  forbids  man  to  be  angry.  I  might  say  that 
the  anger  of  man  ought  to  be  curbed,  because 
he  is  often  angry  unjustly ;  and  he  has  immedi- 
ate emotion,  because  he  is  only  for  a  time.^ 
Therefore,  lest  those  things  should  be  done  which 
the  low,  and  those  of  moderate  station,  and  great 
kings  do  in  their  anger,  his  rage  ought  to  have 
been  moderated  and  suppressed,  lest,  being  out 
of  his  mind, 3  he  should  commit  some  inexpiable 
crime.  But  God  is  not  angry  for  a  short  time,-* 
because  He  is  eternal  and  of  perfect  virtue,  and 
He  is  never  angry  unless  deservedly.  But,  how- 
ever, the  matter  is  not  so  ;  for  if  He  should  alto- 
gether prohibit  anger,  He  Himself  would  have 
been  in  some  measure  the  censurer  of  His  own 


■  [The  degradation  of  the  mind  of  man  to  the  worship  of  stocks 
and  stones  impresses  our  author  as  against  nature.] 

-  Temporalis. 

3  Mentis  inipos,  i.e.,  not  having  possession  of  his  mind,  opposed 
to  "  mentis  compos."     Some  editions  add,  "  in  bile." 

*  Ad  praisens. 


workmanship,  since  He  from  the  beginning  had 
inserted  anger  in  the  liver  5  of  man,  since  it  is 
believed  that  the  cause  of  this  emotion  is  con- 
tained in  the  moisture  of  the  gall.  Therefore 
He  does  not  altogether  prohibit  anger,  because 
that  affection  is  necessarily  given,  but  He  forbids 
us  to  persevere  in  anger.  For  the  anger  of 
mortals  ought  to  be  mortal ;  for  if  it  is  lasting, 
enmity  is  strengthened  to  lasting  destruction. 
Then,  again,  when  He  enjoined  us  to  be  angry, 
and  yet  not  to  sin,^  it  is  plain  that  He  did  not 
tear  up  anger  by  the  roots,  but  restrained  it,  that 
in  every  correction  we  might  preserve  modera- 
tion and  justice.  Therefore  He  who  commands 
us  to  be  angry  is  manifestly  Himself  angry  ;  He 
who  enjoins  us  to  be  quickly  appeased  is  mani- 
festly Himself  easy  to  be  appeased  :  for  He  has 
enjoined  those  things  which  are  just  and  useful 
for  the  interests  of  society. ? 

But  because  I  had  said  that  the  anger  of  God 
is  not  for  a  time  ^  only,  as  is  the  case  with  man, 
who  becomes  inflamed  with  an  immediate  ^  ex- 
citement, and  on  account  of  his  frailty  is  unable 
easily  to  govern  himself,  we  ought  to  understand 
that  because  God  is  eternal,  His  anger  also  re- 
mains to  eternity ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  that 
because  He  is  endued  with  the  greatest  excel- 
lence. He  controls  His  anger,  and  is  not  ruled 
by  it,  but  that  He  regulates  it  according  to  His 
will.  And  it  is  plain  that  this  is  not  opposed  to 
that  which  has  just  been  said.  For  if  His  anger 
had  been  altogether  immortal,  there  would  be 
no  place  after  a  fault  for  satisfaction  or  kind  feel- 
ing, though  He  Himself  commands  men  to  be 
reconciled  before  the  setting  of  the  sun.'°  But  the 
divine  anger  remains  for  ever  against  those  who 
ever  sin.  Therefore  God  is  appeased  not  by 
incense  or  a  victim,  not  by  costly  offerings,  which 
things  are  all  corruptible,  but  by  a  reformation 
of  the  morals  :  and  he  who  ceases  to  sin  renders 
the  anger  of  God  mortal.  For  this  reason  He 
does  not  immediately"  punish  every  one  who  is 
guilty,  that  man  may  have  the  opportunity  of  com- 
ing to  a  right  mind,'=  and  correcting  himself. 

CHAP.    XXII. OF   SINS,    AND   THE    VERSES    OF   THE 

SIBYLS   RESPECTING   THEM    RECITED. 

This  is  what  I  had  to  say,  most  beloved  Dona- 
tus,  respecting  the  anger  of  God,  that  you  might 
know  how  to  refute  those  who  represent  God  as 
being  without  emotions. '^  It  only  remains  that, 
after  the  practice  of  Cicero,  I  should  use  an 


S  As  supposed  to  be  the  seat  of  the  passions. 

*  [Ps.  iv.  4,  Vulgate,  and  Ephes.,  as  below.] 

7  kebus  communibus. 

^  Temporalem. 

9  Pra;sentanea.     The  word  is  applied  to  a  remedy  which  operates 
instantaneously. 

'°  See  Eph.  iv.  26. 
"  Ad  pr;esens. 
'-    Kesipisceiidi. 
'■*  Immobilem. 


278 


A  TREATISE  ON  THE  ANGER  OF  GOD. 


epilogue  by  way  of  peroration.  As  he  did  in 
the  Tuscu'lan  Disputatiojis;  when  discoursing 
on  the  subject  of  death,  so  we  in  this  work  ought 
to  bring  forward  divine  testimonies,  which  may 
be  beheved,  to  refute  the  persuasion  of  those 
who,  beheving  that  God  is  without  anger,  de- 
stroy all  religion,  without  which,  as  we  have 
shown,  we  are  either  equal  to  the  brutes  in  sav- 
ageness,  or  to  the  cattle  in  foolishness  ;  for  it  is 
in  religion  only  —  that  is,  in  the  knowledge  of 
the  Supreme  God  —  that  wisdom  consists.  All 
the  jjrophets,  being  filled  with  the  Divine  Spirit, 
speak  nothing  else  than  of  the  favour  of  God 
towards  the  righteous,  and  His  anger  against 
the  ungodly.  And  their  testimony  is  indeed 
sufficient  for  us  ;  but  because  it  is  not  believed 
by  those  who  make  a  display  of  wisdom  by  their 
hair  and  dress,-  it  was  necessary  to  refute  them 
by  reason  and  arguments.  For  they  act  so  pre- 
posterously,^  that  human  things  give  authority  to 
divine  things,  whereas  divine  things  ought  rather 
to  give  authority  to  human.  But  let  us  now 
leave  these  things,  lest  we  should  produce  no 
effect  upon  them,  and  the  subject  should  be  in- 
definitely drawn  out.  Let  us  therefore  seek 
those  testimonies  which  they  can  either  believe, 
or  at  any  rate  not  oppose. 

Authors  of  great  number  and  weight  have 
made  mention  of  the  Sibyls  ;  of  the  Greeks, 
Aristo  the  Chian,  and  ApoUodorus  the  Ery- 
thraean ;  of  our  writers,  Varro  and  Fenestella. 
All  these  relate  that  the  Erythrcean  Sibyl  was  dis- 
tinguished and  noble  beyond  the  rest.  Apol- 
lodorus,  indeed,  boasts  of  her  as  his  own  citizen 
and  countrywoman.  But  Fenestella  also  relates 
that  ambassadors  were  sent  by  the  senate  to 
Erythrte,  that  the  verses  of  this  Sibyl  might  be 
conveyed  to  Rome,  and  that  the  consuls  Curio 
and  Octavius  might  take  care  that  they  should 
be  placed  in  the  Capitol,  which  had  then  been 
restored  under  the  care  of  Quintus  Catulus.  In 
her  writings,  verses  of  this  kind  are  found  re- 
specting the  Supreme  God  and  Maker  of  the 
world  :  — 

"The  incorruptible  and  eternal  Maker  who  dwells  in  the 
heaven,  holding  forth  good  to  the  good,  a  much 
greater  reward,  but  stirring  up  anger  and  rage 
against  the  evil  and  unjust." 

Again,  in  another  place,  enumerating  the  deeds 
by  which  God  is  especially  moved  to  anger,  she 
introduced  these  things  :  — 

"Avoid  unlawful  services,  and  serve  the  living  God. 
Abstain  from  adultery  and  impurity  ;  bring  up  a 
pure  generation  of  children  ;  do  not  kill  :  for  the 
Immortal  will  be  angry  with  every  one  who  may 

sin." 

Therefore  He  is  angry  with  sinners. 


CHAP.    XXIII. OF    THE    AXGER    OF     G(JD    AND     THE 

PUNISHiMENT  OF  SINS,  AND  A  RECrrAL  OF  THE 
VERSES  OF  THE  SIBYLS  RESPECTING  IT  ;  AND, 
MOREOVER,    A    REPROOF    AND    EXHORTATION. 

But  because  it  is  related  by  most  learned  men 
that  there  have  been  many  Sibyls,  the  testimony 
of  one  may  not  be  sufficient  to  confirm  the 
truth,  as  we  purpose  to  do.  The  volumes,  in- 
deed, of  the  Cumeean  Sibyl,  in  which  are  written 
the  fates  of  the  Romans  are  kept  secret ;  but  the 
writings  of  all  the  others  are,  for  the  most  part, 
not  prohibited  from  being  in  common  use.  And 
of  these  another,  denouncing  the  anger  of  God 
against  all  nations  on  account  of  the  impiety  of 
men,  thus  began  :  — 

"  Since  great  anger  is  coming  upon  a  disobedient  world, 
I  disclose  the  commands  of  God  to  the  last  age, 
prophesying  to  all  men  from  city  to  city." 

Another  Sibyl  also  said,  that  the  deluge  was 
caused  by  die  indignation  of  God  against  the 
unrighteous  in  a  former  age,  that  the  wickedness 
of  the  hurnan  race  might  be  extinguished  :  — 

"  From  the  time  when,  the  God  of  heaven  being  enraged 
against  the  cities  themselves  and  all  men,  a  deluge 
having  burst  forth,  the  sea  covered  the  earth." 

In  like  manner  she  foretold  a  conflagration  about 
to  take  place  hereafter,  in  which  the  impiety  of 
men  should  again  be  destroyed  :  — 

"And  at  some  time,  God  no  longer  soothing  His  anger, 
but  increasing  it,  and  destroying  the  race  of  men, 
and  laying  waste  the  whole  of  it  by  fire." 

From  which  mention  is  thus  made  concerning 
Jupiter  by  Ovid  :  •*  — 

"He  remembers  also  that  it  is  fated  that  the  time  shall 
come  in  which  the  sea,  the  earth,  and  the  palace 
of  heaven,  being  caught  by  fire,  shall  be  burnt, 
and  the  curiously  wTought  framework  of  the 
world'  be  in  danger." 

And  this  must  come  to  pass  at  the  time  when 
the  honour  and  worship  of  the  Supreme  shall 
have  perished  among  men.  The  same  Sibyl, 
however,  testifying  that  He  was  appeased  by 
reformation  ^  of  conduct  and  self-improvement, 
added  these  things  :  — 

"  But,  ye  mortals,  in  pity'  turn  yourselves  now,  and  do 
not  lead  the  great  God  to  every  kind  of  anger." 

And  also  a  little  later  :  — 

"  He  will  not  destroy,  but  will  again  restrain  His  anger, 
if  you  all  practise  valuable  piety  in  your  minds." 

Then  another  Sibyl  declares  that  the  Father  of 
heavenly  and  earthly  things  ought  to  be  loved, 
lest  His  indignation  should  arise,  to  the  destruc- 
tion of  men  :  — 

"  Lest  by  chance  the  immortal  God  should  be  angry, 
and  destroy  the  whole  race  of  men,  their  life  and 
shameless  race,  it  is  befitting  that  we  love  the 
wise,  ever-living  God  the  Father." 


'  fBook  i.,  concluding  chapters.] 
2  Th       '■'         ' '---  ■- 


»  I  BOOK  1.,  concluding  cnapiers.j 

2  The  philosophers  wore  long  hair  and  cloaks.     See  liistit.,  iii. 
[Needlessly  repeated.     See  p.  95,  supra  ;  also  137.) 

3  Praepostere,  i.e.,  in  a  reversed  order,  putting  the  last  first. 


<  Mctam.,  i.  256. 

5  Moles  operosa  laboret. 

''  Poenitetitia  factorum. 

1  €Act-i.     Others  read,  i  /xtAtot,  "  O  wretched.' 


A   TREATISE   ON   THE   ANGER   OF   GOD. 


279 


From  these  things  it  is  evident  that  the  argu- 
ments of  the  philosophers  are  vain,  who  imagine 
that  God  is  without  anger,  and  among  His  other 
praises  reckon  that  which  is  most  useless,  de- 
tracting from  Him  that  which  is  most  salutary 
for  human  affairs,  by  which  majesty  itself  exists. 
For  this  earthly  kingdom  and  government,  un- 
less guarded  by  fear,  is  broken  down.  Take 
away  anger  from  a  king,  and  he  will  not  only 
cease  to  be  obeyed,  but  he  will  even  be  cast  down 
headlong  from  his  height.  Yea,  rather  take  away 
this  affection  from  any  person  of  low  degree, 
and  who  will  not  plunder  him?  Who  will  not 
deride  him?  Who  will  not  treat  him  with  in- 
jury? Thus  he  will  be  able  to  have  neither 
clothing,  nor  an  abode,  nor  food,  since  others 
will  deprive  him  of  whatever  he  has  ;  much  less 
can  we  suppose  that  the  majesty  of  the  heaven- 
ly government  can  exist  without  anger  and  fear. 
The  Milesian  Apollo  being  consulted  concerning 
the  religion  of  the  Jews,  inserted  these  things 
in  his  answer  :  — 

"God,  the  King  and  Father  of  all,  before  whom  the 
earth  trembles,  and  the  heaven  and  sea,  and 
whom  the  recesses  of  Tartarus  and  the  demons 
dread." 

If  He  is  so  mild,  as  the  philosophers  will  have 
it,  how  is  it  that  not  only  the  demons  and  minis- 
ters of  such  great  power,  but  even  the  heaven 
and  earth,  and  the  whole  system  of  the  universe, 
tremble  at  His  presence  ?  For  if  no  one  submits 
to  the  service  of  another  except  by  compulsion, 
it  follows  that  all  government  exists  by  fear,  and 
fear  by  anger.  For  if  any  one  is  not  aroused 
against  one  who  is  unwilling  to  obey,  it  will  not 
be  possible  for  him  to  be  compelled  to  obedi- 
ence. Let  any  one  consult  his  own  feelings  ; 
he  will  at  once  understand  that  no  one  can  be 
subdued  to  the  command  of  another  without 
anger  and  chastisement.  Therefore,  where  there 
shall  be  no  anger,  there  will  be  no  authority. 
But  God  has  authority ;  therefore  also  He  must 
have  anger,  in  which  authority  consists.  There- 
fore let  no  one,  induced  by  the  empty  prating  ' 
of  the  philosophers,  train  himself  to  the  con- 
tempt of  God,  which  is  the  greatest  impiety. 
We  all  are  bound  both  to  love  Him,  because  He 
is  our  Father ;  and  to  reverence  Him,  because 
He  is  our  Lord  :  both  to  pay  Him  honour,  be- 
cause He  is  bounteous ;  and  to  fear  Him,  be- 
cause He  is  severe  :  each  character  in  Him  is 
worthy  of  reverence.^  Who  can  preserve  his 
piety,  and  yet  fail  to  love  the  parent  of  his  life? 
or  who  can  with  impunity  despise  Him  who,  as 
ruler  of  all  things,  has  true  and  everlasting  power 
over  all?  If  you  consider  Him  in  the  character 
of  Father,  He  supplies  to  us  our  entrance  to 


'  Vaniloquentia. 
^  Venerabilis. 


the  light  which  we  enjoy  :  through  Him  we  live, 
through  Him  we  have  entered  into  the  abode  ^  of 
this  world.  If  you  contemplate  Him  as  God,  it 
is  He  who  nourishes  us  with  innumerable  re- 
sources :  it  is  He  who  sustains  us,  we  dwell  in 
His  house,  we  are  His  household  ;  ■*  and  if  we 
are  less  obedient  than  was  befitting,  and  less  at- 
tentive to  our  duty  5  than  the  endless  merits  of 
our  Master  and  Parent  demanded*  nevertheless 
it  is  of  great  avail  to  our  obtaining  pardon,  if  we 
retain  the  worship  and  knowledge  of  Him ;  if, 
laying  aside  low  and  earthly  affairs  and  goods, 
we  meditate  upon  heavenly  and  divine  things 
which  are  everlasting.  And  that  we  may  be 
able  to  do  this,  God  must  be  followed  by  us, 
God  must  be  adored  and  loved ;  since  there  is 
in  Him  the  substance  '^  of  things,  the  principle  7 
of  the  virtues,  and  the  source  of  all  that  is  good. 

For  what  is  greater  in  power  than  Ciod,  or 
more  perfect  in  reason,  or  brighter  in  clearness? 
And  since  He  begat  us  to  wisdom,  and  produced 
us  to  righteousness,  it  is  not  allowable  for  man 
to  forsake  God,  who  is  the  giver  of  intelligence 
and  life,  and  to  serve  earthly  and  frail  things,  or, 
intent  upon  seeking  temporal  goods,  to  turn  aside 
from  innocence  and  piety.  Vicious  and  deadly 
pleasures  do  not  render  a  man  happy ;  nor  does 
opulence,  which  is  the  inciter  of  lusts  ;  nor  empty 
ambition  ;  nor  frail  honours,  by  which  the  human 
soul,  being  ensnared  and  enslaved  to  the  body, 
is  condemned  ^  to  eternal  death  :  but  innocence 
and  righteousness  alone,  the  lawful  and  due  re- 
ward of  which  is  immortality,  which  God  from 
the  beginning  appointed  for  holy  and  uncorrupted 
minds,  which  keep  themselves  pure  and  uncon- 
taminated  from  vices,  and  from  every  earthly 
impurity.  Of  this  heavenly  and  eternal  reward 
they  cannot  be  partakers,  who  have  polluted  their 
conscience  by  deeds  of  violence,  frauds,  rapine, 
and  deceits ;  and  who,  by  injuries  inflicted  upon 
men,  by  impious  actions,  have  branded  them- 
selves 9  with  indelible  stains.  Accordingly  it  is 
befitting  that  all  who  wish  deservedly  to  be  called 
wise,  who  wish  to  be  called  men,  should  despise 
frail  things,  should  trample  upon  earthly  things, 
and  should  look  down  upon  base  '°  things,  that 
they  may  be  able  to  be  united  in  a  most  blissful 
relationship  with  God. 

Let  impiety  and  discords  be  removed ;  let 
turbulent  and  deadly  dissensions  be  allayed,"  by 
which  human  societies  and  the  divine  union  of 
the  public  league  are  broken  in  upon,  divided, 
and  dispersed ;  as  far  as  we  can,  let  us  aim  at 


3  Hospitium,  i.e.,  a  place  of  hospitality. 

*  Familia,  "  a  houseliold  of  slaves." 
5  Officiosa,  i.e.,  familia. 

'^  Materia  reruin. 
"  Ratio  virtiitum. 

*  yi""terna  morte  damnatiir. 

9  Intluibiles  sibi  maciilas  imisserunt. 
'"  Humilia. 
"  Sopiantur,  i.e.,  bo  lulled  to  sleep. 


2  So 


A   TREATISE    ON    THE    ANGER    OF    GOD. 


being  good  and  bounteous  :  if  we  have  a  supply 
of  wealth  and  resources,  let  it  not  be  devoted 
to  the  pleasure  of  a  single  person,  but  bestowed 
on  the  welfare  of  many.  For  pleasure  is  as 
shortlived  as  the  body  to  which  it  does  service. 
But  justice  and  kindness  are  as  immortal  as  the 
mind  and  soul,  which  by  good  works  attain  to 
the  likeness  of  God.  Let  God  be  consecrated 
by  us,  not  in  temples,  but  in  our  heart.  All 
things  which  are  made  by  the  hand  are  destruc- 


tible." Let  us  cleanse  this  temple,  which  is  de- 
filed not  by  smoke  or  dust,  but  by  evil  thoughts  ; 
which  is  lighted  not  by  blazing  tapers,'  but  by 
the  brightness  and  light  of  wisdom.  And  if  we 
believe  that  God  is  always  present  in  this  temple, 
to  whose  divinity  the  secrets  of  the  heart  are 
open,  we  shall  so  live  as  always  to  have  Him 
propitious,  and  never  to  fear  His  anger. 

'  Destructilia.     The  word  is  used  by  Prudentius. 
2  [See  p.  163,  supra.     See  note  below.] 


NOTE   BY  THE   AMERICAN    EDITOR. 

It  is  worth  while  to  direct  attention  to  (book  vi.  cap.  2)  what  our  author  has  said  of  ^^  true 
worship,"  just  now,  when  the  most  violent  and  persistent  efforts  are  made  to  sensualize  Christian 
worship,  and  to  explain  away  the  testimony  of  the  Ante-Nicene  Fathers  on  this  important  sub- 
ject. The  argument  of  our  author,  in  its  entire  drift,  is  as  applicable  to  our  own  times  as  to  his ; 
and,  deeply  as  I  value  beauty  in  the  public  worship  of  God,  I  cannot,  as  a  Nicene  Catholic,  do 
less  than  adopt  the  universal  sentiment  of  the  early  Fathers  as  to  the  limits  of  decoration. 


ON   THE   WORKMANSHIP   OF   GOD, 

OR  THE   FORMATION   OF   MAN. 
A   TREATISE  ADDRESSED   TO  BIS  PUPIL  DEMETRIANUS. 


CHAP.    I. THE   INTRODUCTION,  AND    EXHORTATION 

TO    DEMETRIANUS.' 

How  disturbed  I  am,  and  in  the  greatest  ne- 
cessities, you  will  be  able  to  judge  from  this  little 
book  which  I  have  written  to  you,  Demetrianus, 
almost  in  unadorned  words,  as  the  mediocrity  of 
my  talent  permitted,  that  you  might  know  my 
daily  pursuit,  and  that  I  might  not  be  wanting  to 
you,  even  now  an  instructor,  but  of  a  more  hon- 
ourable subject  and  of  a  better  system.  For  if 
you  afforded  yourself  a  ready  hearer  in  literature, 
which  did  nothing  else  than  form  the  style,  how 
much  more  teachable  ought  you  to  be  in  these 
true  studies,  which  have  reference  even  to  the 
life  !  And  I  now  profess  to  you,  that  I  am  hin- 
dered by  no  necessity  of  circumstance  or  time 
from  composing  something  by  which  the  philoso- 
phers of  our  sect^  which  we  uphold  may  become 
better  instructed  and  more  learned  for  the  future, 
although  they  now  have  a  bad  reputation,  and 
are  commonly  reproved,  as  living  otherwise  than 
is  befitting  for  wise  men,  and  as  concealing  their 
vices  under  the  covering  of  a  name  ;  whereas 
they  ought  either  to  have  remedied  them,  or  to 
have  altogether  avoided  them,  that  they  might 
render  the  name  of  wisdom  happy  and  uncor- 
rupted,  their  life  itself  agreeing  with  their  pre- 
cepts. I,  however,  shrink  from  no  labour  that  I 
may  at  once  instruct  ourselves  and  others.  For 
I  am  not  able  to  forget  myself,  and  especially  at 
that  time  when  it  is  most  necessary  for  me  to 
remember  ;  as  also  you  do  not  forget  yourself,  as 
I  hope  and  wish.  For  although  the  necessity  of 
the  state  may  turn  you  aside  from  true  and  just 
works,  yet  it  is  impossible  that  a  mind  conscious 
of  rectitude  should  not  from  time  to  time  look 
to  the  heaven. 

I    indeed   rejoice    that  all  things  which   are 
esteemed  blessings  turn  out  prosperously  to  you. 


but  only  on  condition  of  their  changing  nothing 
of  your  state  of  mind.  For  I  fear  lest  custom 
and  the  pleasantness  of  these  subjects  should, 
as  usually  happens,  creep  by  degrees  into  your 
mind.     Therefore  I  advise  you, 

"  And  repeating  it,  will  again  and  again  advise  you,"  ^ 

not  to  believe  that  you  have  these  enjoyments  of 
the  earth  as  great  or  true  blessings,  since  they  are 
not  only  deceitful  because  they  are  doubtful,  but 
also  treacherous  because  they  are  pleasant.  For 
you  know  how  crafty  that  wrestler  and  adversary 
of  ours  is,  and  also  often  violent,  as  we  now  see 
that  he  is.  He  employs  all  these  things  which 
are  able  to  entice  as  snares,  and  with  such  sub- 
tilty  that  they  escape  the  notice  of  the  eyes  of 
tlie  mind,  so  that  they  cannot  be  avoided  by  the 
foresight  of  man.  Therefore  it  is  the  highest 
prudence  to  advance  step  by  step,  since  he  occu- 
pies the  passes  on  both  sides,  and  secretly  places 
stumbling-blocks  for  our  feet.  Accordingly  I 
advise  you,  either  to  disregard,  if  you  are  able 
according  to  your  virtue,  your  prosperity  in  which 
you  live,  or  not  to  admire  it  greatly.  Remember 
your  true  parent,  and  in  what^  city  you  have 
given  your  name,  and  of  what  rank  you  have 
been.  You  understand  assuredly  what  I  say. 
For  I  do  not  charge  you  with  pride,  of  which 
there  is  not  even  a  suspicion  in  your  case  ;  but 
the  things  which  I  say  are  to  be  referred  to  the 
mind,  not  to  the  body,  the  whole  system  of 
which  has  been  arranged  on  this  account,  that  it 
may  be  in  subjection  to  the  soul  as  to  a  master, 
and  may  be  ruled  by  its  will.  For  it  is  in  a  cer- 
tain manner  an  earthen  vessel  in  which  the  soul, 
that  is,  the  true  man  himself,  is  contained,  and 
that  vessel  indeed  not  made  by  Prometheus,  as 
the  i)oets  say,  but  by  that  supreme  Creator  and 
Artificer  of  the  world,  (lod,  whose  divine  provi- 
dence and  most  perfect  excellence  it  is  neither 


'   [Of  whom,  infra..\ 

'  [Nostra;  sectse.     Perhaps  adopted  pleasantly  from  Acts  xxviii. 
92.]     i.e..  Christians. 


3  Virg.,  /Eu.,  iii.  436. 

■t  i.e.,  have  been  initiated  by  baptism.     [Phihpp.  ni.  20.    Greek. 

281 


2«2 


ON    THE    WORKMANSHIP    OF    GOD. 


possible  to  comprehend  by  the  perception,  nor 
to  express  in  word. 

I  will  attempt,  however,  since  mention  has 
been  made  of  the  body  and  soul,  to  explain  the 
nature  cf  each,  as  far  as  the  weakness  of  my  un- 
derstanding sees  through  ;  and  I  think  that  this 
duty  is  especially  to  be  undertaken  on  this  ac- 
count, because  Marcus  TuUius,  a  man  of  remark- 
able talent,  in  his  fourth  book  on  the  Republic, 
when  he  had  attempted  to  do  this,  concluded 
a  subject  of  wide  extent  within  narrow  limits, 
lightly  selecting  the  chief  points.  And  that  there 
might  be  no  excuse,  because  he  had  not  followed 
up  this  subject,  he  testified  that  neither  inclina- 
tion nor  attention  had  been  wanting  to  him.  For 
in  his  first  book  concerning  the  Laws,  when  he 
was  concisely  summing  up  the  same  subject,  he 
thus  spoke  :  "  Scipio,  as  it  appears  to  me,  has  suf- 
ficiently expressed  this  subject  in  those  books 
which  you  have  read."  Afterwards,  however,  in 
his  second  book  concerning  the  Nature  of  the 
Gods,  he  endeavoured  to  follow  up  the  same 
subject  more  extensively.  But  since  he  did  not 
express  it  sufficiently  even  there,  I  will  approach 
this  office,  and  will  take  upon  myself  boldly  to 
explain  that  which  a  man  of  the  greatest  elo- 
quence has  almost  left  untouched.  Perhaps  you 
may  blame  me  for  attempting  to  discuss  some- 
thing in  matters  of  obscurity,  when  you  see  that 
there  have  been  men  of  such  rashness  who  are 
commonly  called  philosophers,  that  they  scruti- 
nized those  things  which  God  willed  to  be  abstruse 
and  hidden,  and  investigated  the  nature  of  things 
in  heaven  and  on  earth,  which  are  far  removed 
from  us,  and  cannot  be  examined  '  by  the  eyes, 
nor  touched  by  the  hand,  nor  perceived  by  the 
senses ;  and  yet  they  so  dispute  concerning  the 
nature  of  these  things,  as  to  wish  that  the  things 
which  they  bring  forward  may  appear  to  be 
proved  and  known.  What  reason  is  there,  I 
pray,  why  any  one  should  think  it  an  invidious 
thing  in  us,  if  we  wish  to  look  into  and  con- 
template the  system  of  our  body,^  which  is  not 
altogether  obscure,  because  from  the  very  offices 
of  the  limbs,  and  the  uses  of  the  several  parts, 
it  is  permitted  us  to  understand  with  what  great 
power  of  providence  each  part  has  been  made  ? 

CHAP.    II.  —  OF    THE    PRODUCTION    OF    THE    BEASTS 
AND   OF   MAN. 

For  our  Creator  and  Parent,  God,  has  given 
to  man  perception  and  reason,  that  it  might  be 
evident  from  this  that  we  are  descended  from 
Him,  because  He  Himself  is  intelligence.  He 
Himself  is  perception  and  reason.  Since  He 
did  not  give  that  power  of  reason  to  the  other 


'  Contrectari. 

2  [The  argument  from  design  is  unanswerable,  and  can  never  be 
obsolete.  The  objections  are  frivolous,  and  belong  to  Cicero's  "  minute 
philosophers."]     Of  whom,  see  Tuscul.  Qutest.,  book  i.  cap.  23.] 


animals,  He  provided  beforehand  in  what  man- 
ner their  life  might  be  more  safe.  For  He 
clothed  them  all  with  their  own  natural  hair,^  in 
order  that  they  might  more  easily  be  able  to  en- 
dure the  severity  of  frosts  and  colds.  Moreover, 
He  has  appointed  to  every  kind  its  own  peculiar 
defence  for  the  repelling  of  attacks  from  with- 
out ;  so  that  they  may  either  oppose  the  stronger 
animals  with  natural  weapons,  or  the  feebler 
ones  may  withdraw  themselves  from  danger  by 
the  swiftness  of  their  flight,  or  those  which  re- 
quire at  once  both  strength  and  swiftness  may 
protect  themselves  by  craft,  or  guard  themselves 
in  hiding-places.'*  And  so  others  of  them  either 
poise  themselves  aloft  with  light  plumage,  or  are 
supported  by  hoofs,5  or  are  furnished  with  horns ; 
some  have  arms  in  their  mouth  —  namely,  their 
teeth  ^  —  or  hooked  talons  on  their  feet ;  and 
none  of  them  is  destitute  of  a  defence  for  its 
own  protection. 

But  if  any  fall  as  a  prey  to  the  greater  animals, 
that  their  race  might  not  utterly  perish,  they 
have  either  been  banished  to  that  region  where 
the  greater  ones  cannot  exist,  or  they  have  re- 
ceived a  more  abundant  fruitfulness  in  produc- 
tion, that  food  might  be  supplied  from  them  to 
the  beasts  which  are  nourished  by  blood,  and  yet 
their  very  multitude  might  survive  the  slaughter 
inflicted  upon  them,  so  as  to  preserve  the  race.^ 
But  He  made  man  —  reason  being  granted  to 
him,  and  the  power  of  perceiving  and  speaking 
being  given  to  him  —  destitute  of  those  things 
which  are  given  to  the  other  animals,  because 
wisdom  was  able  to  supply  those  things  which 
the  condition  of  nature  had  denied  to  him.  He 
made  him  naked  and  defenceless,  because  he 
could  be  armed  by  his  talent,  and  clothed  by  his 
reason.^  But  it  cannot  be  expressed  how  won- 
derfully the  absence  of  those  things  which  are 
given  to  the  brutes  contributes  to  the  beauty  of 
man.  For  if  He  had  given  to  man  the  teeth 
of  wild  beasts,  or  horns,  or  claws,  or  hoofs,  or  a 
tail,  or  hairs  of  various  colour,  who  cannot  per- 
ceive how  misshapen  an  animal  he  would  be,  as 
the  dumb  animals,  if  they  were  made  naked  and 
defenceless?  For  if  you  take  from  these  the 
natural  clothing  of  their  body,  or  those  things  by 
which  they  are  armed  of  themselves,  they  can  be 
neither  beautiful  nor  safe,  so  that  they  appear 
wonderfully  furnished  if  you  think  of  utility,  and 
wonderfully  adorned  if  you  think  of  appearance  : 
in  such  a  wonderful  manner  is  utility  combined 
with  beauty. 

But  with  reference  to  man,  whom  He  formed 


3  Omnes  enim  suis  ex  se  pilis.     Others  re.-id,  "  pellibus  texit." 

<   \T:ohuiKii\v  Aa7<u6ts.  —  AnaC,  Ode  i.  3.] 

5  ['Piicrts  Kipara.  Tau'pots  owAds  6'  i&ianiv  Imrois,  —  Anac,  Ode 
i.  I,  2.] 

b   [Aeovtri  ;^o<r/n' ofidi'Tajf.  — /^.,  4.] 

•'  t"  The  survival  of  the  fittest."  The  cant  of  our  day  antici- 
pated.j 

^  [rois  a.v&pa.<ji,v  (ppovrjiia,  —  /i.,  5.     See  p.  172,  note  5i  •!«/''<».] 


ON    THE    WORKMANSHIP    OF    GOD. 


28- 


an  eternal  and  immortal  being,  He  did  not  arm 
him,  as  the  others,  without,  but  within  ;  nor  did 
He  place  his  protection  in  the  body,  but  in  the 
soul :  since  it  would  have  been  superfluous,  when 
He  had  given  him  that  which  was  of  the  greatest 
value,  to  cover  him  with  bodily  defences,  espe- 
cially when  they  hindered  the  beauty  of  the  human 
body.  On  which  account  I  am  accustomed  to 
wonder  at  the  senselessness  of  the  philosophers 
who  follow  Epicurus,  who  blame  the  works  of 
nature,  that  they  may  show  that  the  world  is 
prepared  and  governed  by  no  providence  ; '  but 
they  ascribe  the  origin  of  all  things  to  indivisible 
and  solid  bodies,  from  the  fortuitous  meetings 
of  which  they  say  that  all  things  are  and  were 
produced.  I  pass  by  the  things  relating  to  the 
work  itself  with  which  they  find  fault,  in  which 
matter  they  are  ridiculously  mad ;  I  assume  that 
which  belongs  to  the  subject  of  which  we  are 
now  treating. 

CHAP.  III.  —  OF   THE  CONDITION   OF   THE   BEASTS 
AND    MAN. 

They  complain  that  man  is  born  in  a  more 
feeble  and  frail  condition  than  that  in  which  the 
other  animals  are  born  :  for  that  these,  as  soon 
as  they  are  produced  from  the  womb,  immedi- 
ately raise  themselves  on  their  feet,  and  express 
their  joy  by  running  to  and  fro,  and  are  at  once 
fit  for  enduring  the  air,  inasmuch  as  they  have 
come  forth  to  the  light  protected  by  natural 
coverings ;  but  man,  on  the  contrary,  being 
naked  and  defenceless,  is  cast  forth,  and  driven, 
as  it  were,  from  a  shipwreck,  to  the  miseries  of 
this  life ;  who  is  neither  able  to  move  himself 
from  the  place  where  he  has  been  born,-  nor  to 
seek  the  nourishment  of  milk,  nor  to  endure 
the  injury  of  time.  Therefore  they  say  that 
Nature  is  not  the  mother  of  the  human  race, 
but  a  stepmother,  who  has  dealt  so  liberally  with 
the  dumb  creation,  but  has  so  produced  man, 
that,  without  resources,  and  without  strength, 
and  destitute  of  all  aid,  he  can  do  nothing  else 
than  give  tokens  ^  of  the  state  of  his  frailty  by 
wailing  and  lamentations ;  "  as  well  he  may, 
whose  destiny  it  is  to  go  through  in  life  so  many 
ills."  ■* 

And  when  they  say  these  things  they  are 
believed  to  be  very  wise,  because  every  one  with- 
out consideration  is  displeased  with  his  own  con- 
dition ;  but  I  contend  that  they  are  never  more 
foolish  than  when  they  say  these  things.'  For 
when  I  consider  the  condition  of  things,  I  un- 
derstand that  nothing  ought  to  have  been  other- 
wise   than   it  is  —  not  to  say  could  have  been 


'  [The  admirable  investigations  of  the  modern  atheists  are  so 
many  testimonies  against  their  own  theories  when  they  come  to  talk 
o{  force,  etc.,  instead  of  God.     P.  97,  note  4,  supra.\ 

*  Effiisus  est. 

3  Ominari. 

■*  Lucrct.,  V,  228. 


Otherwise,  for  God  is  able  to  do  all  things  :  but 
it  must  be,  that  that  most  provident  majesty 
made  that  which  was  better  and  more  right. 

I  should  like,  therefore,  to  ask  those  censurers 
of  the  divine  works,  what  they  think  to  be  want- 
ing in  man,  on  account  of  his  being  born  in  a 
more  feeble  condition.  Do  they  think  that  men 
are,  on  this  account,  brought  up  worse?  Or 
that  they  advance  the  less  to  the  greatest  strength 
of  age?  Or  that  weakness  is  a  hindrance  to 
their  growth  or  safety,  since  reason  bestows  5 
the  things  which  are  wanting?  But,  they  say, 
the  bringing  up  of  man  costs  the  greatest  la- 
bours :  in  truth,  the  condition  of  the  brute  crea- 
tion is  better,  because  all  these,  when  they  have 
brought  forth  their  young,  have  no  care  except 
for  their  own  food ;  from  which  it  is  effected 
that,  their  teats  being  spontaneously  distended, 
the  nourishment  of  milk  is  supplied  to  their 
offspring,  and  that  they  seek  this  nourishment 
by  the  compulsion  of  nature,  without  any  trouble 
on  the  part  of  the  mothers.  How  is  it  with 
birds,  which  have  a  different  nature?  do  they 
not  undergo  the  greatest  labours  in  bringing  up 
their  young,  so  that  they  sometimes  appear  to 
have  something  of  human  intelligence?  For 
they  either  build  their  nests  of  mud,  or  construct 
them  with  twigs  and  leaves,  and  they  sit  upon 
the  eggs  without  taking  food ;  and  since  it  has 
not  been  given  to  them  to  nourish  their  young 
from  their  own  bodies,  they  convey  to  them 
food,  and  spend  whole  days  in  going  to  and  fro 
in  this  manner ;  but  by  night  they  defend,  cher- 
ish, and  protect  them.  What  more  can  men  do  ? 
unless  'it  be  this  only,  that  they  do  not  drive 
away  their  young  when  grown  up,  but  retain 
them  bound  by  perpetual  relationship  and  the 
bond  of  affection.  Why  should  I  say  that  the 
offspring  of  birds  is  much  more  fragile  than 
that  of  man?  Inasmuch  as  they  do  not  bring 
forth  the  animal  itself  from  the  body  of  the 
mother,  but  that  which,  being  warmed  by  the 
nourishment  and  heat  of  the  body  of  the  mother, 
produces  the  animal ;  and  this,  even  when  ani- 
mated by  breath,  being  unfledged  and  tender,  is 
not  only  without  the  power  of  flying,  but  even 
of  walking.  AVould  he  not,  therefore,  be  most 
senseless,  if  any  one  should  think  that  nature 
has  dealt  badly  with  birds,  first,  because  they 
are  twice  born,  and  then  because  they  are  so 
weak,  that  they  have  to  be  nourished  by  food 
sought  with  labour  by  their  parents  ?  But  they 
select  the  stronger,  and  pass  by  the  more  feeble 
animals. 

I  ask,  therefore,  from  those  who  prefer  the 
condition  of  the  beasts  to  their  own,  what  they 
would  choose  if  God  should  give  them  the 
choice  :  would  they  prefer  tlie  wisdom  of  man 

5  Dependit. 


284 


ON    THE    WORKMANSHIP   OF    GOD. 


together  with  his  weakness,  or  the  strength  of 
the  beasts  together  with  their  nature  ?  In  truth, 
they  are  not  so  much  Hke  the  beasts  as  not  to 
prefer  even  a  much  more  fragile  condition,  pro- 
vided that  it  be  human,  to  that  strength  of  theirs 
unattended  with  reason.  But,  in  truth,  prudent 
men  neither  desire  the  reason  of  man  together 
with  fraiky,  nor  the  strength  of  the  dumb  ani- 
mals without  reason.  Therefore  it  is  nothing  so 
repugnant  or  contradictory,'  that  either  reason 
or  the  condition  of  nature  should  of  necessity 
prepare  each  animal.  If  it  is  furnished  with 
natural  protection,  reason  is  superfluous.  For 
what  will  it  contrive?-  What  will  it  do?  Or 
what  will  it  plan  ?  Or  in  what  will  it  display 
that  light  of  the  intellect,  when  Nature  of  its 
o\vn  accord  grants  those  things  which  are  able 
to  be  the  result  of  reason  ?  But  if  it  be  endued 
with  reason,  what  need  will  there  be  of  defences 
for  the  body,  when  reason  once  granted  is  able 
to  supply  the  office  of  nature?  And  this  has 
such  power  for  the  adorning  and  protection  of 
man,  that  nothing  greater  or  better  can  be  given 
by  God.  Finally,  since  man  is  possessed  of  a 
body  which  is  not  great,  and  of  slight  strength, 
and  of  infirm  health,  nevertheless,  since  he  has 
received  that  which  is  of  greater  value,  he  is  bet- 
ter equipped  than  the  other  animals,  and  more 
adorned.  For  though  he  is  born  frail  and  feeble, 
yet  he  is  safe  from  all  the  dumb  animals,  and 
all  those  which  are  born  with  greater  strength, 
though  they  are  able  to  bear  patiently  the  in- 
clemency of  the  sky,  yet  are  unable  to  be  safe 
from  man.  Thus  it  comes  to  pass  that  reason 
bestows  more  on  man  than  nature  does  on  the 
dumb  animals  ;  since,  in  their  case,  neither  great- 
ness of  strength  nor  firmness  of  body  can  pre- 
vent them  from  being  oppressed  by  us,  or  from 
being  made  subject  to  our  power. 

Can  any  one,  then,  when  he  sees  that  even 
elephants,^  with  their  vast  bodies  and  strength, 
are  subservient  to  man,  complain  respecting  God, 
the  Maker  of  all  things,  because  he  has  received 
moderate  strength,  and  a  small  body ;  and'  not 
estimate  according  to  their  deserts  the  divine 
benefits  towards  himself,  which  is  the  part  of  an 
ungrateful  man,  or  (to  speak  more  truly)  of  a 
madman  ?  Plato,  I  believe,  that  he  might  refute 
these  ungrateful  men,  gave  thanks  to  nature  that 
he  was  born  a  man.''  How  much  better  and 
more  soundly  did  he  act,  who  perceived  that  the 
condition  of  man  was  better,  than  they  did  who 
would  have  preferred  that  they  had  been  born 
beasts  !  For  if  God  should  happen  to  change 
them  into  those  animals  whose  condition  they 


'  Contrarinm. 

2  Excogitabit. 

3  Boves  Lucas.     Elephants  are  said  to  have  been  so  called,  be- 
cause they  were  first  seen  by  the  Romans  in  Lucania. 

•♦  Some  editions  here  add:  "  But  what  is  the  nature   of  this,  it 
does  not  belong  to  the  present  subject  to  consider." 


prefer  to  their  own,  they  would  now  immedi- 
ately desire  to  return  to  their  previous  state,  and 
would  with  great  outcries  eagerly  demand  their 
former  condition,  because  strength  and  firmness 
of  body  are  not  of  such  consequence  that  you 
should  be  without  the  office  of  the  tongue  ;  or 
the  free  course  of  birds  through  the  air,  that  you 
should  be  without  the  hands.  For  the  hands 
are  of  greater  service  than  the  lightness  and  use 
of  the  wings ;  the  tongue  is  of  greater  service 
than  the  strength  of  the  whole  body.  What 
madness  is  it,  therefore,  to  prefer  those  things 
which,  if  they  were  given,  you  would  refuse  to 
receive  ! 


CHAP.    IV. 


■OF   THE   WEAKNESS   OF   MAN. 


They  also  complain  that  man  is  liable  to  dis- 
eases, and  to  untimely  death.  They  are  indig- 
nant, it  appears,  that  they  are  not  born  gods. 
By  no  means,  they  say ;  but  we  show  from  this, 
that  man  was  made  with  no  foresight,  which 
ought  to  have  been  otherwise.  What  if  I  shall 
show,  that  this  very  thing  was  foreseen  with  great 
reason,  that  he  might  be  able  to  be  harassed  by 
diseases,  and  that  his  life  might  often  be  cut  short 
in  the  midst  of  its  course  ?  For,  since  God  had 
known  that  the  animal  which  He  had  made,  of 
its  own  accord  passed  to  death,  that  it  might  be 
capable  of  receiving  death  itself,  which  is  the 
dissolution  of  nature.  He  gave  to  it  frailty,  which 
might  find  an  approach  for  death  in  order  to  the 
dissolution  of  the  animal.  For  if  it  had  been 
of  such  strength  that  disease  and  sickness  could 
not  approach  it,  not  even  could  death,  since 
death  is  the  consequence  of  diseases.  But  how 
could  a  premature  death  be  absent  from  him, 
for  whom  a  mature  death  had  been  appointed  ? 
Assuredly  they  wish  that  no  man  should  die,  un- 
less when  he  has  completed  his  hundredth  year. 
How  can  they  maintain  their  consistency  in  so 
great  an  opposition  of  circumstances?  For,  in 
order  that  no  one  may  be  capable  of  dying 
before  a  hundred  years,  something  of  the 
strength  which  is  immortal  must  be  given  to 
him  ;  and  when  this  is  granted,  the  condition 
of  death  must  necessarily  be  excluded.  But  of 
what  kind  can  that  be,  which  can  render  a  man 
firm  and  impregnable  against  diseases  and  at- 
tacks from  without?  For,  inasmuch  as  he  is 
composed  of  bones,  and  nerves,  and  flesh,  and 
blood,  which  of  these  can  be  so  firm  as  to  repel 
frailty  and  death?  That  man,  therefore,  may 
not  be  hable  to  dissolution  before  that  time 
which  they  think  ought  to  have  been  appointed 
for  him,  of  what  material  will  they  assign  to  him 
a  body?  All  things  which  can  be  seen  and 
touched  are  frail.  It  remains  that  they  seek 
something  from  heaven,  since  there  is  nothing 
on  earth  which  is  not  weak. 

Since,  therefore,  man  had  to  be  so  formed  by 


ON   THE   WORKMANSHIP   OF   GOD. 


285 


God,  that  he  should  at  some  time  be  mortal,  the 
matter  itself  re(|uired  that  he  should  be  made 
with  a  frail  and  earthly  body.  It  is  necessary, 
therefore,  that  he  should  at  some  time  receive 
death,  since  he  is  possessed  of  a  body  ;  for  every 
body  is  liable  to  dissolution  and  to  death.  There- 
fore they  are  most  foolish  who  complain  of  pre- 
mature death,  since  the  condition  of  nature 
makes  a  place  for  it.  Thus  it  will  follow  that  he 
is  subject  also  to  diseases ;  for  nature  does  not 
admit  that  infirmity  can  be  absent  from  that 
body  which  is  at  some  time  to  undergo  dissolu- 
tion. But  let  us  suppose  it  to  be  possible,  as 
they  wish,  that  man  is  not  born  under  those  con- 
ditions by  which  he  is  subject  to  disease  or  death, 
unless,  having  completed  the  course  of  his  life, 
he  shall  have  arrived  at  the  extremity  of  old  age. 
They  do  not,  therefore,  see  what  would  be  the 
consequence  if  it  were  so  arranged,  that  it  would 
be  plainly  impossible  to  die  at  another  time  ;  but 
if  any  one  can  be  deprived  of  nourishment  by 
another,  it  will  be  possible  for  him  to  die.  There- 
fore the  case  requires  that  man,  who  cannot  die 
before  an  appointed  day,  should  have  no  need 
of  the  nourishment  of  food,  because  it  may  be 
taken  from  him  ;  but  if  he  shall  have  no  need  of 
food,  he  will  now  not  be  a  man,  but  will  become 
a  god.  Therefore,  as  I  have  already  said,  they 
who  complain  of  the  frailty  of  man,  make  this 
complaint  especially,  that  they  were  not  born 
immortal  and  everlasting.  No  one  ought  to  die 
unless  he  is  old.  On  this  account,  in  truth,  he 
ought  to  die,  because  he  is  not  God.  But  mor- 
tality cannot  be  united  with  immortality :  for  if 
a  man  is  mortal  in  old  age,  he  cannot  be  immor- 
tal in  youth  ;  neither  is  the  condition  of  death 
foreign  to  him  who  is  at  some  time  about  to  die  ; 
nor  is  there  any  immortality  to  which  a  limit  is 
appointed.  Thus  it  comes  to  pass,  that  the  ex- 
clusion of  immortality  for  ever,  and  the  reception 
of  mortality  for  a  time,  place  man  in  such  a 
condition  that  he  is  at  some  time  mortal. 

Therefore  the  necessity  is  in  all  points  suitable,' 
that  he  ought  not  to  have  been  otherwise  than 
he  is,  and  that  it  was  impossible.  But  they  do 
not  see  the  order  of  consequences,  because  they 
have  once  committed  an  error  in  the  main  point 
itself.  For  the  divine  providence  having  been 
excluded  from  the  affairs  of  men,  it  necessarily 
followed  that  all  things  were  produced  of  their 
own  accord.  Hence  they  invented  the  notion 
of  those  blows  and  fortuitous  meetings  together 
of  minute  seeds,  because  they  did  not  see  the 
origin  of  things.  And  when  they  had  thrown 
themselves  into  this  difficulty,  necessity  now 
compelled  them  to  think  that  souls  were  born 
together  with  bodies,  and  in  like  manner  were 
extinguished  together  with  bodies  ;  for  they  had 


Quadrat. 


made  the  assumption,  that  nothing  was  made  by 
the  divine  mind.  And  they  were  unable  to  prove 
this  in  any  other  way,  than  by  showing  that  there 
were  some  things  in  which  the  system  of  provi- 
pence  appeared  to  be  at  fault.-  Therefore  they 
blamed  those  things  in  which  providence  won- 
derfully expressed  its  divinity,  as  those  things 
which  I  have  related  concerning  diseases  and 
premature  death ;  whereas  they  ought  to  have 
considered,  these  things  being  assumed,  what 
would  be  the  necessary  consequences  (but  those 
things  which  I  have  spoken  are  the  consequences) 
if  he  were  not  liable  to  diseases,  and  did  not  re- 
quire a  dwelling,  nor  clothing.  For  why  should 
he  fear  the  winds,  or  rains,  or  colds,  the  power 
of  which  consists  in  this,  that  they  bring  diseases? 
For  on  this  account  he  has  received  wisdom,  that 
he  may  guard  his  frailty  against  things  that  would 
injure  him.  The  necessary  consequence  is,  that 
since  he  is  liable  to  diseases  for  the  sake  of  re- 
taining his  wisdom,  he  must  also  be  liable  to 
death ;  because  he  to  whom  death  does  not 
come,  must  of  necessity  be  firm.  But  infirmity 
has  in  itself  the  condition  of  death  ;  but  where 
there  shall  be  firmness,  neither  can  old  age  have 
any  place,  nor  death,  which  follows  old  age. 

Moreover,  if  death  were  appointed  for  a  fixed 
age,  man  would  become  most  arrogant,  and 
would  be  destitute  of  all  humanity.  For  almost 
all  the  rights  of  humanity,  by  which  we  are 
united  with  one  another,  arise  from  fear  and  the 
consciousness  of  frailty.  In  short,  all  the  more 
feeble  and  timid  animals  herd  together,  that, 
since  they  are  unable  to  protect  themselves  by 
strength,  they  may  protect  themselves  by  their 
multitude  ;  but  the  stronger  animals  seek  soli- 
tudes, since  they  trust  in  their  force  and  strength.^ 
If  man  also,  in  the  same  manner,  had  sufficient 
strength  for  the  repelling  of  dangers,  and  did 
not  stand  in  need  of  the  assistance  of  any  other, 
what  society  would  there  be  ?  Or  what  system  ? 
What  humanity  ?  Or  what  would  be  more  harsh 
than  man?  What  more  brutal?  What  more 
savage?  But  since  he  is  feeble,  and  not  able 
to  live  by  himself  apart  from  man,  he  desires 
society,  that  his  life,  passed  in  intercourse  with 
others,  may  become  both  more  adorned  and 
more  safe.  You  see,  therefore,  that  the  whole 
reason  of  man  centres  most  of  all  in  this,  that 
he  is  born  naked  and  fragile,  that  he  is  attacked 
by  diseases,  that  he  is  punished  by  premature 
death.  And  if  these  things  should  be  taken  away 
from  man,  reason  also,  and  wisdom,  must  neces- 
sarily be  taken  away.  But  I  am  discussing  too 
long  respecting  things  which  are  manifest,  since 
it  is  clear  that  nothing  ever  was  made,  or  could 
have  been  made,  without  providence.     And  if 


^  Claudicare. 

3  [The  disposition,  even  among  men,  to  herd  together  in  artificial 
societies,  is  instinctively  repugnant  to  the  stronger  natures.] 


286 


ON    THE    WORKMANSHIP    OF    GOD. 


I  should  now  wish  to  discuss  respecting  all  its 
works  in  order,  the  subject  would  be  infinite. 
But  I  have  puri)osed  to  speak  so  much  concern- 
ing the  body  of  man  only,  that  I  may  show  in 
it  the  power  of  divine  providence,  how  great 
it  has  been  in  those  things  only  which  are  easy 
of  comprehension  and  open  ;  for  those  things 
which  relate  to  the  soul  can  neither  be  subjected 
to  the  eyes,  nor  comprehended.  Now  we  speak 
concerning  the  vessel  itself  of  man,  which  we 
see. 

CHAP.  v. OF  THE  FIGURES  AND  LIMBS  OF  ANIMALS. 

In  the  beginning,  when  God  was  forming  the 
animals.  He  did  not  wish  to  conglobate  '  and 
collect  them  into  a  round  shape,  that  they  might 
be  able  easily  to  put  themselves  in  motion  for 
walking,  and  to  turn  themselves  in  any  direction  ; 
but  from  the  highest  part  of  the  body  He  length- 
ened out  the  head.  He  also  carried  out  to  a 
greater  length  some  of  the  limbs,  which  are  called 
feet,  that,  being  fixed  on  the  ground  with  alter- 
nate motions,  they  might  lead  forward  the  animal 
wherever  his  inclination  had  borne  him,  or  the 
necessity  of  seeking  food  had  called  him.  More- 
over, He  made  four  limbs  standing  out  from  the 
very  vessel  of  the  body  :  two  behind,  which  are 
in  all  animals  —  the  feet ;  also  two  close  to  the 
head  and  neck,  which  supply  various  uses  to 
animals.  For  in  cattle  and  wild  beasts  they  are 
feet  like  the  hinder  ones  ;  but  in  man  they  are 
hands,  which  are  produced  not  for  walking,  but 
for  acting  and  controlling.^  There  is  also  a  third 
class,  in  which  those  former  limbs  are  neither 
feet  nor  hands  ;  but  wings,  which,  having  feath- 
ers arranged  in  order,  supply  the  use  of  flying.^ 
Thus  one  formation  has  different  forms  and  uses  ; 
and  that  He  might  firmly  hold  together  the  den- 
sity itself  of  the  body,  by  binding  together  greater 
and  small  bones,  He  compacted  a  kind  of  keel, 
which  we  call  the  spine  ;  and  He  did  not  think 
fit  to  form  it  of  one  continued  bone,  lest  the 
animal  should  not  have  the  power  of  walking 
and  bending  itself.  From  its  middle  part,  as  it 
were.  He  has  extended  in  a  different  direction 
transverse  and  flat  bones,  by  which,  being  slightly 
curved,  and  almost  drawn  together  to  themselves 
as  into  a  circle,  the  inward  organs  *  may  be  cov- 
ered, that  those  parts  which  needed  to  be  soft 
and  less  strong  might  be  protected  by  the  encir- 
cling of  a  solid  framework.5  But  at  the  end  of 
that  joining  together  which  we  have  said  to  re- 
semble the  keel  of  a  ship.  He  placed  the  head, 
in  which  might  be  the  government  of  the  whole 


*  Conglobare,  "  to  gather  into  a  ball." 

2  Temperandum.     Others  read  "  tenendum." 

3  [But,  query,  Is  there  not  an  unsolved  mystery  about  birds  and 
flying?  They  seem  to  me  to  be  sustained  in  the  air  by  some  faculty 
not  yet  understood.] 

*  Viscera.  This  word  includes  the  heart,  lungs,  liver,  stomach, 
and  mtestines. 

5  Cratis,  properly  "  wicker-work." 


living  creature  ;  and  this  name  was  given  to  it, 
as  indeed  Varro  writes  to  Cicero,  because  from 
this  the  senses  and  the  nerves  take  their  begin- 
ning. 

But  those  parts,  which  we  have  said  to  be 
lengthened  out  from  the  body,  either  for  the 
sake  of  walking,  or  of  acting,  or  of  flying.  He 
would  have  to  consist  of  bones,  neither  too  long, 
for  the  sake  of  rapidity  of  motion,  nor  too  short, 
for  the  sake  of  firmness,  but  of  a  few,  and  those 
large.  For  either  they  are  two  as  in  man,  or 
four  as  in  a  quadruped.  And  these  He  did  not 
make  solid,  lest  in  walking  sluggishness  and 
weight  should  retard ;  but  He  made  them  hol- 
low, and  full  of  marrow  within,  to  preserve  the 
vigour  of  the  body.  And  again.  He  did  not 
make  them  equally  extended  to  the  end  ;  but 
He  conglobated  their  extremities  with  coarse 
knots,  that  they  might  be  able  more  easily  to 
be  bound  with  sinews,  and  to  be  turned  more 
easily,  from  which  they  are  called  joints.^  These 
knots  He  made  firmly  solid,  and  covered  with  a 
soft  kind  of  covering,  which  is  called  cartilage ; 
for  this  purpose,  that  they  might  be  bent  without 
galling  or  any  sense  of  pain.  He  did  not,  how- 
ever, form  these  after  one  fashion.  For  He 
made  some  simple  and  round  into  an  orb,  in 
those  joints  at  least  in  which  it  was  befitting  that 
the  limbs  should  move  in  all  directions,  as  in  the 
shoulders,  since  it  is  necessary  that  the  hands 
should  move  and  be  twisted  about  in  any  direc- 
tion ;  but  others  He  made  broad,  and  equal,  and 
round  towards  one  part,  and  that  plainly  in  those 
places  where  only  it  was  necessary  for  the  limbs 
to  be  bent,  as  in  the  knees,  and  in  the  elbows, 
and  in  the  hands  themselves.  For  as  it  was  at 
the  same  time  pleasant  to  the  sight,  and  useful, 
that  the  hands  should  move  in  every  direction 
from  that  position  from  which  they  spring ;  so 
assuredly,  if  this  same  thing  should  happen  to 
the  elbows,  a  motion  of  that  kind  would  be  at 
once  superfluous  and  unbecoming.  For  then 
the  hand,  having  lost  the  dignity  which  it  now 
has,  through  its  excessive  flexibility,''  would  ap- 
pear like  the  trunk  of  an  elephant ;  and  man 
would  be  altogether  snake-handed,'''  —  an  instance 
of  which  has  been  wonderfully  effected  in  that 
monstrous  beast.  For  God,  who  wished  to  dis- 
play His  providence  and  power  by  a  wonderful 
variety  of  many  things,  inasmuch  as  He  had  not 
extended  the  head  of  that  animal  to  such  a  length 
that  he  might  be  able  to  touch  the  earth  with 
his  mouth,  which  would  have  been  horrible  and 
hideous,  and  because  He  had  so  armed  the 
mouth  itself  with  extended  tusks,  that  even  if 
he  touched  the  earth  the  tusks  would  still  deprive 
him  of  the  power  of  feeding,  He  lengthened  out 


*  Vertibula. 

-"  Mobilitas. 

^  Anguimanus,  - 


•  a  word  applied  by  Lucretius  to  the  elephant. 


ON    THE   WORKMANSHIP    OF    GOD. 


287 


between  these  from  the  top  of  the  forehead  a 
soft  and  flexible  hmb,  by  which  he  might  be  able 
to  grasp  and  lay  hold  of  anything,  lest  the  promi- 
nent magnitude  of  the  tusks,  or  the  shortness  of 
the  neck,  should  interfere  with  the  arrangement 
for  taking  food. 

CHAP.  VI.  OF   THE    ERROR    OF    EPICURUS,   AND    OF 

THE    LIMBS    AND    THEIR   USE. 

I  cannot  here  be  prevented  from  again  show- 
ing the  folly  of  Epicurus.  For  all  the  ravings 
of  Lucretius  '  belong  to  him,  who,  in  order  that 
he  might  show  that  animals  are  not  produced  by 
any  contrivance  of  the  divine  mind,  but,  as  he 
is  wont  to  say,  by  chance,  said  that  in  the  begin- 
ning of  the  world  innumerable  other  ammals  of 
wonderful  form  and  magnitude  were  produced  ; 
but  that  they  were  unable  to  be  permanent,  be- 
cause either  the  power  of  taking  food,  or  the 
method  of  uniting  and  generating,  had  failed 
them.  It  IS  evident  that,  in  order  to  make  a 
place  for  his  atoms  flying  about  through  the 
boundless  and  empty  space,  he  wished  to  ex- 
clude the  divine  providence.  But  when  he  saw 
that  a  wonderful  system  of  providence  is  con- 
tained in  all  things  which  breathe,  what  vanity 
was  it  (O  mischievous  one  !)  to  say  that  there 
had  been  animals  of  immense  size,  in  which  the 
system  of  production  ceased  ! 

Since,  therefore,  all  things  which  we  see  are 
produced  with  reference  to  a  plan  —  for  nothing 
but  a  plan  ^  can  effect  this  very  condition  of  be- 
ing born  —  it  is  manifest  that  nothing  could  have 
been  born  without  a  plan.  For  it  was  previously 
foreseen  in  the  formation  of  everything,  how  it 
should  use  the  service  of  the  limbs  for  the  neces- 
saries of  life  ;  and  how  the  offspring,  being  pro- 
duced from  the  union  of  bodies,  might  preserve 
all  living  creatures  by  their  several  species.  For 
if  a  skilful  architect,  when  he  designs  to  construct 
some  great  building,  first  of  all  considers  what 
will  be  the  effect  ^  of  the  complete  building,  and 
previously  ascertains  by  measurement  what  situa- 
tion is  suitable  for  a  light  weight,  in  what  place 
a  massive  part  of  the  structure  will  stand,  what 
will  be  the  intervals  between  the  columns,  what 
or  where  will  be  the  descents  and  outlets  of  the 
falling  waters  and  the  reservoirs,  —  he  first,  I 
say,  foresees  these  things,  that  he  may  begin  to- 
gether with  the  very  foundations  whatever  things 
are  necessary  for  the  work  when  now  completed, 
—  why  should  any  one  suppose  that,  in  the  con- 
trivance of  animals,  God  did  not  foresee  what 
things  were  necessary  for  living,  before  giving 
life  itself?     For  it  is  manifest  that  life  could  not 


'  [Vet  Lucretius  ha";  originality  and  genius  of  an  order  far  nobler 
than  that  of  moderns  who  copy  his  follies.] 

=  Ratio.     Nearly  equivalent  in  this  place  to  "  providentia." 
3  Summa.     [Wisd.  xi.  20.] 


exist,  unless  those  things  by  which  it  exists  were 
previously  arranged.-* 

Therefore  Epicurus  saw  in  the  bodies  of  ani- 
mals the  skill  of  a  divine  plan  ;  but  that  he  might 
carry  into  efi"ect  that  which  he  had  before  im- 
prudently assumed,  he  added  another  absurdity 
agreeing  with  the  former.  For  he  said  that  the 
eyes  were  not  produced  for  seeing,  nor  the  ears 
for  hearing,  nor  the  feet  for  walking,  since  these 
members  were  produced  before  there  was  the 
exercise  of  seeing,  hearing,  and  walking;  but 
that  all  the  offices  of  these  members  arose  from 
them  after  their  production. s  I  fear  lest  the  ref- 
utation of  such  extravagant  and  ridiculous  stories 
should  appear  to  be  no  less  foolish  ;  but  it  pleases 
me  to  be  foolish,  since  we  are  dealing  with  a 
foolish  man,  lest  he  should  think  himself  too 
clever.^  What  do  you  say,  Epicurus?  Were 
not  the  eyes  produced  for  seeing?  Why,  then, 
do  they  see?  Their  use,  he  says,  afterwards 
showed  itself.  Therefore  they  were  produced 
for  the  sake  of  seeing,  since  they  can  do  nothing 
else  but  see.  Likewise,  in  the  case  of  the  other 
limbs,  use  itself  shows  for  what  purpose  they 
were  produced.  For  it  is  plain  that  this  use 
could  have  no  existence,  unless  all  the  limbs  had 
been  made  with  such  arrangement  and  foresight, 
that  they  might  be  able  to  have  their  use. 

For  what  if  you  should  say,  that  birds  were 
not  made  to  fly,  nor  wild  beasts  to  rage,  nor 
fishes  to  swim,  nor  men  to  be  wise,  when  it  is 
evident  that  living  creatures  are  subject  to  that 
natural  disposition  and  office  to  which  each  was 
created  ?  But  it  is  evident  that  he  who  has  lost 
the  main  point  itself  of  the  truth  must  always  be 
in  error.  For  if  all  things  are  produced  not  by 
providence,  but  by  a  fortuitous  meeting  together 
of  atoms,  why  does  it  never  happen  by  chance, 
that  those  first  principles  meet  together  in  such 
a  way  as  to  make  an  animal  of  such  a  kind,  that 
it  might  rather  hear  with  its  nostrils,  smell  with 
its  eyes,  and  see  ^  with  its  ears  ?  For  if  the  first 
principles  leave  no  kind  of  posidon  untried, 
monstrous  productions  of  this  kind  ought  daily 
to  have  been  brought  forth,  in  which  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  limbs  might  be  distorted,*^  and  the 
use  far  different  from  that  which  prevails.  But 
since  all  the  races  of  animals,  and  all  the  limbs, 
observe  their  own  laws  and  arrangements,  and 
the  uses  assigned  to  them,  it  is  plain  that  noth- 
ing is  made  by  chance,  since  a  perpetual  arrange- 
ment of  the  divine  plan  is  i)reserved.  But  we 
will  refute  Epicurus  at  another  time.     Now  let 


■<  [The  amazin,?  proportions  imparted  to  all  things  created,  in 
correspondence  with  their  relations  .to  man  and  to  the  earth,  is  beauti- 
fully hinted  by  our  author,] 

5  [The  .snout  of  the  elephant  and  the  neck  of  the  giraffe  were  de- 
veloped from  their  necessities,  etc.     Afoiicrn  Science, passim.] 

*>  fin  our  days  reproduced  as  prp^ress.'\ 

7  Cerneret,  "  to  see  so  as  to  distinguish;  "  a  stronger  word  than 
"  video." 

*  Prxposterus;  having  the  last  first,  and  the  first  last. 


288 


ON   THE    WORKMANSHIP    OF   GOD. 


us  discuss  the  subject  of  providence,  as  we  have 
begun. 

CHAP.    VII. OF    ALL   THE    PARTS    OF   THE    BODY. 

God  therefore  connected  and  bound  together 
the  parts  which  strengthen '  the  body,  which  we 
call  bones,  being  knotted  and  joined  to  one  an- 
other by  sinews,  which  the  mind  might  make  use 
of,  as  bands,^  if  it  should  wish  to  hasten  forward 
or  to  lag  behind  ;  and,  indeed,  without  any  la- 
bour or  effort,  but  with  a  very  slight  inclination, 
it  might  moderate  and  guide  the  mass  of  the 
whole  body.  But  He  covered  these  with  the 
inward  organs,^  as  was  befitting  to  each  place, 
that  the  parts  which  were  solid  might  be  enclosed 
and  concealed.  Also  He  mixed  with  the  inward 
organs,  veins  as  streams  divided  through  the 
whole  body,  through  which  the  moisture  and  the 
blood,  running  in  different  directions,  might  be- 
dew all  the  limbs  with  the  vital  juices ;  and  He 
fashioned  these  inward  organs  after  that  manner 
which  was  befitting  to  each  kind  and  situation, 
and  covered  them  with  skin  drawn  over  them, 
which  He  either  adorned  with  beauty  only,  or 
covered  with  thick  hair,  or  fenced  with  scales, 
or  adorned  with  brilliant  feathers.  But  that  is  a 
wonderful  contrivance  of  God,  that  one  arrange- 
ment and  one  state  exhibits  innumerable  varie- 
ties of  animals.  For  in  almost  all  things  which 
breathe  there  is  the  same  connection  and  ar- 
rangement of  the  limbs.  For  first  of  all  is  the 
head,  and  annexed  to  this  the  neck ;  also  the 
breast  adjoined  to  the  neck,  and  the  shoulders 
projecting  from  it,  the  belly  adhering  to  the 
breast ;  also  the  organs  of  generation  subjoined 
to  the  belly;  in  the  last  place,  the  thighs  and 
feet.  Nor  do  the  limbs  only  keep  their  own 
course  and  position  in  all,  but  also  the  parts  of 
the  limbs.  For  in  the  head  itself  alone  the  ears 
occupy  a  fixed  position,  the  eyes  a  fixed  positiort, 
likewise  the  nostrils,  the  mouth  also,  and  in  it 
the  teeth  and  tongue.  And  though  all  these 
things  are  the  same  in  all  animals,  yet  there  is 
an  infinite  and  manifold  diversity  of  the  things 
formed  ;  because  those  things  of  which  I  have 
spoken,  being  either  more  drawn  out  or  more 
contracted,  are  comprehended  by  lineaments 
differing  in  various  ways.  What  !  is  not  that 
divine,  that  in  so  great  a  multitude  of  living 
creatures  each  animal  is  most  excellent  in  its 
own  class  and  species?  —  so  that  if  any  part 
should  be  taken  from  one  to  another,  the  neces- 
sary result  would  be,  that  nothing  would  be  more 
embarrassed  for  use,  nothing  more  unshapely  to 
look  upon ;  as  if  you  should  give  a  prolonged 
neck  to  an  elephant,  or  a  short  neck  to  a  camel ; 


*  Solidamenta  corporis. 

*  Retinaculis. 
3  Visceribus. 


or  if  you  should  attach  feet  or  hair  to  serpents, 
in  which  the  length  of  the  body  equally  stretched 
out  required  nothing  else,  except  that  being 
marked  as  to  their  backs  with  spots,  and  sup- 
porting themselves  by  their  smooth  scales,  with 
winding  courses  they  should  glide  into  slippery 
tracts.  But  in  quadrupeds  the  same  designer 
lengthened  out  the  arrangenient  of  the  spine, 
which  is  drawn  out  from  the  top  of  the  head  to 
a  greater  length  on  the  outside  of  the  body,  and 
pointed  it  into  a  tail,  that  the  parts  of  the  body 
which  are  oftensive  might  either  be  covered  on 
account  of  their  unsighdiness,  or  be  protected 
on  account  of  their  tenderness,  so  that  by  its 
motion  certain  minute  and  injurious  animals 
might  be  driven  away  from  the  body ;  and  if 
you  should  take  away  this  member,  the  animal 
would  be  imperfect  and  weak.  But  where  there 
is  reason  and  the  hand,  that  is  not  so  necessary 
as  a  covering  of  hair.  To  such  an  extent  are  all 
things  most  befittingly  arranged,  each  in  its  own 
class,  that  nothing  can  be  conceived  more  unbe- 
coming than  a  quadruped  which  is  naked,  or  a 
man  that  is  covered. 

But,  however,  though  nakedness  itself  on  the 
part  of  man  tends  in  a  wonderful  manner  to 
beauty,  yet  it  was  not  adapted  to  his  head  ;  for 
what  great  deformity  there  would  be  in  this,  is 
evident  from  baldness.  Therefore  He  clothed 
the  head  with  hair ;  and  because  it  was  about  to 
be  on  the  top.  He  added  it  as  an  ornament,  as 
it  were,  to  the  highest  summit  of  the  building. 
And  this  ornament  is  not  collected  into  a  circle, 
or  rounded  into  the  figure  of  a  cap,  lest  it  should 
be  unsightly  by  leaving  some  parts  bare  ;  but  it 
is  freely  poured  forth  in  some  places,  and  with- 
drawn in  others,  according  to  the  comeliness  of 
each  place.  Therefore,  the  forehead  entrenched 
by  a  circumference,  and  the  hair  put  forth  from 
the  temples  before  the  ears,  and  the  uppermost 
parts  of  these  being  surrounded  after  the  man- 
ner of  a  crown,  and  all  the  back  part  of  the 
head  covered,  display  an  appearance  of  wonder- 
ful comeliness.  Then  the  nature  of  the  beard 
contributes  in  an  incredible  degree  to  distinguish 
the  maturity  of  bodies,  or  to  the  distinction  of 
sex,  or  to  the  beauty  of  manliness  and  strength  ; 
so  that  it  appears  that  the  system  of  the  whole 
work  would  not  have  been  in  agreement,  if  any- 
thing had  been  made  otherwise  than  it  is. 

CHAP.    VIII. OF   THE    PARTS    OF    MAN  :     THE    EYES 

AND    EARS. 

Now  I  will  show  the  plan  of  the  whole  man, 
and  will  explain  the  uses  and  habits  of  the  sev- 
eral members  which  are  exposed  to  view  in  the 
body,  or  concealed.  When,  therefore,  God  had 
determined  of  all  the  animals  to  make  man 
alone   heavenly,  and    all   the   rest   earthly,    He 


ON   THE    WORKMANSHIP   OF    GOD. 


289 


raised  him  erect '  to  the  contemplation  of  the 
heaven,  and  made  him  a  biped,  doubtless  that 
he  might  look  to  the  same  quarter  from  which 
he  derives  his  origin ;  but  He  depressed  the 
others  to  the  earth,  that,  inasmuch  as  they  have 
no  expectation  of  immortality,  being  cast  down 
with  their  whole  body  to  the  ground,  they  might 
be  subservient  to  their  appetite  and  food.  And 
thus  the  right  reason  and  elevated  position  of 
man  alone,  and  his  countenance,  shared  with 
and  closely  resembling  God  his  Father,  bespeak 
his  origin  and  Maker.-  His  mind,  nearly  di- 
vine, because  it  has  obtained  the  rule  not  only 
over  the  animals  which  are  on  the  earth,  but 
even  over  his  own  body,  being  situated  in  the 
highest  part,  the  head,  as  in  a  lofty  citadel, 
looks  out  upon  and  observes  all  things.  He 
formed  this  its  palace,  not  drawn  out  and  ex- 
tended, as  in  the  case  of  the  dumb  animals,  but 
like  an  orb  and  a  globe,  because  all  ^  roundness 
belongs  to  a  perfect  plan  and  figure.  Therefore 
the  mind  and  that  divine  fire  is  covered  with  it,-*  as 
with  a  vault ;  5  and  when  He  had  covered  its  high- 
est top  with  a  natural  garment.  He  alike  furnished 
and  adorned  the  front  part,  which  is  called  the 
face,  with  the  necessary  services  of  the  members. 
And  first,  He  closed  the  orbs  of  the  eyes  with 

*  concave  apertures,  from  which  boring  ^  Varro 
thought  that  the  forehead  ^  derived  its  name ; 
and  He  would  have  these  to  be  neither  less  nor 
more  than  two,  because  no  number  is  more  per- 
fect as  to  appearance  than  that  of  two  :  as  also 
He  made  the  ears  two,  the  doubleness  ^  of  which 
bears  with  it  an  incredible  degree  of  beauty, 
both  because  each  part  is  adorned  with  a  resem- 
blance, and  that  voices  coming  from  both  sides  "^ 
may  more  easily  be  collected.  For  the  form 
itself  is  fashioned  after  a  wonderful  manner : 
because  He  would  not  have  their  apertures  to 
be  naked  and  uncovered,  which  would  have  been 
less  becoming  and  less  useful ;  since  the  voice 
might  fly  beyond  the  narrow  space  of  simple  cav- 
erns, and  be  scattered,  did  not  the  apertures  them- 
selves confine  it,  received  through  hollow  wind- 
ings and  kept  back  from  reverberation,  like  those 
small  vessels,  by  the  application  of  which  narrow- 
mouthed  vessels  are  accustomed  to  be  filled. 

These  ears,  then,  which  have  their  name  from 
the  drinking'"  in  of  voices,  from  which  Virgil 
*ays," 

*  "  And  with  these  ears  I  drank  in  his  voice ;  " 


'  Rigidum. 

2  [An  amusing  persistency  in  the  enforcement  of  this  idea.] 

3  Omnis.     Others  read  "  orbis." 

*  i.e.,  the  head. 

S  Cnelo.     Some  believed  that  the  soul  was  of  fire. 
*■  Foratu,  "  the  process  of  boring;  "  foramen,  "  the  aperture  thus 
made." 

'   Frontem. 

*  Duplicitas. 
9  Altrinsecus. 

'°  Hauricndis,  from  which  "  aures"  is  said  to  be  formed. 
"  /Kneici,  iv.  359.     [The  English  verb  botliir  {—  both  ear)  is  an 
amusing  conuuent  on  the  adaptation  of  ears  to  unwelcome  voices.] 


or  because  the  Greeks  call  the  voice  itself  aiS-qy, 
from  hearing,  —  the  ears  {aures)  were  named 
as  though  a/u/es  by  the  change  of  a  letter, — 
God  would  not  form  of  soft  skins,  which,  hang- 
ing down  and  flaccid,  might  take  away  beauty ; 
nor  of  hard  and  solid  bones,  lest,  being  stiff"  and 
immoveable,  they  should  be  inconvenient  for 
use.  But  He  designed  that  which  might  be  be- 
tween these,  that  a  softer  cartilage  might  bind 
them,  and  that  they  might  have  at  once  a  befit- 
ting and  flexible  firmness.  In  these  the  office 
of  hearing  only  is  placed,  as  that  of  seeing  is  in 
the  eyes,  the  acuteness  of  which  is  especially  in- 
explicable and  wonderful ;  for  He  covered  their 
orbs,  presenting  the  similitude  of  gems  in  that 
part  with  which  they  had  to  see,  with  trans- 
parent membranes,  that  the  images  of  objects 
placed  opposite  them,  l^eing  refracted  '^  as  in  a 
mirror,  might  penetrate  to  the  innermost  percep- 
tion. Through  these  membranes,  therefore,  that 
faculty  which  is  called  the  mind  sees  those  things 
which  are  without ;  lest  you  should  happen  to 
think  that  we  see  either  by  the  striking  '^  of  the 
images,  as  the  philosophers  discuss,  since  the 
office  of  seeing  ought  to  be  in  that  which  sees, 
not  in  that  which  is  seen ;  or  in  the  tension  of 
the  air  together  with  the  eyesight ;  or  in  the 
outpouring  of  the  rays  :  since,  if  it  were  so,  we 
should  see  the  ray  towards  which  we  turn  with 
our  eyes,  until  the  air,  being  extended  together 
with  the  eyesight,  or  the  rays  being  jDOured  out, 
should  arrive  at  the  object  which  was  to  be  seen. 
But  since  we  see  at  the  same  moment  of  time, 
and  for  the  most  part,  while  engaged  on  other 
business,  we  nevertheless  behold  all  things  which 
are  placed  opposite  to  us,  it  is  more  true  and 
evident  that  it  is  the  mind  which,  through  the 
eyes,  sees  those  things  which  are  placed  oppo- 
site to  it,  as  though  through  windows  covered 
with  pellucid  crystal  or  transparent  stone  ;  '"*  and 
therefore  the  mind  and  inclination  are  often 
known  from  the  eyes.  For  the  refutation  of 
which  Lucretius  '5  employed  a  very  senseless  ar- 
gument. For  if  the  mind,  he  says,  sees  through 
the  eyes,  it  would  see  better  if  the  eyes  were 
torn  out  and  dug  up,  inasmuch  as  doors  being 
torn  up  together  with  the  door-posts  let  in  more 
light  than  if  they  were  covered.  Truly  his  eyes, 
or  rather  those  of  Epicurus  who  taught  him, 
ought  to  have  been  dug  out,  that  they  might  not 
see,  that  the  torn-out  orbs,  and  the  burst  fibres 
of  the  eyes,  and  the  blood  flowing  through  the 
veins,  and  the  flesh  increasing  from  wounds,  and 
the  scars  drawn  over  at  last  can  admit  no  light ; 
unless  by  chance  he  would  have  it  that  eyes  are 
produced  resembling  ears,  so  that  we  should  see 


'2  Refulgentes. 

'^  Im:ij;iiiuni  incursione. 

'••  According  to  some,  "  talc. 

"5  iii.  363. 


290 


ON   THE    WORKMANSHIP    OF    GOD. 


not  so  much  \vith  eyes  as  with  apertures,  than 
which  there  can  be  nothing  more  unsightly  or 
more  useless.  For  how  little  should  we  be  able 
to  see,  if  from  the  innermost  recesses  of  the 
head  the  mind  should  pay  attention  through 
slight  fissures  of  caverns ;  as,  if  any  one  should 
wish  to  look  through  a  stalk  of  hemlock,  he 
would  see  no  more  than  the  capability  of  the 
stalk  itself  admitted  1  For  sight,  therefore,  it 
was  rather  needful  that  the  members  should  be 
collected  together  into  an  orb,  that  the  sight 
might  be  spread  in  breadth  and  the  parts  which 
adjoined  them  in  the  front  of  the  face,  that  they 
might  freely  behold  all  things.  Therefore  the 
unspeakable  power  of  the  div'ine  providence 
made  two  orl)s  most  resembling  each  other,  and 
so  bound  them  together  that  they  might  be  able 
not  only  to  be  altogether  turned,  but  to  be 
moved  and  directed  with  moderation.'  And 
He  willed  that  the  orbs  themselves  should  be 
full  of  a  pure  and  clear  moisture,  in  the  middle 
part  of  which  sparks  of  lights  might  be  kept 
shut  up,  which  we  call  the  pupils,  in  which,  being 
pure  and  delicate,  are  contained  the  faculty  and 
method  of  seeing.  The  mind  therefore  directs 
itself  through  these  orbs  that  it  may  see,  and 
the  sight  of  both  the  eyes  is  mingled  and  joined 
together  in  a  wonderful  manner. 

CHAP.  IX.  —  OF  THE   SENSES   AND   THEIR   POWER. 

It  pleases  me  in  this  place  to  censure  the  folly 
of  those  who,  while  they  wish  to  show  that  the 
senses  are  false,  collect  many  instances  in  which 
the  eyes  are  deceived ;  and  among  them  this 
also,  that  all  things  appear  double  to  the  mad 
and  intoxicated,  as  though  the  cause  of  that  error 
were  obscure.  For  it  happens  on  this  account, 
because  there  are  two  eyes.  But  hear  how  it 
happens.  The  sight  of  the  eyes  consists  in  the 
exertion  of  the  soul.  Therefore,  since  the  mind, 
as  has  been  above  said,  uses  the  eyes  as  windows, 
this  happens  not  only  to  those  who  are  intoxicated 
or  mad,  but  even  to  those  who  are  of  sound 
mind,  and  sober.  For  if  you  place  any  object 
too  near,  it  will  appear  double,  for  there  is  a 
certain  interval  and  space  in  which  the  sight  of 
the  eyes  meets  together.  Likewise,  if  you  call 
the  soul  back  as  if  to  reflection,  and  relax  the 
exertion  of  the  mind,  then  the  sight  of  each  eye 
is  drawn  asunder,  and  they  each  begin  to  see 
separately. 

If  you,  again,  exert  the  mind  and  direct  the 
eyesight,  whatever  appeared  double  unites  into 
one.  What  wonder,  therefore,  if  the  mind,  im- 
paired by  poison  and  the  powerful  influence  of 
wine,  cannot  direct  itself  to  seeing,  as  the  feet 
cannot  to  walking  when  they  are  weak  through 
the  numbness  of  the  sinews,  or  if  the  force  of 


'  Cum  modo:  "  in  a  measured  degree." 


madness  raging  against  the  brain  disunites  the 
agreement  of  the  eyes?  Which  is  so  true,  that 
in  the  case  of  one-eyed  ^  men,  if  they  become 
either  mad  or  intoxicated,  it  can  by  no  means 
happen  that  they  see  any  object  double.  Where- 
fore, if  the  reason  is  evident  why  the  eyes  are 
deceived,  it  is  clear  that  the  senses  are  not  false  : 
for  they  either  are  not  deceived  if  they  are  pure 
and  sound  ;  or  if  they  are  deceived,  yet  the  mind 
is  not  deceived  which  recognises  their  error. 

CHAP.    X. OF    THE    OUTER    LIMBS     OF    MAN,    AND 

THEIR    USE. 

But  let  us  return  to  the  works  of  God.  That 
the  eyes,  therefore,  might  be  better  protected 
from  injury.  He  concealed  them  with  the  cover- 
ings of  the  eyelashes,^  from  which  Varro  thinks 
that  the  eyes-*  derived  their  name.  For  even 
the  eyelids  themselves,  in  which  there  is  the 
power  of  rapid  motion,  and  to  which  throbbing  5 
gives  their  name,  being  protected  by  hairs  stand- 
ing in  order,  afford  a  most  becoming  fence  to 
the  eyes  ;  the  continual  motion  of  which,  meet- 
ing with  incomprehensible  rapidity,  does  not  im- 
pede the  course  of  the  sight,  and  relieves  the 
eyes.^  For  the  pupil  -=—  that  is,  the  transparent 
membrane — which  ought  not  to  be  drained  and 
to  become  dry,  unless  it  is  cleansed  by  continual 
moisture  so  that  it  shines  clearly,  loses  its  power.? 
Why  should  I  speak  of  the  summits  of  the  eye- 
brows themselves,  furnished  with  short  hair?  Do 
they  not,  as  it  were  by  mounds,  both  afford  pro- 
tection to  the  eyes,  so  that  nothing  may  fall  into 
them  from  above,^  and  at  the  same  time  orna- 
ment? And  the  nose,  arising  from  the  confines 
of  these,  and  stretched  out,  as  it  were,  with  an 
equal  ridge,  at  once  serves  to  separate  and  to 
protect  the  two  eyes.  Below  also,  a  not  unbe- 
coming swelling  of  the  cheeks,  gently  rising  after 
the  similitude  of  hills,  makes  the  eyes  safer  on 
every  side  ;  and  it  has  been  provided  by  the 
great  Artificer,  that  if  there  shall  happen  to  be  a 
more  violent  blow,  it  may  be  repelled  by  the 
projecting  parts.  But  the  upper  part  of  the  nose 
as  far  as  the  middle  has  been  made  solid  ;  but 
the  lower  part  has  been  made  with  a  softened 
cartilage  annexed  to  it,  that  it  may  be  pliant  '^  to 
the  use  of  the  fingers.  Moreover,  in  this,  though 
a  single  member,  three  offices  are  placed  :  one, 
that  of  drawing  the  breath  ;  the  second,  that  of 
smelling  ;  the  third,  that  the  secretions  of  the 
brain  may  escape  through  its  caverns.  And  in 
how  wonderful,  how  divine  a  manner  did  God 


2  Luscis. 

3  Cillorum.     The  word  properly  denotes  the  edge  of  the  eyelid,  in 
which  the  eyelash  is  fixed ;  said  to  be  derived  from  "  cilleo,"  to  move. 

*  Ociili,  as  though  derived  from  '   occiilere,"  to  conceal. 
5  Palpitatio.     Hence  "  palpebral,"  the  eyelids. 

*  Reficit  obtutum. 
'  Obsolescit. 

8  [Xenophon,  fl/emoraiiiia,  i.  4.] 

9  Tractabilis. 


ON   THE   WORKMANSHIP   OF   GOD. 


291 


contrive  these  also,  so  that  the  very  cavity  of 
the  nose  should  not  deform  the  beauty  of  the 
face  :  which  would  certainly  have  been  the  case 
if  one  single  aperture  only  were  open.  But  He 
enclosed  and  divided  that,  as  though  by  a  wall 
drawn  through  the  middle,  and  made  it  most 
beautiful  by  the  very  circumstance  of  its  being 
double.'  From  which  we  understand  of  how 
much  weight  the  twofold  number,  made  firm  by 
one  simple  connection,  is  to  the  perfection  of 
things. 

For  though  the  body  is  one,  yet  the  whole 
could  not  be  made  up  of  single  members,  unless 
it  were  that  there  should  be  parts  on  the  right 
hand  or  on  the  left.  Therefore,  as  the  two  feet 
and  also  hands  not  only  avail  to  some  utility  and 
practice  either  of  walking  or  of  doing  some- 
thing, but  also  bestow  an  admirable  character 
and  comeliness  ;  so  in  the  head,  which  is,  as  it 
were,  the  crown  of  the  divine  work,  the  hearing 
has  been  divided  by  the  great  Artificer  into  two 
ears,  and  the  sight  into  two  eyes,  and  the  smell- 
ing into  two  nostrils,  because  the  brain,  in  which 
is  contained  the  system  of  the  sensation,  although 
it  is  one,  yet  is  divided  into  two  parts  by  the 
intervening  membrane.  But  the  heart  also,  which 
appears  to  be  the  abode  of  wisdom,  although  it 
is  one,  yet  has  two  recesses  within,  in  which  are 
contained  the  living  fountains  of  blood,  divided 
by  an  intervening  barrier :  that  as  in  the  world 
itself  the  chief  control,  being  twofold  from  sim- 
ple matter,  or  simple  from  a  twofold  matter, 
governs  and  keeps  together  the  whole  ;  so  in  the 
body,  all  the  parts,  being  constructed  of  two, 
might  present  an  inseparable  unity.  Also  how 
useful  and  how  becoming  is  the  appearance  and 
the  opening  of  the  mouth  transversely  cannot 
be  expressed  ;  the  use  of  which  consists  in  two 
offices,  that  of  taking  food  and  speaking. 

The  tongue  enclosed  within,  which  by  its 
motions  divides  the  voice  into  words,  and  is  the 
interpreter  of  the  mind,  cannot,  however,  by 
itself  alone  fulfil  the  office  of  speaking,  unless  it 
strikes  its  edge  against  the  palate,  unless  aided 
by  striking  against  the  teeth  or  by  the  compres- 
sion of  the  lips.  The  teeth,  however,  contribute 
more  to  speaking :  for  infants  do  not  begin  to 
speak  before  they  have  teeth  ;  and  old  men, 
when  they  have  lost  their  teeth,  so  lisp  that  they 
appear  to  have  returned  afresh  to  infancy.  But 
these  things  relate  to  man  alone,  or  to  birds,  in 
which  the  tongue,  being  pointed  and  vibrating 
with  fixed  motions,  expresses  innumerable  in- 
flexions of  songs  and  various  kinds  of  sounds. 
It  has,  moreover,  another  office  also,  which  it 
exercises  in  all,  and  this  alone  in  the  dumb  ani- 
mals, that  it  collects  the  food  when  bniised  and 
ground  by  the  teeth,  and  by  its  force  presses  it 


'   Ipsa  duplicitate. 


down  when  collected  into  balls,  and  transmits  it 
to  the  belly.  Accordingly,  Varro  thinks  that  the 
name  of  tongue  was  given  to  it  from  binding - 
the  food.  It  also  assists  the  beasts  in  drinking : 
for  with  the  tongue  stretched  out  and  hollowed 
they  draw  water ;  and  when  they  have  taken  it 
in  the  hollow  ^  of  the  tongue,  lest  by  slowness 
and  delay  it  should  flow  away,  they  dash-*  it 
against  the  palate  with  swift  rapidity.  This, 
therefore,  is  covered  by  the  concave  part  of  the 
palate  as  by  a  shell,5  and  God  has  surrounded  it 
with  the  enclosure  of  the  teeth  as  with  a  wall. 

But  He  has  adorned  the  teeth  themselves, 
which  are  arranged  in  order  in  a  wonderful  man- 
ner, lest,  being  bare  and  exposed,*^  they  should 
be  a  terror  rather  than  an  ornament,  with  soft 
gums,  which  are  so  named  from  producing  teeth, 
and  tlien  with  the  coverings  of  the  lips  ;  and  the 
hardness  of  the  teeth,  as  in  a  millstone,  is  greater 
and  rougher  than  in  the  other  bones,  that  they 
might  be  sufficient  for  bruising  the  food  and 
pasture.  But  how  befittingly  has  He  divided  ^ 
the  lips  themselves,  which  as  it  were  before 
were  united  !  the  upper  of  which,  under  the  v^ery 
middle  of  the  nostrils.  He  has  marked  with  a 
kind  of  slight  cavity,  as  with  a  valley :  He  has 
gracefully  spread  out  ^  the  lower  for  the  sake  of 
beauty.  For,  as  far  as  relates  to  the  receiving 
of  flavour,  he  is  deceived,  whoever  he  is,  who 
thinks  that  this  sense  resides  in  the  palate  ;  for 
it  is  the  tongue  by  which  flavours  are  perceived, 
and  not  the  whole  of  it :  for  the  parts  of  it 
which  are  more  tender  on  either  side,  draw  in 
the  flavour  with  the  most  delicate  perceptions. 
And  though  nothing  is  diminished  from  that 
which  is  eaten  or  drunk,  yet  the  flavour  in  an 
indescribable  manner  penetrates  to  the  sense,  in 
the  same  way  in  which  the  taking  of  the  smell 
detracts  nothing  from  any  material. 

And  how  beautiful  tlie  other  parts  are  can 
scarcely  be  expressed.  The  chin,  gently  drawn 
down  from  the  cheeks,  and  the  lower  part  of  it  so 
closed  that  the  lightly  imprinted  division  appears 
to  mark  its  extreme  point :  the  neck  stiff  and 
well  rounded  :  the  shoulders  let  down  as  though 
by  gentle  ridges  from  the  neck  :  the  fore-arms  ^ 
powerful,  and  braced  '°  by  sinews  for  firmness  : 
the  great  strength  of  the  upper-arms"  standing 
out  with  remarkable  muscles :  the  useful  and 
becoming  bending  of  the  elbows.  What  shall  I 
say  of  the  hands,  the  ministers  of  reason  and 
wisdom?  Which  the  most  skilful  Creator  made 
with  a  flat  and  moderately  concave  bend,  that  if 


-  I.ingiia,  as  though  from  "  liganJo." 

*  Linguae  sinu. 
■♦  Comi)lodunt. 
S  Testudine. 

*  Restricti. 

7  Intcrcidit. 

8  Koras  moUIter  explicavit. 

9  Ilrachia.     The  fore-amis,  from  the  hand  to  the  elbow. 
'=>  Substricta. 

"  Lacerti.     The  arm  from  the  elbow  to  the  shoulder. 


292 


ON   THE   WORKMANSHIP    OF   GOD. 


anything  was  to  be  held,  it  might  conveniently 
rest  upon  them,  and  terminated  them  in  the 
fingers  ;  in  which  it  is  difficult  to  explain  whether 
the  appearance  or  the  usefulness  is  greater.  For 
the  perfection  and  completeness  of  their  num- 
ber, and  the  comeliness  of  their  order  and  gra- 
dation, and  the  flexible  bending  of  the  equal 
joints,  and  the  round  form  of  the  nails,  com- 
prising and  strengthening  the  tips  of  the  fingers 
with  concave  coverings,  lest  the  softness  of  the 
flesh  should  yield  in  holding  any  object,  afford 
great  adornment.  But  this  is  convenient  for  use 
in  wonderful  ways,  that  one  separated  from  the 
rest  rises  together  with  the  hand  itself,  and  is 
enlarged '  in  a  different  direction,  which,  offer- 
ing itself  as  though  to  meet  the  others,  possesses 
all  the  power  of  holding  and  doing  either  alone, 
or  in  a  special  manner,  as  the  guide  and  director 
of  them  all ;  from  which  also  it  received  the 
name  of  thumb,^  because  it  prevails  among  the 
others  by  force  and  power.  It  has  two  joints 
standing  out,  not  as  the  others,  three  ;  but  one 
is  annexed  by  flesh  to  the  hand  for  the  sake  of 
beauty  :  for  if  it  had  been  with  three  joints,  and 
itself  separate,  the  foul  and  unbecoming  appear- 
ance would  have  deprived  the  hand  of  all  grace. 
Again,  the  breadth  of  the  breast,  being  ele- 
vated, and  exposed  to  the  eyes,  displays  a  won- 
derful dignity  of  its  condition ;  of  which  this  is 
the  cause,  that  God  appears  to  have  made  man 
only,  as  it  were,  reclining  with  his  face  upward  : 
for  scarcely  any  other  animal  is  able  to  lie  upon 
its  back.  But  He  appears  to  have  formed  the 
dumb  animals  as  though  lying  on  one  side,  and 
to  have  pressed  them  to  the  earth.  For  this 
reason  He  gave  them  a  narrow  breast,  and  re- 
moved from  sight,  and  prostrate  ^  towards  the 
earth.  But  He  made  that  of  man  open  and 
erect,  because,  being  full  of  reason  given  from 
heaven,  it  was  not  befitting  that  it  should  be 
humble  or  unbecoming.  The  nipples  also  gently 
rising,  and  crowned  with  darker  and  small  orbs, 
add  something  of  beauty  ;  being  given  to  females 
for  the  nourishment  of  their  young,  to  males  for 
grace  only,  that  the  breast  might  not  appear  mis- 
shapen, and,  as  it  were,  mutilated.  Below  this 
is  placed  the  flat  surface  of  the  belly,  about  the 
middle  of  which  the  navel  distinguishes  by  a 
not  unbecoming  mark,  being  made  for  this  pur- 
pose, that  through  it  the  young,  while  it  is  in  the 
womb,  may  be  nourished. 


CH.^.    XI. 


OF 


THE     INTESTINES     IN     MAN,     AND 
THEIR    USE. 

It  necessarily  follows  that  I  should  begin  to 
speak  of  the  inward  parts  also,  to  which  has 
been  assigned  not  beauty,  because  they  are  con- 

'  Maturius  funditur. 

2  i.e.,  pollex,  as  though  from  "  poUeo,"  to  prevail. 

3  Abjectum. 


cealed  from  view,  but  incredible  utility,  since  it 
was  necessary  that  this  earthly  body  should  be 
nourished  with  some  moisture  from  food  and 
drink,  as  the  earth  itself  is  by  showers  and  frosts. 
The  most  provident  Artificer  placed  in  the  mid- 
dle of  it  a  receptacle  for  articles  of  food,  by 
means  of  which,  when  digested  and  liquefied,  it 
might  distribute  the  vital  juices  to  all  the  mem- 
bers. But  since  man  is  composed  of  body  and 
soul,  that  receptacle  of  which  I  have  spoken 
above  affords  nourishment  only  to  the  body ;  to 
the  soul,  in  truth,  He  has  given  another  abode. 
For  He  has  made  a  kind  of  intestines  soft  and 
thin,'*  which  we  call  the  lungs,  into  which  the 
breath  might  pass  by  an  alternate  interchange  ;  5 
and  He  did  not  form  this  after  the  fashion  of 
the  uterus,  lest  the  breath  should  all  at  once  be 
poured  forth,  or  at  once  inflate  it.  And  on  this 
account  He  did  not  make  it  a  full  intestine,^  but 
capable  of  being  inflated,  and  admitting  the  air, 
so  that  it  might  gradually  receive  the  breath ; 
while  the  vital  air  is  spread  through  that  thinness. 
and  might  again  gradually  give  it  back,  while  it 
spreads  itself  forth  from  it :  for  the  very  alter- 
nation of  blowing  and  breathing,?  and  the  pro- 
cess of  respiration,  support  life  in  the  body. 

Since,  therefore,  there  are  in  man  two  recep- 
tacles,—  one  of  the  air  which  nourishes  the  soul,** 
the  other  of  the  food  which  nourishes  the  body, 
—  there  must  be  two  tubes  ^  through  the  neck 
for  food,  and  for  breath,  the  upper  of  which  leads 
from  the  mouth  to  the  belly,  the  lower  from  the 
nostrils  to  the  lungs.  And  the  plan  and  nature 
of  these  are  different :  for  the  passage  which  is 
from  the  mouth  has  been  made  soft,  and  which 
when  closed  always  adheres  ■"  to  itself,  as  the 
mouth  itself;  since  drink  and  food,  being  cor- 
poreal, make  for  themselves  a  space  for  passage, 
by  moving  aside  and  opening  the  gullet.  The 
breath,  on  the  other  hand,  which  is  incorporeal 
and  thin,  because  it  was  unable  to  make  for 
itself  a  space,  has  received  an  open  way,  which 
is  called  the  windpipe.  This  is  composed  of 
flexible  and  soft  bones,  as  though  of  rings  fitted 
together  after  the  manner  of  a  hemlock  stalk," 
and  adhering  together ;  and  this  passage  is  al- 
always  open.  For  the  breath  can  have  no  cessa- 
tion in  passing ;  because  it,  which  is  always 
passing  to  and  fro,  is  checked  as  by  a  kind  of 
obstacle  through  means  of  a  portion  of  a  mem- 
ber usefully  sent  down  from  the  brain,  and  which 
is  called  the  uvula,  lest,  drawn  by  pestilential  air, 


*  Rarum,  i.e.,  loose  in  texture. 

5  Reciproca  vici.ssitudine. 

6  Ne  plenum  quidem.  Some  editions  omit  "  ne,"  but  it  seems  to 
be  required  by  the  sense;  the  lungs  not  being  compact  and  solid,  as 
the  liver,  but  of  a  slighter  substance. 

7  Flandi  et  spirandi.  The  former  word  denotes  the  process  of 
sending  forth,  the  latter  of  inhaling,  the  air. 

8  Animam,  the  vital  principle,  as  differing  from  the  rational. 

9  Fistulas. 

'o  Coha;reat  sibi. 
"  In  cicuta;  modum. 


ON   THE   WORKMANSHIP   OF   GOD. 


293 


it  should  come  with  impetuosity  and  spoil  the 
slightness  '  of  its  abode,  or  bring  the  whole 
violence  of  the  injury  upon  the  inner  receptacles. 
And  on  this  account  also  the  nostrils  are  slightly 
open,  which  are  therefore  so  named,  because 
either  smell  or  breath  does  not  cease  to  flow  ^ 
through  these,  which  are,  as  it  were,  the  doors 
of  this  tube.  Yet  this  breathing-tube  lies  open  ^ 
not  only  to  the  nostrils,  but  also  to  the  mouth  in 
the  extreme  regions  of  the  palate,  where  the  ris- 
ings of'*  the  jaws,  looking  towards  the  uvula,  be- 
gin to  raise  themselves  into  a  swelling.  And  the 
reason  of  this  arrangement  is  not  obscure  :  for 
we  should  not  have  the  power  of  speaking  if  the 
windpipe  were  open  to  the  nostrils  only,  as  the 
path  of  the  gullet  is  to  the  mouth  only ;  nor 
could  the  breath  proceeding  from  it  cause  the 
voice,  without  the  service  of  the  tongue. 

Therefore  the  divine  skill  opened  a  way  for  the 
voice  from  that  breathing-tube,  so  that  the  tongue 
might  be  able  to  discharge  its  office,  and  by  its 
strokes  divide  into  words  the  even  5  course  of 
the  voice  itself.  And  this  passage,  if  by  any 
means  it  is  intercepted,  must  necessarily  cause 
dumbness.  For  he  is  assuredly  mistaken,  who- 
ever thinks  that  there  is  any  other  cause  why 
men  are  dumb.  For  they  are  not  tongue-tied, 
as  is  commonly  believed ;  but  they  pour  forth 
that  vocal  breath  through  the  nostrils,  as  though 
bellowing,''  because  there  is  either  no  passage  at 
all  for  the  voice  to  the  mouth,  or  it  is  not  so 
open  as  to  be  able  to  send  forth  the  full  voice. 
And  this  generally  comes  to  pass  by  nature ; 
sometimes  also  it  happens  by  accident  that  this 
entrance  is  blocked  up  and  does  not  transmit 
the  voice  to  the  tongue,  and  thus  makes  those 
who  can  speak  dumb.  And  when  this  happens, 
the  hearing  also  must  necessarily  be  blocked  up  ; 
so  -that  because  it  cannot  emit  the  voice,  it  is 
also  incapable  of  admitting  it.  Therefore  this 
passage  has  been  opened  for  the  purpose  of 
speaking.  It  also  affords  this  advantage,  that  in 
fre(]uenting  the  bath,^  because  the  nostrils  are 
not  able  to  endure  the  heat,  the  hot  air  is  taken 
in  by  the  mouth  ;  also,  if  phlegm  contracted  by 
cold  shall  have  happened  to  stop  up  the  breath- 
ing pores  of  the  nostrils,  we  may  be  able  to  draw 
the  air  through  the  mouth,  lest,  if  the  passage  ^ 
should  be  obstructed,  the  breath  should  be  stifled. 
But  the  food  lleing  received  into  the  stomach, 
and  mixed  with  the  moisture  of  the  drink,  when 
it  has  now  been  digested  by  the  heat,  its  juice, 
being  in  an  indescribable  manner  diffused  through 


'  Teneritudinem  domicilii. 

2  Nare;  hence  "  narcs,"  the  nostrils. 

*  Interpatct. 

*  Colics  faucium.     Others  read  "  toles,"  i.e.,  the  tonsils. 

.    s  Inoficnsum  tenorem,  i.e.,  without  obstruction,  not  striking  against 
any  object  —  smooth. 

*  Quasi  miigiens. 

'  111  lavacris  celebrandis. 

*  Obstruct^  meandi  facultate. 


the  limbs,  bedews   and   invigorates   the  whole 
body. 

The  manifold  coils  also  of  the  intestines,  and 
their  length  rolled  together  on  themselves,  and 
yet  fastened  with  one  band,  are  a  wonderful  work 
of  God.  For  when  the  stomach  has  sent  forth 
from  itself  the  food  softened,  it  is  gradually  thrust 
forth  through  those  windings  of  the  intestines,  so 
that  whatever  of  the  moisture  by  which  the  body 
is  nourished  is  in  them,  is  divided  to  all  the 
members.  And  yet,  lest  in  any  place  it  should 
happen  to  adhere  and  remain  fixed,  which  might 
have  taken  place  on  account  of  the  turnings  of 
the  coils,9  which  often  turn  back  to  themselves, 
and  which  could  not  have  happened  without 
injury.  He  has  spread  over  "="  these  from  within  a 
thicker  juice,  that  the  secretions  of  the  belly 
might  more  easily  work  tlieir  way  through  the 
slippery  substance  to  their  outlets.  It  is  also  a 
most  skilful  arrangement,  that  the  bladder,  which 
birds  do  not  use,  though  it  is  separated  from  the 
intestines,  and  has  no  tube  by  which  it  may  draw 
the  urine  from  them,  is  nevertheless  filled  and 
distended  with  moisture.  And  it  is  not  difficult 
to  see  how  this  comes  to  pass.  For  the  parts 
of  the  intestines  which  receive  the  food  and 
drink  from  the  belly  are  more  open  than  the 
other  coils,  and  much  more  delicate.  These 
entwine  themselves  around  and  encompass  the 
bladder  ;  and  when  the  meat  and  the  drink  have 
arrived  at  these  parts  in  a  mixed  state,  the  ex- 
crement becomes  more  solid,  and  passes  through, 
but  all  the  moisture  is  strained  through  those 
tender  parts,"  and  the  bladder,  the  membrane 
of  which  is  equally  fine  and  delicate,  absorbs 
and  collects  it,  so  as  to  send  it  forth  where 
nature  has  opened  an  outlet. 

CHAP.  XII. DE  UTERO,  ET  CONCEPTIONE  ATQUE 

SEXIBUS.'^ 

De  utero  quoque  et  conceptione,  quoniam  de 
internis  loquimur,  dici  necesse  est,  ne  quid  pme- 
terisse  videamur ;  quae  quamquam  in  operto  la- 
tent, sensum  tamen  atque  intelligentiam  latere 
non  possunt.  Vena  in  maribus,  qucie  seminium 
continet,  duplex  est,  paulo  interior,  quam  illud 
humoris  obscoeni  receptaculum.  Sicut  enim 
renes  duo  sunt,  itemque  testes,  ita  et  ven« 
seminales  duae,  in  una  tamen  compage  cohce- 
rentes  ;  quod  videmus  in  corporibus  animalium, 
cum  interfecta  '^  patefiunt.  Sed  ilia  dexterior 
masculinum  continet  semen,  sinisterior  foemi- 
ninum  ;  et  omnino  in  toto  corpore  pars  dextra 
masculina  est,  sinistra  vero  foeminina.  Ipsum 
semen  quidam  putant  ex  meduUis  tantum,  qui- 

9  Voluminum  flexiones. 
'"  Oblovit  ea  intrliisecus  crassiore  succo. 
"   Per  illam  teneriliidinem. 

'-  It  has  been  judged  advisable  not  to  translate  this  and  the  first 
part  of  the  next  chapter. 

'•^  Alii  leguiit  "  intersecta." 


294 


ON    THE   WORKMANSHIP    OF    GOD. 


dam  ex  omni  corpora  ad  venam  genitalem  con- 
fluere,  ibique  concrescere.  Sed  hoc,  humana 
mens,  quomodo  fiat,  non  potest  comprehendere. 
Item  in  foeminis  uterus  in  duas  se  dividit  partes, 
quae  in  diversum  diftusi^  ac  reflex^,  circumpli- 
cantur,  sicut  arietis  cornua.  Qixx.  pars  in  dex- 
tram  retorquetur,  masculina  est ;  quce  in  sinis- 
tram,  fceminina. 

Conceptum  igitur  Varro  et  Aristoteles  sic  fieri 
arbitrantur.  Aiunt  non  tantum  maribus  inesse 
semen,  verum  etiam  foeminis,  et  inde  plerumque 
mairibus  similes  procreari ;  sed  earum  semen 
sanguinem  esse  purgatum,  quod  si  recte  cum 
virili  mixtum  sit,  utraque  concreta  et  simul  co- 
agulata  informari :  et  primum  quidem  cor  homi- 
nis  effingi,  quod  in  eo  sit  et  vita  omnis  et  sapi- 
entia ;  denique  totum  opus  quadragesimo  die 
consummari.  Ex  abortionibus  haec  fortasse  col- 
lecta  sunt.  In  avium  tamen  fcetibus  primum 
oculos  fingi  dubium  non  est,  quod  in  ovis  ssepe 
deprehendimus.  Unde  fieri  non  posse  arbitror, 
quin  fictio  a  capite  sumat  exordium. 

Similitudines  autem  in  corporibus  filiorum  sic 
fieri  putant.  Cum  semina  inter  se  permixta  co- 
alescunt,  si  virile  superaverit,  patri  similem  pro- 
venire,  seu  marem,  seu  foeminam  ;  si  muliebre 
praevaluerit,  progeniem  cujusque  sexus  ad  imagi- 
nem  respondere  maternam.  Id  autem  praevalet 
e  duobus,  quod  fuerit  uberius ;  alterum  enim 
quodammodo  amplectitur  et  includit :  hinc  ple- 
rumque fieri,  ut  unius  tantum  lineamenta  prae- 
tendat.  Si  vero  gequa  fuerit  ex  pari  semente 
permixtio,  figuras  quoque  misceri,  ut  soboles  ilia 
communis  aut  neutrum  referre  videatur,  quia 
totum  ex  altero  non  habet ;  aut  utrumque,  quia 
partem  de  singulis  mutuata  est.  Nam  in  cor- 
poribus animalium  videmus  aut  confundi  paren- 
tum  colores,  ac  fieri  tertium  neutri  generantium 
simile  ;  aut  utriusque  sic  exprimi,  ut  discolori- 
bus  membris  per  omne  corpus  concors  mixtura 
varietur.  Dispares  quoque  naturae  hoc  modo 
fieri  putantur.  Cum  forte  in  kevam  uteri  par- 
tem masculinse  stirpis  semen  incident,  marem 
quidem  gigni  opinatio  est ;  sed  quia  sit  in  foemi- 
nina  parte  conceptus,  aliquid  in  se  habere  foe- 
mineum,  supra  quam  decus  virile  patiatur ;  vel 
formam  insignem,  vel  nimium  candorem,  vel  cor- 
poris levitatem,  vel  artus  delicatos,  vel  staturam 
brevem,  vel  vocem  gracilem,  vel  animum  imbecil- 
lum,  vel  ex  his  plura.  Item,  si  partem  in  dex- 
tram  semen  foaminini  sexus  influxerit,  fcjeminam 
quidem  procreari ;  sed  quoniam  in  masculina 
parte  concepta  sit,  habere  in  se  aliquid  virilita- 
tis,  ultra  quam  sexus  ratio  permittat ;  aut  valida 
membra,  aut  immoderatam  longitudinem,  aut 
fuscum  colorem,  aut  hispidam  faciem,  aut  vul- 
tum  indecorum,  aut  vocem  robustam,  aut  ani- 
mum audacem,  aut  ex  his  plura. 

Si  vero  masculinum  in  dexteram,  fijemininum 
in   sinistram   pervenerit,    utrosque    foetus    recte 


provenire  ;  ut  et  foeminis  per  omnia  naturae  suae 
decus  constet,  et  maribus  tam  mente,  quam 
corpore  robur  virile  servetur.  Istud  vero  ipsum 
quam  mirabile  institutum  Dei,  quod  ad  conser- 
vationem  generum  singulorum,  duos  sexus  maris 
ac  foeminam  machinatus  est ;  quibus  inter  se  per 
voluptatis  illecebras  copulatis,  successiva  soboles 
pareretur,  ne  omne  genus  viventium  conditio 
mortalitatis  extingueret.  Sed  plus  roboris  mari- 
bus attributum  est,  quo  facilius  ad  patientiam 
jugi  maritalis  fceminae  cogerentur.  Vir  itaque 
nominatus  est,  quod  major  in  eo  vis  est,  quam 
in  fuemina  ;  et  hmc  virtus  nomen  accepit.  Item 
mulier  (ut  Varro  interpretatur)  a  mollitie,  im- 
mutata  et  detracta  littera,  velut  moilier ;  cui 
suscepto  fatu,  ciim  partus  appropinquare  jam 
coepit,  turgescentes  mammae  dulcibus  succis  dis- 
tenduntur,  et  ad  nutrimenta  nascentis  fontibus 
lacteis  foecundum  pectus  exuberat.  Nee  enim 
decebat  aliud  quam  ut  sapiens  animal  a  corde 
alimoniam  duceret.  Idque  ipsum  solertissime 
comparatum  est,  ut  candens  ac  pinguis  humor 
teneritudinem  novi  corporis  irrigaret,  donee  ad 
capiendos  fortiores  cibos,  et  dentibus  instruatur, 
et  viribus  roboretur.  Sed  redeamus  ad  proposi- 
tum,  ut  csetera,  quas  supersunt,  breviter  explice- 
mus. 


CHAP.  XIII, 


■OF   THE    LOWER    MEMBERS. 


Poteram  nunc  ego  ipsorum  quoque  genitalium 
membrorum  mirificam  rationem  tibi  exponere, 
nisi  me  pudor  ab  hujusmodi  sermone  revocaret : 
itaque  a  nobis  indumento  verecundiae,  quae  sunt 
pudenda  velentur.  Quod  ad  hanc  rem  attinet, 
queri  satis  est,  homines  impios  ac  profanos  sum- 
mum  nefas  admittere,  qui  divinum  et  admirabile 
Dei  opus,  ad  propagandam  successionem  inex- 
cogitabili  ratione  provisum  et  effectum,  vel  ad 
turpissimos  queestus,  vel  ad  obsccenae  libidinis 
pudenda  opera  convertunt,  ut  jam  nihil  aliud  ex 
re  sanctissima  petant,  quam  inanem  et  sterilem 
voluptatem. 

How  is  it  with  respect  to  the  other  parts  of 
the  body?  Are  they  without  order  and  beauty? 
The  flesh  rounded  off  into  the  nates,  how  adapt- 
ed to  the  office  of  sitting  !  and  this  also  more 
firm  than  in  the  other  limbs,  lest  by  the  pressure 
of  the  bulk  of  the  body  it  should  give  way  to 
the  bones.  Also  the  length  of  the  thighs  drawn 
out,  and  strengthened  by  broader  muscles,  in 
order  that  it  might  more  easily  sustain  the 
weight  of  the  body ;  and  as  this  is  gradually 
contracted,  it  is  bounded '  by  the  knees,  the 
comely  joints  ^  of  which  supply  a  bend  which  is 
most  adapted  for  walking  and  sitting.  Also  the 
legs  not  drawn  out  in  an  equal  manner,  lest  an 
unbecoming  figure  should  deform  the  feet ;  but 
they  are  at  once  strengthened  and  adorned  by 


'  Genua  determinant. 
2  Nodi. 


ON   THE   WORKMANSHIP   OF   GOD. 


295 


well  -  turned '    calves    gently   standing   out    and 
gradually  diminishing. 

But  in  the  soles  of  the  feet  there  is  the  same 
plan  as  in  the  hands,  but  yet  very  different :  for 
since  these  are,  as  it  were,  the  foundations  of 
the  whole  body,^  the  admirable  Artificer  has 
not  made  them  of  a  round  appearance,  lest  man 
should  be  unable  to  stand,  or  should  need  other 
feet  for  standing,  as  is  the  case  with  quadrupeds  ; 
but  He  has  formed  them  of  a  longer  and  more 
extended  shape,  that  they  might  make  the  body 
firm  by  their  flatness,'  from  which  circumstance 
their  name  was  given  to  them.  The  toes  are 
of  the  same  number  with  the  fingers,  for  the 
sake  of  appearance  rather  than  utility  ;  and  on 
this  account  they  are  both  joined  together,  and 
short,  and  put  together  by  gradations  ;  and  that 
which  is  the  greatest  of  these,  since  it  was  not 
befitting  that  it  should  be  separated  from  the 
others,  as  in  the  hand,  has  been  so  arranged  in 
order,  that  it  appears  to  differ  from  the  others 
m  magnitude  and  the  small  space  which  inter- 
venes. This  beautiful  union  *  of  them  strength- 
ens the  pressure  of  the  feet  with  no  slight  aid  ; 
for  we  cannot  be  excited  to  running,  unless,  our 
toes  being  pressed  against  the  ground,  and  rest- 
ing upon  the  soil,  we  take  an  impetus  and  a 
spring.  I  appear  to  have  explained  all  things 
of  which  the  plan  is  capable  of  being  under- 
stood. I  now  come  to  those  things  which  are 
either  doubtful  or  obscure. 

CHAP.  XIV. OF   THE   UNKNOWN    PURPOSE  OF  SOME 

OF   THE    INTESTINES. 

It  is  evident  that  there  are  many  things  in  the 
body,  the  force  and  purpose  of  which  no  one 
can  perceive  but  He  who  made  them.  Can  any 
one  suppose  that  he  is  able  to  relate  what  is  the 
advantage,  and  what  the  effect,  of  that  slight 
transparent  membrane  by  which  the  stomach  is 
netted  over  and  covered?  What  the  twofold 
resemblance  of  the  kidneys?  which  Varro  says 
are  so  named  because  streams  of  foul  moisture 
arise  from  these  ;  which  is  far  from  being  the 
case,  because,  rising  on  either  side  of  the  spine, 
they  are  united,  and  are  separated  from  the  in- 
testines. What  is  the  use  of  the  spleen  ?  What 
of  the  liver  ?  Organs  which  appear  as  it  were 
to  be  made  up  5  of  disordered  blood.  What  of 
the  very  bitter  moisture  of  the  gall  ?  What  of  the 
heart  ?  unless  we  shall  happen  to  think  that  they 
ought  to  be  believed,  wlio  think  that  the  affec- 
tion of  anger  is  placed  in  the  gall,  that  of  fear 
in  the  heart,  of  joy  in  the  spleen.  But  they  will 
have  it    that    the    office    of   the  liver  is,  by  its 


'  Teretes. 

2  Corporis.     Other  editions   have   "operis,"   i.e., 
work. 

^  Planitie,  hence  "  planta  " 

*  Germanitas,  "  a  brotherhood,  or  close  connection. 

5  Concrela  esse.     [See  p.  iSu,  note  i,  iupra.\ 


of  the  whole 


embrace  and  heat,  to  digest  the  food  in  the 
stomach ;  some  think  that  the  desires  of  the 
amorous  passions  are  contained  in  the  liver. 

First  of  all,  the  acuteness  of  the  human  sense 
is  unable  to  perceive  these  things,  because  their 
offices  lie  concealed ;  nor,  when  laid  open,  do 
they  show  their  uses.  For,  if  it  were  so,  per- 
haps the  more  gentle  animals  would  either  have 
no  gall  at  all,  or  less  than  the  wild  beasts ;  the 
more  timid  ones  would  have  more  heart,  the 
more  lustful  would  have  more  liver,  the  more 
playful  more  spleen.  As,  therefore,  we  perceive 
that  we  hear  with  our  ears,  that  we  see  with  our 
eyes,  that  we  smell  with  our  nostrils  ;  so  assuredly 
we  should  perceive  that  we  are  angry  with  the 
gall,  that  we  desire  with  the  liver,  that  we  rejoice 
with  the  spleen.  Since,  therefore,  we  do  not  at 
all  perceive  from  what  part  those  affections  come, 
it  is  possible  that  they  may  come  from  another 
source,  and  that  those  organs  may  have  a  dif- 
ferent effect  to  that  which  we  suppose.  We  can- 
not prove,  however,  that  they  who  discuss  these 
things  speak  falsely.  But  I  think  that  all  things 
which  relate  to  the  motions  of  the  mind  and 
soul,  are  of  so  obscure  and  profound  a  nature, 
that  it  is  beyond  the  power  of  man  to  see  through 
them  clearly.  This,  however,  ought  to  be  sure 
and  undoubted,  that  so  many  objects  and  so 
many  organs  have  one  and  the  same  office  —  to 
retain  the  soul  in  the  body.  But  what  office  is 
particularly  assigned  to  each,  who  can  know,  ex- 
cept the  Designer,  to  whom  alone  His  own  work 
is  known? 


CHAP.    XV. 


■OF   THE   VOICE. 


But  what  account  can  we  give  of  the  voice  ? 
Grammarians,  indeed,  and  philosophers,  define 
the  voice  to  be  air  struck  by  the  breath ;  from 
which  words  ^  derive  their  name  :  which  is  plainly 
false.  For  the  voice  is  not  produced  outside  of 
the  mouth,  but  within,  and  therefore  that  opinion 
is  more  probable,  that  the  breath,  being  com- 
pressed, when  it  has  struck  against  the  obstacle 
presented  by  the  throat,  forces  out  the  sound  of 
the  voice  :  as  when  we  send  down  the  breath 
into  an  open  hemlock  stalk,  having  applied  it  to 
the  lips,  and  the  breath,  reverberating  from  the 
hollow  of  the  stalk,  and  rolled  back  from  the 
bottom,  while  it  returns  ^  to  that  descending 
through  meeting  with  itself,  striving  for  an  outlet, 
produces  a  sound ;  and  the  wind,  rebounding 
by  itself,  is  animated  into  vocal  breath.  Now, 
whether  this  is  true,  God,  who  is  the  designer, 
may  see.  For  the  voice  appears  to  arise  not 
from  the  mouth,  but  from  the  innermost  breast. 
In  fine,  even  when  the  mouth  is  closed,  a  sound 
such  as  is  possible  is  emitted  from  the  nostrils. 


6  Verba:   as  though  derived  from  "  verbero,"  to  stril<e. 

7  I>um  ad  dcsrendL-ntcm  otcursu  suo  rcdit.     Others  read,  "  Uum 
descendcntcm  reddil." 


296 


ON   THE    WORKMANSHIP    OF    GOD. 


Moreover,  also,  the  voice  is  not  affected  by  that 
greatest  breath  with  which  we  gasp,  but  with  a 
hglit  and  not  compressed  breath,  as  often  as  we 
wish.  It  has  not  tlierefore  been  comprehended 
in  what  manner  it  takes  place,  or  what  it  is  alto- 
gether. And  do  not  imagine  that  1  am  now 
falling  into  the  opinion  of  the  Academy,  for  all 
things  are  not  incomprehensible.  For  as  it  must 
be  confessed  that  many  things  are  unknown,  since 
God  has  willed  that  they  should  exceed  the  un- 
derstanding of  man ;  so,  however,  it  must  be 
acknowledged  that  there  are  many  w^iich  may 
both  be  perceived  by  the  senses  and  compre- 
hended by  the  reason.  But  we  shall  devote  an  en- 
tire treatise  to  the  refutation  of  the  philosophers. 
Let  us  therefore  finish  the  course  over  which  we 
are  now  running. 


CHAP.  XVI. 


■OF   THE   MIND   AND   ITS   SEAT. 


That  the  nature  of  the  mind  is  also  incompre- 
hensible, who  can  be  ignorant,  but  he  who  is 
altogether  destitute  of  mind,  since  it  is  not  known 
in  what  place  the  mind  is  situated,  or  of  what 
nature  it  is  ?  Therefore  various  things  have  been 
discussed  by  philosophers  concerning  its  nature 
and  place.  But  I  will  not  conceal  what  my  own 
sentiments  are  :  not  that  I  should  affirm  that  it 
is  so  —  for  in  a  doubtful  matter  it  is  the  part 
of  a  foolish  person  to  do  this  ;  but  that  when  I 
have  set  forth  the  difficulty  of  the  matter,  you 
may  understand  how  great  is  the  magnitude  of 
the  divine  w^orks.  Some  would  have  it,  that  the 
seat  of  the  mind  is  in  the  breast.  But  if  this  is 
so,  how  wonderful  is  it,  that  a  faculty  which  is 
situated  in  an  obscure  and  dark  habitation  should 
be  employed  in  so  great  a  light  of  reason  and 
intelligence  ;  then  that  the  senses  from  every  part 
of  the  body  come  together  to  it,  so  that  it  ap- 
pears to  be  present  in  any  quarter  of  the  limbs  ! 
Others  have  said  that  its  seat  is  in  the  brain  : 
and,  indeed,  they  have  used  probable  arguments, 
saying  that  it  was  doubtless  befitting  that  that 
which  had  the  government  of  the  whole  body 
should  especially  have  its  abode  in  the  highest 
place,  as  though  in  the  citadel  of  the  body ;  and 
that  nothing  should  be  in  a  more  elevated  position 
than  that  which  governs  the  whole  by  reason, 
just  as  the  Lord  Himself,  and  Ruler  of  the  uni- 
verse, is  in  the  highest  place.  Then  they  say 
that  the  organs  which  are  the  ministers  of  each 
sense,  that  is,  of  hearing,  and  seeing,  and  smell- 
ing, are  situated  in  the  head,  and  that  the  chan- 
nels of  all  these  lead  not  to  the  breast,  but  to  I 
the  brain  :  otherwise  we  must  be  more  slow  in  | 
the  exercise  of  our  senses,  until  the  power  of 
sensation  by  a  long  course  should  descend  through 
the  neck  even  to  the  breast.  I'hese,  in  truth,  do 
not  greatly  err,  or  perchance  not  at  all. 

For  the  mind,  which  exercises   control   over 


the  body,  appears  to  be  placed  in  the  highest 
part,  the  head,  as  God  is  in  heaven  ;  but  when 
it  is  engaged  in  any  reflection,  it  appears  to  pass 
to  the  breast,  and,  as  it  were,  to  withdraw  to 
some  secret  recess,  that  it  may  elicit  and  draw 
forth  counsel,  as  it  were,  from  a  hidden  treasury. 
And  therefore,  when  we  are  intent  upon  reflec- 
tion, and  when  the  mind,  being  occupied,  has 
withdrawn  itself  to  the  inner  depth,'  we  are 
accustomed  neither  to  hear  the  things  which 
sound  about  us,  nor  to  see  the  things  which 
stand  in  our  way.  But  whether  this  is  the  case, 
it  is  assuredly  a  matter  of  admiration  how  this 
takes  place,  since  there  is  no  passage  from  the 
brain  to  the  breast.  But  if  it  is  not  so,  never- 
theless it  is  no  less  a  matter  of  admiration  that, 
by  some  divine  plan  or  other,  it  is  caused  that  it 
appears  to  be  so.  Can  any  fail  to  admire  that 
that  living  and  heavenly  faculty  which  is  called 
the  mind  or  the  soul,  is  of  such  volubility  ^  that 
it  does  not  rest  even  then  when  it  is  asleep  ;  of 
such  rapidity,  that  it  surveys  the  whole  heaven 
at  one  moment  of  time  ;  and,  if  it  wills,  flies 
over  seas,  traverses  lands  and  cities,  —  in  short, 
places  in  its  own  sight  all  things  which  it  pleases, 
however  far  and  widely  they  are  removed  ? 

And  does  any  one  wonder  if  the  divine  mind 
of  God,  being  extended  ^  through  all  parts  of 
the  universe,  runs  to  and  fro,  and  rules  all  things, 
governs  all  things,  being  everywhere  present, 
everywhere  diffused ;  when  the  strength  and 
power  of  the  human  mind,  though  enclosed 
within  a  mortal  body,  is  so  great,  that  it  can  in 
no  way  be  restrained  even  by  the  barriers  of  this 
heavy  and  slothfiil  body,  to  which  it  is  bound, 
from  bestowing  upon  itself,  in  its  impatience  of 
rest,  the  power  of  wandering  without  restraint? 
Whether,  therefore,  the  mind  has  its  dwelling  in 
the  head  or  in  the  breast,  can  any  one  compre- 
hend what  power  of  reason  effects,  that  that  in- 
comprehensible faculty  either  remains  fixed  in 
the  marrow  of  the  brain,  or  in  that  blood  divided 
into  two  parts  •♦  which  is  enclosed  in  the  heart ; 
and  not  infer  from  this  very  circumstance  how 
great  is  the  power  of  God,  because  the  soul 
does  not  see  itself,  or  of  what  nature  or  where 
it  is  ;  and  if  it  did  see,  yet  it  would  not  be  able 
to  perceive  in  what  manner  an  incorporeal  sub- 
stance is  united  with  one  which  is  corporeal? 
Or  if  the  mind  has  no  fixed  locality,  but  runs 
here  and  there  scattered  through  the  whole 
body,  —  which  is  possible,  and  was  asserted  by 
Xenocrates,  the  disciple  of  Plato,  —  then,  inas- 
much as  intelligence  is  present  in  every  part  of 

'  In  altiim  se  abdiderit.  [An  interesting  "evolution  from  self- 
consciousness,"  not  altogether  to  be  despised.  In  connection  with 
the  tripartite  nature  of  ni:in  (of  which  see  vol.  iii.  p.  474),  we  may 
well  inquire  as  to  the  seat  of  the  ^vxv  and  the  n-veii/xa,  severally,  on 
this  hint.] 

2  Mobilitatis. 

3  Intenta  di.scurrit.     [2  Chron.  xvi.  9;  Zech.  iv.  10.] 
*  liipartito. 


ON   THE   WORKMANSHIP   OF   GOD. 


297 


the  body,  it  cannot  be  understood  what  that 
mind  is,  or  what  its  qualities  are,  since  its  nature 
is  so  subtle  and  refined,  that,  though  infused 
into  solid  organs  by  a  living  and,  as  it  were, 
ardent  perception,  it  is  mingled  with  all  the 
members. 

But  take  care  that  you  never  think  it  proba- 
ble, as  Aristoxenus  said,  that  the  mind  has  no 
existence,  but  that  the  power  of  perception  ex- 
ists from  the  constitution  of  the  body  and  the 
construction  of  the  organs,  as  harmony  does  in 
the  case  of  the  lyre.  For  musicians  call  the 
stretching  and  sounding  of  the  strings  to  entire 
strains,  without  any  striking  of  notes  in  agree- 
ment with  them,  harmony.  They  will  have  it, 
therefore,  that  the  soul  in  man  exists  in  a  man- 
ner like  that  by  which  harmonious  modulation 
exists  on  the  lyre ;  namely,  that  the  firm  uniting 
of  the  separate  parts  of  the  body  and  the  vigour 
of  all  the  limbs  agreeing  together,  makes  that 
perceptible  motion,  and  adjusts  '  the  mind,  as 
well-stretched  things  produce  harmonious  sound. 
And  as,  in  the  lyre,  when  anything  has  been  in- 
terrupted or  relaxed,  the  whole  method  of  the 
strain  is  disturbed  and  destroyed ;  so  in  the 
body,  when  any  part  of  the  limbs  receives  an 
injury,  the  whole  are  weakened,  and  all  being 
corrupted  and  thrown  into  confusion,  the  power 
of  perception  is  destroyed  :  and  this  is  called 
death.  But  he,  if  he  had  possessed  any  mind, 
would  never  have  transferred  harmony  from  the 
lyre  to  man.  For  the  lyre  cannot  of  its  own 
accord  send  forth  a  sound,  so  that  there  can  be 
in  this  any  comparison  and  resemblance  to  a 
living  person ;  but  the  soul  both  reflects  and  is 
moved  of  its  own  accord.  But  if  there  were  in 
us  anything  resembling  harmony,  it  would  be 
moved  by  a  blow  from  without,  as  the  strings  of 
the  lyre  are  by  the  hands ;  whereas  without  the 
handling  of  the  artificer,  and  the  stroke  of  the 
fingers,  they  lie  mute  and  motionless.  But 
doubtless  he  ^  ought  to  have  beaten  by  the  hand, 
that  he  might  at  length  observe  ;  for  his  mind, 
badly  compacted  from  his  members,  was  in  a 
state  of  torpor. 

CHAP.    XVII.  —  OF    THE    SOUL,    AND    THE    OPINION 
OF   PHILOSOPHERS    CONCERNING    IT. 

It  remains  to  speak  of  the  soul,  although  its 
system  and  nature  cannot  be  perceived.  Nor, 
therefore,  do  we  fail  to  understand  that  the  soul 
is  immortal,  since  whatever  is  vigorous  and  is  in 
motion  by  itself  at  all  times,  and  cannot  be  seen 
or  touched,  must  be  eternal.  But  what  the  soul 
is,  is-  not  yet  agreed  upon  by  philosophers,  and 
perhaps  will  never  be  agreed  upon.  For  some 
have  said  that  it  is  blood,  others  that  it  is  fire, 


'  Concinnet. 

'  Aristoxenus,  whose  opinion  has  been  mentioned  above. 


Others  wind,  from  which  it  has  received  its  name 
of  aiiinia,  or  animus,  because  in  Greek  the  wind 
is  called  ancmos,^  and  yet  none  of  these  appears 
to  have  spoken  anything.  For  if  the  soul  ap- 
pears to  be  extinguished  when  the  blood  is 
poured  forth  through  a  wound,  or  is  exhausted 
by  the  heat  of  fevers,  it  does  not  therefore  follow 
that  the  system  of  the  soul  is  to  be  placed  in  the 
material  of  the  blood ;  as  though  a  question 
should  arise  as  to  the  nature  of  the  light  which 
we  make  use  of,  and  the  answer  should  be  given 
that  it  is  oil,  for  when  that  is  consumed  the  light 
is  extinguished  :  since  they  are  plainly  different, 
but  the  one  is  the  nourishment  of  the  other. 
Therefore  the  soul  appears  to  be  like  light,  since 
it  is  not  itself  blood,  but  is  nourished  by  the 
moisture  of  the  blood,  as  light  is  by  oil. 

But  they  who  have  supposed  it  to  be  fire  made 
use  of  this  argument,  that  when  the  soul  is  pres- 
ent the  body  is  warm,  but  on  its  departure  the 
body  grows  cold.  But  fire  is  both  without  per- 
ception and  is  seen,  and  burns  when  touched. 
But  the  soul  is  both  endowed  with  perception 
and  cannot  be  seen,  and  does  not  burn.  From 
which  it  is  evident  that  the  soul  is  something  like 
God.  But  they  who  suppose  that  it  is  wind  are 
deceived  by  this,  because  we  appear  to  live  by 
drawing  breath  from  the  air.  Varro  gi\es  this 
definition:  "The  soul  is  air  conceived  in  the 
mouth,  warmed  in  the  lungs,  heated  in  the  heart, 
diffused  into  the  body."  These  things  are  most 
plainly  false.  For  I  say  that  the  nature  of  things 
of  this  kind  is  not  so  obscure,  that  we  do  not 
even  understand  what  cannot  be  true.  If  any 
one  should  say  to  me  that  the  heaven  is  of  brass, 
or  crystal,  or,  as  Empedocles  says,  that  it  is 
frozen  air,  must  I  at  once  assent  because  I  do 
not  know  of  what  material  the  heaven  is?  For 
as  I  know  not  this,  I  know  that.  Therefore  the 
soul  is  not  air  conceived  in  the  mouth,  because 
the  soul  is  produced  much  before  air  can  be 
conceived  in  the  mouth.  For  it  is  not  intro- 
duced into  the  body  after  birth,  as  it  appears  to 
some  philosophers,  but  immediately  after  con- 
ception, when  the  divine  necessity  has  formed 
the  offspring  in  the  womb  ;  for  it  so  lives  within 
the  bowels  of  its  mother,  that  it  is  increased  in 
growth,  and  delights  to  bound  with  repeated 
beatings.  In  short,  there  must  be  a  miscarriage 
if  the  living  young  within  shall  die.  The  other 
parts  of  the  definition  have  reference  to  this,  that 
during  those  nine  months  in  which  we  were  in 
the  womb  we  appear  to  have  been  dead.  None, 
therefore,  of  these  three  opinions  is  true.  We 
cannot,  however,  say  that  they  who  held  these 
sentiments  were  false  to  such  an  extent  that  they 
said  nothing  at  all ;  for  we  live  at  once  by  the 
blood,  and  heat,  and  breath.     But  since  the  soul 


298 


ON    THE   WORKMANSHIP    OF    GOD. 


exists  in  the  body  by  the  union  of  all  these,  they 
did  not  express  what  it  was  in  its  own  proper 
sense ; '  for  as  it  cannot  be  seen,  so  it  cannot  be 
expressed. 

CH,\P.  XVIII. OF   THE   SOUL    AND   THE    MIND,   AND 

THEIR    AFFECTIONS. 

There  follows  another,  and  in  itself  an  inex- 
plicable inquiry  :  Whether  the  soul  and  the  mind 
are  the  same,  or  there  be  one  faculty  by  which 
we  live,  and  another  by  which  we  perceive  and 
have  discernment.^  There  are  not  wanting  argu- 
ments on  either  side.  For  they  who  say  that 
they  are  one  faculty  make  use  of  this  argument, 
that  we  cannot  live  without  perception,  nor  per- 
ceive without  life,  and  therefore  that  that  which 
is  incapable  of  separation  cannot  be  different ; 
but  that  whatever  it  is,  it  has  the  office  of  living 
and  the  method  of  perception.  On  which  ac- 
count two  ^  Epicurean  poets  speak  of  the  mind 
and  the  soul  indifferently.  But  they  who  say 
that  they  are  different  argue  in  this  way  :  That 
the  mind  is  one  thing,  and  the  soul  another,  may 
be  understood  from  this,  that  the  mind  may  be 
extinguished  while  the  soul  is  uninjured,  which 
is  accustomed  to  happen  in  the  case  of  the  in- 
sane ;  also,  that  the  soul  is  put  to  rest"*  by  death, 
the  mind  by  sleep,  and  indeed  in  such  a  manner 
that  it  is  not  only  ignorant  of  what  is  taking 
place, 5  or  where  it  is,  but  it  is  even  deceived  by 
the  contemplation  of  false  objects.  And  how 
this  takes  place  cannot  accurately  be  perceived  ; 
why  it  takes  place  can  be  perceived.  For  we 
can  by  no  means  rest  unless  the  mind  is  kept 
occupied  by  the  similitudes^  of  visions.  But 
the  mind  lies  hid,  oppressed  with  sleep,  as  fire 
buried  ^  by  ashes  drawn  over  it ;  but  if  you  stir 
it  a  little  it  again  blazes,  and,  as  it  were,  wakes 
up.^  I'herefore  it  is  called  away  by  images,^ 
until  the  limbs,  bedewed  with  sleep,  are  invigo- 
rated ;  for  the  body  while  the  perception  is 
awake,  although  it  lies  motionless,  yet  is  not  at 
rest,  because  the  perception  burns  in  it,  and 
vibrates  as  a  flame,  and  ke&ps  all  the  limbs 
bound  to  itself. 

But  when  the  mind  is  transferred  from  its 
application  to  the  contemplation  of  images,  then 
at  length  the  whole  body  is  resolved  into  rest. 
But  the  mind  is  transferred  from  dark  thought, 
when,  under  the  influence  of  darkness,  it  has 
begun  to  be  alone  with  itself.  While  it  is  intent 
upon  those  things  concerning  which  it  is  reflect- 

'  Proprie. 

2  [See  cap.  16,  p.  296,  note  1,  supra  ;  also  vol.  ii.  p.  102,  note 
2,  this  series.] 

^  Lucretius  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  poets  here  referred  to;  some 
think  that  Virgil,  others  that  Horace,  is  the  second. 

*  Sopiatur. 

5  Quid  fiat.     Others  read  "  quid  faciat." 

•>  Imaginibus. 

'  Sopitus. 

*  Evigilat. 

9  Simulacris. 


ing,  sleep  suddenly  creeps  on,  and  the  thought 
itself  imperceptibly  turns  aside  to  the  nearest 
appearances  :  "'  thus  it  begins  also  to  see  those 
things  which  it  had  placed  before  its  eyes.  Then 
it  proceeds  further,  and  finds  diversions"  for  it- 
self, that  it  may  not  interrupt  the  most  healthy 
repose  of  the  body.  For  as  the  mind  is  diverted 
in  the  day  by  true  sights,  so  that  it  does  not 
sleep ;  so  is  it  diverted  in  the  night  by  false 
sights,  so  that  it  is  not  aroused.  For  if  it  per- 
ceives no  images,  it  will  follow  of  necessity  either 
that  it  is  awake,  or  that  it  is  asleep  in  perpetual 
death.  Therefore  the  system  of  dreaming  has 
been  given  by  God  for  the  sake  of  sleeping ; 
and,  indeed,  it  has  been  given  to  all  animals  in 
common  ;  but  this  especially  to  man,  that  when 
God  gave  this  system  on  account  of  rest.  He 
left  to  Himself  the  power  of  teaching  man  future 
events  by  means  of  the  dream. '^  For  narratives 
often  testify  that  there  have  been  dreams  which 
have  had  an  immediate  and  a  remarkable  accom- 
plishment,'^ and  the  answers  of  our  prophets  have 
been  after  the  character  of  a  dream..^^  Qn  which 
account  they  are  not  always  true,  nor  always  false, 
as  Virgil  testified,'-^  who  supposed  that  there  were 
two  gates  for  the  passage  of  dreams.  But  those 
which  are  false  are  seen  for  the  sake  of  sleeping  ; 
those  which  are  true  are  sent  by  God,  that  by 
this  revelation  we  may  learn  impending  goods 
or  evils. 

CHAP.  XIX. OF  THE  SOUL,  AND  IT  GIVEN  BY  GOD. 

A  question  also  may  arise  respecting  this, 
whether  the  soul  is  produced  from  the  father, 
or  rather  from  the  mother,  or  indeed  from  both. 
But  I  think  that  tliis  judgment  is  to  be  formed 
as  though  in  a  doubtful  matter.'^  For  nothing 
is  true  of  these  three  opinions,  because  souls  are 
produced  neither  from  both  nor  from  either. 
For  a  body  may  be  produced  from  a  body,  since 
something  is  contributed  from  both  ;  but  a  soul 
cannot  be  produced  from  souls,  because  nothing 
can  depart  from  a  slight  and  incomprehensible 
subject.  Therefore  the  manner  of  the  produc- 
tion of  souls  belongs  entirely  to  God  alone. 

"In  fine,  we  are  all  sprung  from  a  heavenly  seed,  all 
all  have  that  same  Father." 

as  Lucretius  '^  says.  For  nothing  but  what  is 
mortal  can  be  generated  from  mortals.  Nor 
ought  he  to  be  deemed  a  father  who  in  no  way 


'°  Species. 

■'  Avocamenta. 

'=  Thus  Joseph  and  Daniel  were  interpreters  of  dreams;  and  the 
prophet  Joel  (ii.  28)  foretells  this  as  a  mark  of  the  la^t  days,  "  Your 
old  men  shall  dream  dreams,  your  young  men  shall  see  visions." 

■^  Quorum  prassens  et  ailmirabilis  fuerit  evenlus.  [.A  sober  view 
of  the  facts  revealed  in  Scripture,  and  which,  in  the  days  of  miracles, 
influenced  so  many  of  the  noblest  minds  in  the  Church. J 

'■»  Ex  parte  somnii  constiterunt.  Some  editions  read,  "  ex  parte 
somniis  constituerunt." 

•5  yEtu'iii,  vi.  894. 

">  Sed  ego  id  in  eo  jure  ab  uncipiti  vindico. 

"  ii.  991. 


ON   THE   WORKMANSHIP   OF    GOD. 


299 


perceives  that  he  has  transmitted  or  breathed  a 
soul  from  his  own  ;  nor,  if  he  perceives  it,  com- 
prehends in  his  mind  when  or  in  what  manner 
that  effect  is  produced. 

From  this  it  is  evident  that  souls  are  not  given 
by  parents,  but  by  one  and  the  same  God  and 
Father  of  all,  who  alone  has  the  law  and  method 
of  their  birth,  since  He  alone  produces  them. 
For  the  part  of  the  earthly  parent  is  nothing 
more  than  with  a  sense  of  pleasure  to  emit  the 
moisture  of  the  body,  in  which  is  the  material 
of  birth,  or  to  receive  it;  and  to  this  work 
man's  power  is  limited,'  nor  has  he  any  further 
power.  Therefore  men  wish  for  the  birth  of 
sons,  because  they  do  not  themselves  bring  it 
about.  Everything  beyond  this  is  the  work  of 
God,  —  namely,  the  conception  itself,  and  the 
moulding  of  the  body,  and  the  breathing  in  of 
life,  and  the  bringing  forth  in  safety,  and  what- 
ever afterwards  contributes  to  the  preservation 
of  man  :  it  is  His  gift  that  we  breathe,  that  we 
live,  and  are  vigorous.  For,  besides  that  we  owe 
it  to  His  bounty  that  we  are  safe  in  body,  and 
that  He  supplies  us  with  nourishment  from  vari- 
ous sources.  He  also  gives  to  man  wisdom,  which 
no  earthly  father  can  by  any  means  give  ;  and 
therefore  it  often  happens  that  foolish  sons  are 
born  from  wise  parents,  and  wise  sons  from  fool- 
ish parents,  which  some  persons  attribute  to  fate 
and  the  stars.  But  this  is  not  now  the  time  to 
discuss  the  subject  of  fate.  It  is  sufficient  to 
say  this,  that  even  if  the  stars  hold  together  the 
efficacy  of  all  things,  it  is  nevertheless  certain 
that  all  things  are  done  by  God,  who  both  made 
and  set  in  order  the  stars  themselves.  They  are 
therefore  senseless  who  detract  this  power  from 
God,  and  assign  it  to  His  work. 

He  would  have  it,  therefore,  to  be  in  our  own 
power,  whether  we  use  or  do  not  use  this  divine 
and  excellent  gift  of  God.  For,  having  granted 
this.  He  bound  man  himself  by  the  mystery^  of 
virtue,  by  which  he  might  be  able  to  gain  life. 
For  great  is  the  power,  great  the  reason,  great 
the  mysterious  purpose  of  man  ;  and  if  any  one 
shall  not  abandon  this,  nor  betray  his  fidelity 
and  devotedness,  he  must  be  happy  :  he,  in 
short,  to  sum  up  the  matter  in  few  words,  must 
of  necessity  resemble  God.  For  he  is  ui  error 
whosoever  judges  of^  man  by  his  flesh.  For 
this  worthless  body  ^  with  which  we  are  clothed 
is  the  receptacle  of  man.s  For  man  himself 
can  neither  be  touched,  nor  looked  upon,  nor 
grasped,  because  he  lies  hidden  within  this  body, 


which  is  seen.  And  if  he  shall  be  more  luxuri- 
ous and  delicate  in  this  life  than  its  nature 
demands,  if  he  shall  despise  virtue,  and  give 
himself  to  the  pursuit  of  fleshly  lusts,  he  will 
fall  and  be  pressed  down  to  the  earth ;  but  if 
(as  his  duty  is)  he  shall  readily  and  constantly 
maintain  his  position,  which  is  right  for  him,  and 
he  has  rightly  obtained,*"  —  if  he  shall  not  be  en- 
slaved to  the  earth,  which  he  ought  to  trample 
upon  and  overcome,  he  will  gain  eternal  life. 


*  Et  citra  hoc  opus  homo  resistit.  The  compound  word  "  resis- 
tit  "  is  used  for  the  simple  sistil  —  "  stands." 

2  Sacramento. 

3  Metiiur,  "  measures." 

*  Corpuscuhun.     The  diminutive  appears  to  imply  contempt. 

5  The  expression  is  too  general,  since  the  body  as  well  as  the  soul 
is  a  true  part  of  man's  nature.  [Perhaps  so;  but  Lactantius  is  think- 
ing of  St.  Paul's  expression  (Philipp.  iii.  21),  "  the  body  of  our  hit- 
]iiiliatioiL."\ 


CHAP.    XX. 


OF    HIMSELF  AND    THE   TRUTH. 


These  things  I  have  written  to  you,  Demetri- 
anus,  for  the  present  in  few  words,  and  perhaps 
with  more  obscurity  than  \vas  befitting,  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  necessity  of  circumstances 
and  the  time,  with  which  you  ought  to  be  con- 
tent, since  you  are  about  to  receive  more  and 
better  things  if  God  shall  favour  us.  Then,  ac- 
cordingly, I  will  exhort  you  with  greater  clear- 
ness and  truth  to  the  learning  of  true  philosophy. 
For  I  have  determined  to  commit  to  writing  as 
many  things  as  I  shall  be  able,  which  have  refer- 
ence to  the  condition  of  a  happy  life  ;  and  that 
indeed  against  the  philosophers,  since  they  are 
pernicious  and  weighty  for  the  disturbing  of  the 
truth.  For  the  force  of  their  eloquence  is  in- 
credible, and  their  subdety  in  argument  and 
disputation  may  easily  deceive  any  one ;  and 
these  we  will  refute  partly  by  our  own  weapons, 
but  partly  by  weapons  borrowed  from  their 
mutual  wrangling,  so  that  it  may  be  evident 
that  they  rather  mtroduced  error  than  removed 
it. 

Perhaps  you  may  wonder  that  I  venture  to 
undertake  so  great  a  deed.  Shall  we  then  suffer 
the  truth  to  be  extinguished  or  crushed  ?  I,  in 
truth,  would  more  willingly  fail  even  under  this 
burthen.  For  if  Marcus  TuUius,  the  unparalleled 
example  of  eloquence  itself,  was  often  vanquished 
by  men  void  of  learning  and  eloquence,  —  who, 
however,  were  striving  for  that  which  was  true, — 
why  should  we  despair  that  the  truth  itself  will 
by  its  own  peculiar  force  and  clearness  avail 
against  deceitful  and  captious  eloquence  ?  They 
indeed  are  wont  to  profess  themseh^es  advocates 
of  the  truth  ;  but  who  can  defend  that  which  he 
has  not  learned,  or  make  clear  to  others  that 
which  he  himself  does  not  know?  I  seem  to 
jwomise  a  great  thing  ;  but  there  is  need  of  the 
favour  of  Heaven,  that  ability  and  time  may  be 
given  us  for  following  our  purpose.  But  if  life 
is  to  be  wished  for  by  a  wise  man,  assuredly  I 
should  wish  to  live  for  no  other  reason  than  that 
I  may  effect  something  which  may  be  worthy  of 
life,  and  which  may  be  useful  to  my  readers,  if 


6  Quem  rectum  rectfi  sortitus  est. 
'  rectc  "  is  omitted. 


In  some  editions  the  word 


-oo  ON   THE   WORKMANSHIP   OF   GOD. 


not  for  eloquence,  because  there  is  in  me  but  a  enough,  and  that  I  have  discharged  the  duty  of 
shght  stream  of  elociuence,  at  any  rate  for  Uving,  1  a  man,  if  my  labour  shall  have  freed  some  men 
which  is  especially  needful.  And  when  I  have  j  from  errors,  and  have  directed  them  to  the  path 
accomplished  this,'  I  shall  think  that  1  have  lived  I  which  leads  to  heaven. 


GENERAL  NOTE  BY  THE  AMERICAN   EDITOR. 

Just  here  I  economize  a  little  spare  room  to  note  the  cynical  Gibbon's  ideas  about  Lactantius 
and  his  works.  He  quotes  him  freely,  and  recognises  his  Ciceronian  Latinity,  and  even  the  ele- 
gance of  his  rhetoric,  and  the  spirit  and  eloquence  with  which  he  can  garnish  the  "  dismal  tale  " 
of  coming  judgments,  based  on  the  Apocalypse.  But  then,  again'  he  speaks  of  him  as  an  "  obscure 
rhetorician,"  and  affects  a  doubt  as  to  his  sources  of  information,  notably  in  doubting  the  conver- 
sation between  Galerius  and  Diocletian  which  forced  the  latter  to  abdicate.  This  is  before  he 
decides  to  attribute  the  work  on  the  Deaths  of  Persecutors  to  somebody  else,  or,  rather,  to  quote 
its  author  ambiguously  as  Ccccilius.  And  here  we  may  insert  what  he  says  on  this  subject,  as 
follows  :  — 

"  It  is  certain  that  this  .  .  .  was  composed  and  published  while  Licinius,  sovereign  of  the  East,  still  preserved 
the  friendship  of  Constantine  and  of  the  Christians.  Every  reader  of  taste  must  perceive  that  the  style  is  of  a 
very  different  and  inferior  character  to  that  of  Lactantius;  and  such,  indeed,  is  the  judgment  of  Le  Clerc^  and 
Lardner.^  Three  arguments  (from  the  title  of  the  book  and  from  the  names  of  Donatus  and  CjEcilius)  are  pro- 
duced by  the  advocates  of  Lactantius.''  Each  of  these  proofs  is,  singly,  weak  and  defective ;  but  their  coucurj-ence 
has  great  weii^ht.  I  have  often  fluctuated,  and  shall  tamely^  follow  the  Colbert  MS.  in  calling  the  author,  whoever 
he  was,  Cacilius.^'' 

After  this  the  critic  adheres  to  this  ambiguity.  I  have  no  wish  to  argue  otherwise.  Quite  as 
important  are  his  notes  on  the  Institutes.  He  states  the  probable  conjecture  of  two  original 
editions,  —  the  one  under  Diocletian,  and  the  other  under  Licinius.     Then  he  says  :  ^  — 

"I  am  fl/wf'j/ convinced  that  Lactantius  dedicated  his  Iitstittitions  to  the  sovereign  of  Gaul  at  a  time  when 
Galerius,  Maximin,  and  even  Licinius,  persecuted  the  Christians;  that  is, between  the  years  A.D.  306  and  a.d.  311." 

On  the  dubious  passages  ^  he  remarks  :  ^  — 

"  The  first  and  most  imj^ortant  of  these  is,  indeed,  wanting  in  twenty-eight  Mss.,  but  is  found  in  nineteen. 
If  we  weigh  the  comparative  value  of  those  mss.,  one,  ...  in  the  King  of  France's  library,'  may  be  alleged  in  its 
favour.  But  the  passage  is  omitted  in  the  correct  MS.  of  Bologna,  which  the  Pere  de  Montfaucon  '°  ascribes  to  the 
sixth  or  seventh  century.     The  taste  of  most  of  the  editors  "  has/eV/  the  genuine  style  of  Lactantius." 

Do  not  many  indications  point  to  the  natural  suggestion  of  a  third  original  edition,  issued  after 
the  conversion  of  Constantine  ?  Or  the  questionable  passages  may  be  the  interpolations  of  Lac- 
tantius himself. 

*  Cap.  xiv.  (vol.  i.)  p.  452. 

2  Bibliotheque  Ancienne  et  Mod.,  torn.  iii.  p.  438. 

3  Credib.,  part  ii.  vol.  vii.  p.  94. 

*  The  Pfcre  Lestocq,  torn.  ii.  pp.  46-60. 

5  This  word  is  italicized  by  Gibbon. 

6  Vol.  ii.  cap.  20. 

7  Inst.,  i.  I  and  vii.  27. 

*  Vol.  ii.  cap.  2o. 

9  Now  (1880)  a  thousand  years  old. 
'°  Diariiitti  !taiiC7<m,  p.  409. 
"  "  Except  Isatus,"  says  Gibbon,  who  refers  to  the  edition  of  our  author  by  Dufresnoy,  torn.  i.  p.  596. 


OF    THE     MANNER    IN    WHICH    THE    PERSE- 
CUTORS   DIED.' 

ADDRESSED   TO  DONATUS. 


CHAP.    I. 

The  Lord  has  heard  those  supphcations  which 
you,  my  best  beloved  Donatus,^  pour  forth  in 
His  presence  all  the  day  long,  and  the  suppli- 
cations of  the  rest  of  our  brethren,  who  by  a 
glorious  confession  have  obtained  an  everlasting 
crown,  the  reward  of  their  faith.  Behold,  all  the 
adversaries  are  destroyed,  and  tranquillity  having 
been  re-established  throughout  the  Roman  em- 
pire, the  late  oppressed  Church  arises  again,  and 
the  temple  of  God,  overthrown  by  the  hands  of 
the  wicked,  is  built  with  more  glory  than  before. 
For  God  has  raised  up  princes  to  rescind  the 
impious  and  sanguinary  edicts  of  the  tyrants  and 
provide  for  the  welfare  of  mankind  ;  so  that  now 
the  cloud  of  past  times  is  dispelled,  and  peace 
and  serenity  gladden  all  hearts.  And  after  the 
furious  whirlwind  and  black  tempest,  the  heavens 
are  now  become  calm,  and  the  wished-for  light 
has  shone  forth  ;  and  now  God,  the  hearer  of 
prayer,  by  His  divine  aid  has  lifted  His  pros- 
trate and  afflicted  servants  from  the  ground,  has 
brought  to  an  end  the  united  devices  of  the 
wicked,  and  wiped  off  the  tears  from  the  faces 
of  those  who  mourned.  They  who  insulted  over 
the  Divinity,  lie  low  ;  they  who  cast  down  the 
holy  temple,  are  fallen  with  more  tremendous 
ruin ;  and  the  tormentors  of  just  men  have 
poured  out  their  guilty  souls  amidst  plagues  in- 
flicted by  Heaven,  and  amidst  deserved  tortures. 
For  God  delayed  to  punish  them,  that,  by  great 
and  marvellous  examples,  He  might  teach  pos- 
terity that  He  alone  is  God,  and  that  with  fit 
vengeance  He  executes  judgment  on  the  proud, 
the  impious,  and  the  persecutors. ^ 

Of  the  end  of  those  men  I  have  thought  good 
to  publish  a  narrative,  that  all  who  are  afar  off, 


'  [Not  "  the  persecutors,"  but  only  some  of  them.  This  treatise 
is,  in  fact,  a  most  precious  relic  of  antiquity,  and  a  striking  narrative 
of  the  events  which  led  to  the  "  conversion  of  the  Empire,"  so  called. 
Its  historical  character  is  noted  by  Gibbon,  D.  and F.,  vol.  ii.  20,  n.  40.] 

2  [See  cap.  16,  tn/ra] 

3  [  I.et  any  one  who  visits  Rome  stand  before  the  Arch  of  Con- 
stantine,  and,  while  he  looks  upon  it  (as  the  mark  of  an  epoch),  let  him 
at  the  same  time  behold  the  Colosseum  close  at  hand,  and  there  let  him 
recall  this  noble  chapter.] 


and  all  who  shall  arise  hereafter,  may  learn  how 
the  Almighty  manifested  His  power  and  sover- 
eign greatness  in  rooting  out  and  utterly  destroy- 
ing the  enemies  of  His  name.  And  this  will 
become  evident,  when  I  relate  w/io  were  the 
persecutors  of  the  Church  from  the  time  of  its 
first  constitution,  and  w/ia^  were  the  punishments 
by  which  the  divine  Judge,  in  His  severity,  took 
vengeance  on  them. 

CHAP.    II. 

In  the  latter  days  of  the  Emperor  Tiberius,  in 
the  consulship  of  Ruberius  Geminus  and  Fufius 
Geminus,  and  on  the  tenth  of  the  kalends  of 
April,-*  as  I  find  it  written,  Jesus  Christ  was  cru- 
cified by  the  Jews. 5  After  He  had  risen  again  on 
the  third  day.  He  gathered  together  His  apostles, 
whom  fear,  at  the  time  of  His  being  laid  hold 
on,  had  put  to  flight ;  and  while  He  sojourned 
with  them  forty  days.  He  opened  their  hearts, 
interpreted  to  them  the  Scripture,  which  hitherto 
had  been  wrapped  up  in  obscurity,  ordained  and 
fitted  them  for  the  preaching  of  His  word  and 
doctrine,  and  regulated  all  things  concerning  the 
institutions  of  the  New  Testament ;  and  this  hav- 
ing been  accomplished,  a  cloud  and  whirlwind 
enveloped  Him,  and  caught  Him  up  from  the 
sight  of  men  unto  heaven. 

His  apostles  were  at  that  time  eleven  in  num- 
ber, to  whom  were  added  Matthias,  in  the  room 
of  the  traitor  Judas,  and  afterwards  Paul.  Then 
were  they  dispersed  throughout  all  the  earth  to 
preach  the  Gospel,  as  the  Lord  their  Master  had 
commanded  them  ;  and  during  twenty-five  years, 
and  until  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  the  Faw- 
peror  Nero,  they  occupied  themselves  in  laying 
the  foundations  of  the  Church  in  every  province 
and  city.  And  while  Nero  reigned,  the  Apostle 
Peter  came  to  Rome,  and,  through  the  power 
of  God  committed  unto  him,  wrought  certain 
miracles,  and,  by  turning  many  to  the  true  re- 
ligion,  built  up  a  faithful  and  stedfast    temple 


*  23d  of  March. 

5  [Elucidation,  p.  322.] 


301 


;02      OF   THE   MANNER   IN   WHICH    THE    PERSECUTORS   DIED. 


unto  the  Lord.  AVhen  Nero  heard  of  those 
things,  and  observed  that  not  only  in  Rome,  but 
in  every  other  place,  a  great  multitude  revolted 
daily  from  the  worshij)  of  idols,  and,  condemning 
their  old  ways,  went  over  to  the  new  religion,  he, 
an  execrable  and  pernicious  tyrant,  sprung  for- 
ward to  raze  the  heavenly  temple  and  destroy 
the  true  faith.  He  it  was  who  first  persecuted 
the  servants  of  God ;  he  crucified  Peter,  and 
slew  Paul : '  nor  did  he  escape  with  impunity ; 
for  God  looked  on  the  affliction  of  His  people  ; 
and  therefore  the  tyrant,  bereaved  of  authority, 
and  precipitated  from  the  height  of  empire,  sud- 
denly disappeared,  and  even  the  burial-place  of 
that  noxious  wild  beast  was  nowhere  to  be  seen. 
This  has  led  some  persons  of  extravagant  im- 
agination to  suppose  that,  having  been  conveyed 
to  a  distant  region,  he  is  still  reserved  alive  ;  and 
to  him  they  apply  the  Sibylline  verses  concerning 

"The  fugitive,  who  slew  his  own  mother,  being  to  come 
from  the  uttermost  boundaries  of  the  earth ; " 

as  if  he  who  was  the  first  should  also  be  the  last 
persecutor,  and  thus  prove  the  forerunner  of 
Antichrist  !  But  we  ought  not  to  believe  those 
who,  affirming  that  the  two  prophets  Enoch  and 
Elias  have  been  translated  into  some  remote 
place  that  they  might  attend  our  Lord  when  He 
shall  come  to  judgment,^  also  fancy  that  Nero  is 
to  appear  hereafter  as  the  forerunner  of  the 
devil,  when  he  shall  come  to  lay  waste  the  earth 
and  overthrow  mankind. 

CHAP.    III. 

After  an  inter\-al  of  some  years  from  the  death 
of  Nero,  there  arose  another  tyrant  no  less  wicked 
(Domitian),  who,  although  his  government  was 
exceedingly  odious,  for  a  very  long  tiiTie  op- 
pressed his  subjects,  and  reigned  in  security, 
until  at  length  he  stretched  forth  his  impious 
hands  against  the  Lord.  Having  been  instigated 
by  evil  demons  to  persecute  the  righteous  people, 
he  was  then  delivered  into  the  power  of  his 
enemies,  and  suffered  due  punishment.  To  be 
murdered  in  his  own  palace  was  not  vengeance 
ample  enough  :  the  very  memory  of  his  name 
was  erased.  For  although  he  had  erected  many 
admirable  edifices,  and  rebuilt  the  Capitol,  and 
left  other  distinguished  marks  of  his  magnificence, 
yet  the  senate  did  so  persecute  his  name,  as  to 
leave  no  remains  of  his  statues,  or  traces  of  the 
inscriptions  put  up  in  honour  of  him  ;  and  by 
most  solemn  and  severe  decrees  it  branded  him, 
even  after  death,  with  perpetual  infamy.  Thus, 
the  commands  of  the  tyrant  having  been  re- 
scinded, the  Church  was  not  only  restored  to 
her  former  state,  but  she  shone  forth  with  ad- 


'  [St.  Peter,  as  a  Jew,  could  be  thus  dealt  with-,  St.  Paul,  as  a 
Roman,  was  beheaded.     See  p.  120,  note  7,  sttfira.] 

2  [Note  the  incredulity  of  Lactantius.     But  see  vol.  iv.  p.  219.] 


ditional  splendour,  and  became  more  and  more 
flourishing.  And  in  the  times  that  followed, 
while  many  well-deserving  princes  guided  the 
helm  of  the  Roman  empire,  the  Church  suffered 
no  violent  assaults  from  her  enemies,  and  she 
extended  her  hands  unto  the  east  and  unto  the 
west,  insomuch  that  now  there  was  not  any 
the  most  remote  corner  of  the  earth  to  which  the 
divine  religion  had  not  penetrated,  or  any  nation 
of  manners  so  barbarous  that  did  not,  by  being 
converted  to  the  worship  of  God,  become  mild 
and  gentle  .3 

CHAP.    IV. 

This  long  peace,'*  however,  was  afterwards  in- 
terrupted. Decius  appeared  in  the  world,  an 
accursed  wild  beast,  to  afflict  the  Church,  —  and 
taho  but  a  bad  man  would  persecute  religion? 
It  seems  as  if  he  had  been  raised  to  sovereign 
eminence,  at  once  to  rage  against  God,  and  at 
once  to  fall ;  for,  having  undertaken  an  expedi- 
tion against  the  Carpi,  who  had  then  possessed 
themselves  of  Dacia  and  Moefia,  he  was  suddenly 
surrounded  by  the  barbarians,  and  slain,  together 
with  great  part  of  his  army ;  nor  could  he  be 
honoured  with  the  rites  of  sepulture,  but,  stripped 
and  naked,  he  lay  to  be  devoured  by  wild  beasts 
and  birds,5  —  a  fit  end  for  the  enemy  of  God. 

CHAP.    V. 

And  presently  Valerian  also,  in  a  mood  alike 
frantic,  lifted  up  his  impious  hands  to  assault 
God,  and,  although  his  time  was  short,  shed 
much  righteous  blood.  But  God  punished  him 
in  a  new  and  extraordinary  manner,  that  it  might 
be  a  lesson  to  future  ages  that  the  adversaries 
of  Heaven  always  receive  the  just  recompense  of 
their  iniquities.  He,  having  been  made  prisoner 
by  the  Persians,  lost  not  only  that  power  which 
he  had  exercised  without  moderation,  but  also 
the  liberty  of  which  he  had  deprived  others  ; 
and  he  wasted  the  remainder  of  his  days  in  the 
vilest  condition  of  slavery  :  for  Sapores,  the  king 
of  the  Persians,  who  had  made  him  prisoner, 
whenever  he  chose  to  get  into  his  carriage  or  to 
mount  on  horseback,  commanded  the  Roman 
to  stoop  and  present  his  back ;  then,  setting  his 
foot  on  the  shoulders  of  Valerian,  he  said,  with 
a  smile  of  reproach,  "  This  is  true,  and  not  what 
the  Romans  delineate  on  board  or  plaster." 
Valerian  lived  for  a  considerable  time  under  the 
well-merited  insults  of  his  conqueror  ;  so  that  the 
Roman  name  remained  long  the  scoff  and  deris- 
ion of  the  barbarians  :  and  this  also  was  added 
to  the  severity  of  his  punishment,  that  although 
he  had  an  emperor  for  his  son,  he  found  no  one 
to  revenge  his  captivity  and  most  abject  and  ser- 


3  [See  especially  vol.  iv.  p.  141  for  the  intermediary  pauses  of 
persecutions,  while  yet  in  many  places  Christians  "  died  daily."] 
*  [Most  noteworthy  in  corroboration  of  the  earlier  Fathers.] 
5   [Jer.  xxii.  ly  and  xxxvi.  30.] 


OF   THE    MANNER    IN   WHICH    THE    PERSECUTORS    DIED.      303 


vile  state  ;  neither  indeed  was  he  ever  demanded 
back.  Afterward,  when  he  had  finished  this 
shameful  life  under  so  great  dishonour,  he  was 
flayed,  and  his  skin,  stripped  from  the  flesh,  was 
dyed  with  vermilion,  and  placed  in  the  temple 
of  the  gods  of  the  barbarians,  that  the  remem- 
brance of  a  triumph  so  signal  might  be  perpetu- 
ated, and  that  this  spectacle  might  always  be 
exhibited  to  our  ambassadors,  as  an  admonition 
to  the  Romans,  that,  beholding  the  spoils  of  their 
captived  emperor  in  a  Persian  temple,  they 
should  not  place  too  great  confidence  in  their 
own  strength. 

Now  since  God  so  punished  the  sacrilegious, 
is  it  not  strange  that  any  one  should  afterward 
have  dared  to  do,  or  even  to  devise,  aught  against 
the  majesty  of  the  one  God,  who  governs  and 
supports  all  things  ? 

CHAP.    VI. 

Aurelian  might  have  recollected  the  fate  of 
the  captived  emperor,  yet,  being  of  a  nature  out- 
rageous and  headstrong,  he  forgot  both  his  sin 
and  its  punishment,  and  by  deeds  of  cruelty  irri- 
tated the  divine  wrath.  He  was  not,  however, 
permitted  to  accomplish  what  he  had  devised  ; 
for  just  as  he  began  to  give  a  loose  to  his  rage, 
he  was  slain.  His  bloody  edicts  had  not  yet 
reached  the  more  distant  provinces,  when  he 
himself  lay  all  bloody  on  the  earth  at  Caenophru- 
rium  in  Thrace,  assassinated  by  his  familiar 
friends,  who  had  taken  up  groundless  suspicions 
against  him. 

Examples  of  such  a  nature,  and  so  numerous, 
ought  to  have  deterred  succeeding  tyrants ; 
nevertheless  they  were  not  only  not  .dismayed, 
but,  in  their  misdeeds  against  God,  became  more 
bold  and  presumptuous. 

CHAP.    VII. 

While  Diocletian,  that  author  of  ill,  and  de- 
viser of  misery,  was  ruining  all  things,  he  could 
not  withhold  his  insults,  not  even  against  God. 
This  man,  by  avarice  partly,  and  partly  by  timid 
counsels,  overturned  the  Roman  empire.  For 
he  made  choice  of  three  persons  to  share  the 
government  with  him  ;  and  thus,  the  empire 
having  been  quartered,  armies  were  multiplied, 
and  each  of  the  four  princes  strove  to  maintain  a 
much  more  considerable  military  force  than  any 
sole  emperor  had  done  in  times  past."  There 
began  to  be  fewer  men  who  paid  taxes  than  there 
were  who  received  wages  ;  so  that  the  means  of 
the  husliandmen  being  exhausted  by  enormous 
impositions,  the  farms  were  abandoned,  culti- 
vated grounds  became  woodland,  and  universal 
dismay  prevailed.  Besides,  the  provinces  were 
divided  into  minute  portions,  and  many  presi- 

'  [See  p.  12,  note  i,  sttpra.\ 


dents  and  a  multitude  of  inferior  oiificers  lay 
heavy  on  each  territory,  and  almost  on  each  city. 
There  were  also  many  stewards  of  different  de- 
grees, and  deputies  of  presidents.  Very  few 
civil  causes  came  before  them  :  but  there  were 
condemnations  daily,  and  forfeitures  frequently 
inflicted  ;  taxes  on  numberless  commodities,  and 
those  not  only  often  repeated,  but  perpetual, 
and,  in  exacting  them,  intolerable  wrongs. 

Whatever  was  laid  on  for  the  maintenance  of 
the  soldiery  might  have  been  endured  ;  but  Dio- 
cletian, through  his  insatiable  avarice,  would 
never  allow  the  sums  of  money  in  his  treasury 
to  be  diminished  :  he  was  constantly  heaping  to- 
gether extraordinary  aids  and  free  gifts,  that  his 
original  hoards  might  remain  untouched  and  in- 
violable. He  also,  when  by  various  extortions 
he  had  made  all  things  exceedingly  dear,  at- 
tempted by  an  ordinance  to  limit  their  prices. 
Then  much  blood  was  shed  for  the  veriest  trifles  ; 
men  were  afraid  to  expose  aught  to  sale,  and  the 
scarcity  became  more  excessive  and  grievous 
than  ever,  until,  in  the  end,  the  ordinance,  after 
having  proved  destructive  to  multitudes,  was  from 
mere  necessity  abrogated.  To  this  there  were 
added  a  certain  endless  passion  for  building, 
and  on  that  account,  endless  exactions  from  the 
provinces  for  furnishing  wages  to  labourers  and 
artificers,  and  supplying  carriages  and  whatever 
else  was  requisite  to  the  works  which  he  pro- 
jected. Here  public  halls,  there  a  circus,  here  a 
mint,  and  there  a  workhouse  for  making  imple- 
ments of  war  ;  in  one  place  a  habitation  for  his 
empress,  and  in  another  for  his  daughter.  Pres- 
ently great  part  of  the  city  was  quitted,  and  all 
men  removed  with  their  wives  and  children,  as 
from  a  town  taken  by  enemies  ;  and  when  those 
buildings  were  com])leted,  to  the  destruction  of 
whole  provinces,  he  said,  "  They  are  not  right, 
let  them  be  done  on  another  plan."  Then  they 
were  to  be  puUed  down,  or  altered,  to  undergo 
perhaps  a  future  demolition.  By  such  folly  was 
he  continually  endeavouring  to  equal  Nicomedia 
with  the  city  Rome  in  magnificence. 

I  omit  mentioning  how  many  perished  on  ac- 
count of  their  possessions  or  wealth  ;  for  such 
evils  were  exceedingly  frequent,  and  through 
their  frequency  appeared  almost  lawful.  But 
this  was  peculiar  to  him,  that  whenever  he  saw 
a  field  remarkably  well  cultivated,  or  a  house  of 
uncommon  elegance,  a  false  accusation  and  a 
capital  punishment  were  straightway  prepared 
against  the  proprietor ;  so  that  it  seemed  as  if 
Diocletian  could  not  be  guilty  of  rapine  without 
also  shedding  blood. 

CHAP.    VIII, 

What  was  the  character  of  his  brother  in  em- 
pire, Maximian,  called  HercuUus?  Not  unlike 
to  that  of  Diocletian  ;  and,  indeed,  to  render 


304     OF   THE   MANNER   IN   WHICH   THE   PERSECUTORS   DIED. 


their  friendship  so  close  and  faithful  as  it  was, 
there  must  have  been  in  them  a  sameness  of  in- 
clinations and  purposes,  a  corresponding  will  and 
unanimity  in  judgment.  Herein  alone  they  were 
different,  that  Diocletian  was  more  avaricious 
and  less  resolute,  and  that  Maximian,  with  less 
avarice,  had  a  bolder  spirit,  prone  not  to  good, 
but  to  evil.  For  while  he  possessed  Italy,  itself 
the  chief  seat  of  empire,  and  while  other  very 
opulent  provinces,  such  as  Africa  and  Spain, 
were  near  at  hand,  he  took  little  care  to  preserve 
those  treasures  which  he  had  such  fair  oppor- 
tunities of  amassing.  Whenever  he  stood  in  need 
of  more,  the  richest  senators  were  presently 
charged,  by  suborned  evidences,  as  guilty  of 
aspiring  to  the  empire  ;  so  that  the  chief  lumina- 
ries of  the  senate  were  daily  extinguished.  And 
thus  the  treasury,  delighting  in  blood,  overflowed 
with  ill-gotten  wealth. 

Add  to  all  this  the  incontinency  of  that  pesti- 
lent wretch,  not  only  in  debauching  males,  which 
is  hateful  and  abominable,  but  also  in  the  viola- 
tion of  the  daughters  of  the  principal  men  of  the 
state  ;  for  wherever  he  journeyed,  virgins  were 
suddenly  torn  from  the  presence  of  their  parents. 
In  such  enormities  he  placed  his  supreme  de- 
light, and  to  indulge  to  the  utmost  his  lust  and 
flagitious  desires  was  in  his  judgment  the  felicity 
of  his  reign. 

I  pass  over  Constantius,  a  prince  unlike  the 
others,  and  wortiiy  to  have  had  the  sole  gov- 
ernment of  the  empire. 

CHAP.    IX. 

But  the  other  Maximian  (Galerius),  chosen 
by  Diocletian  for  his  son-in-law,  was  worse,  not 
only  than  those  two  princes  whom  our  own 
times  have  experienced,  but  worse  than  all  the 
bad  princes  of  former  days.  In  this  wild  beast 
there  dwelt  a  native  barbarity  and  a  savageness 
foreign  to  Roman  blood  ;  and  no  wonder,  for 
his  mother  was  born  beyond  the  Danube,  and  it 
was  an  inroad  of  the  Carpi  that  obliged  her  to 
cross  over  and  take  refuge  in  New  Dacia.  The 
form  of  Galerius  corresponded  with  his  manners. 
Of  stature  tall,  full  of  flesh,  and  swollen  to  a 
horrible  bulk  of  corpulency ;  by  his  speech, 
gestures,  and  looks,  he  made  himself  a  terror  to 
all  that  came  near  him.  His  father-in-law,  too, 
dreaded  him  excessively.  The  cause  was  this. 
Narseus,  king  of  the  Persians,  emulating  the  ex- 
ample set  him  by  his  grandfather  Sapores,  as- 
sembled a  great  army,  and  aimed  at  becoming 
master  of  the  eastern  provinces  of  the  Roman 
empire.  Diocletian,  apt  to  be  low-spirited  and 
timorous  in  every  commotion,  and  fearing  a 
fate  like  that  of  Valerian,  would  not  in  person 
encounter  Narseus ;  but  he  sent  Galerius  by 
the  way  of  Armenia,  while  he  himself  halted  in 
the  eastern  provinces,  and  anxiously  watched  the 


event.  It  is  a  custom  amongst  the  barbarians  to 
take  everything  that  belongs  to  them  into  the 
field.  Galerius  laid  an  ambush  for  them,  and 
easily  overthrew  men  embarrassed  with  the  mul- 
titude of  their  followers  and  with  their  baggage. 
Having  put  Narseus  to  flight,  and  returned  with 
much  spoil,  his  own  pride  and  Diocletian's  fears 
were  greatly  increased.  For  after  this  victory 
he  rose  to  such  a  pitch  of  haughtiness  as  to  re- 
ject the  appellation  of  Csesar ;  '  and  when  he 
heard  that  appellation  in  letters  addressed  to 
him,  he  cried  out,  with  a  stern  look  and  terrible 
voice,  "  How  long  am  I  to  be  Ccesar?  "  Then 
he  began  to  act  extravagantly,  insomuch  that, 
as  if  he  had  been  a  second  Romulus,  he  wished 
to  pass  for  and  to  be  called  the  offspring  of 
Mars  ;  and  that  he  might  appear  the  issue  of  a 
divinity,  he  was  willing  that  his  mother  Romula 
should  be  dishonoured  with  the  name  of  adul- 
teress. But,  not  to  confound  the  chronological 
order  of  events,  I  delay  the  recital  of  his  actions  ; 
for  indeed  afterwards,  when  Galerius  got  the 
title  of  emperor,  his  father-in-law  having  been 
divested  of  the  imperial  purple,  he  became  alto- 
gether outrageous,  and  of  unbounded  arrogance. 
While  by  such  a  conduct,  and  with  such  asso- 
ciates, Diodes  —  for  t/iaf  was  the  name  of  Dio- 
cletian before  he  attained  sovereignty — occupied 
himself  in  subverting  the  commonweal,  there 
was  no  evil  which  his  crimes  did  not  deserve  : 
nevertheless  he  reigned  most  prosperously,  as 
long  as  he  forbore  to  defile  his  hands  with  the 
blood  of  the  just ;  and  what  cause  he  had  for 
persecuting  them,  I  come  now  to  explain. 

CHAP.    X. 

Diocletian,  as  being  of  a  timorous  disposition, 
was  a  searcher  into  futurity,  and  during  his 
abode  in  the  East  he  began  to  slay  victims,  that 
from  their  livers  he  might  obtain  a  prognostic 
of  events ;  and  while  he  sacrificed,  some  at- 
tendants of  his,  who  were  Christians,  stood  by, 
and  they  put  the  immortal  sign  on  their  fore- 
heads. At  this  the  demons  were  chased  away, 
and  the  holy  rites  interrupted.  The  soothsay- 
ers trembled,  unable  to  investigate  the  wonted 
marks  on  the  entrails  of  the  victims.  They  fre- 
quently repeated  the  sacrifices,  as  if  the  former 
had  been  unpropitious  ;  but  the  victims,  slain 
from  time  to  time,  afforded  no  tokens  for  divina- 
tion. At  length  Tages,  the  chief  of  the  sooth- 
sayers,^  either  from  guess  or  from  his  own 
observation,  said,  "  There  are  profane  persons 
here,  who  obstruct  the  rites."  Then  Diocletian, 
in  furious  passion,  ordered  not  only  all  who 
were  assisting  at  the  holy  ceremonies,  but  also 


'  [On  which  see  cap.  2o,  infra,  and  preceding  chapters  ] 
2   [Nothing  easier  than  for  these  to  pretend  such  a  difficulty,  in 
order  to  incite   the  emperor  to  severities.     They  may  have  found,  it 
convenient  to  represent  the  sign  of  tiie  cross  as  the  source  of  their 
inability  to  give  oracles.J 


OF   THE    MANNER    IN    WHICH    THE    PERSECUTORS    DIED.     305 


all  who  resided  within  the  palace,  to  sacrifice, 
and,  in  case  of  their  refusal,  to  be  scourged. 
And  further,  by  letters  to  the  commanding  offi- 
cers, he  enjoined  that  all  soldiers  should  be 
forced  to  the  like  impiety,  under  pain  of  being 
dismissed  the  service.  Thus  far  his  rage  pro- 
ceeded ;  but  at  that  season  he  did  nothing  more 
against  the  law  and  religion  of  God.  After  an  in- 
terval of  some  time  he  went  to  winter  in  Bithynia  ; 
and  presently  Galerius  Caesar  came  thither,  in- 
flamed with  furious  resentment,  and  purposing 
to  excite  the  inconsiderate  old  man  to  carry  on 
that  persecution  which  he  had  begun  against  the 
Christians.  I  have  learned  that  the  cause  of  his 
fury  was  as  follows. 

CHAP.    XI. 

The  mother  of  Galerius,  a  woman  exceedingly 
superstitious,  was  a  votary  of  the  gods  of  the 
mountains.  Being  of  such  a  character,  she 
made  sacrifices  almost  every  day,  and  she  feasted 
her  servants  on  the  meat  offered  to  idols  :  but 
the  Christians  of  her  family  would  not  partake 
of  those  entertainments  ;  and  while  she  feasted 
with  the  Gentiles,  they  continued  in  fasting  and 
prayer.  On  this  account  she  conceived  ill-will 
against  the  Christians,  and  by  woman-like  com- 
plaints instigated  her  son,  no  less  superstitious 
than  herself,  to  destroy  them.  So,  during  the 
whole  winter,  Diocletian  and  Galerius  held  coun- 
cils together,  at  which  no  one  else  assisted  ;  and 
it  was  the  universal  opinion  that  their  confer- 
ences respected  the  most  momentous  affairs  of 
the  empire.  The  old  man  long  opposed  the  fury 
of  Galerius,  and  showed  how  pernicious  it  would 
be  to  raise  disturbances  throughout  the  world 
and  to  shed  so  much  blood  ;  that  the  Christians 
were  wont  with  eagerness  to  meet  death  ;  and 
that  it  would  be  enough  for  him  to  exclude 
persons  of  that  religion  from  the  court '  and  the 
army.  Yet  he  could  not  restrain  the  madness 
of  that  obstinate  man.  He  resolved,  therefore, 
to  take  the  opinion  of  his  friends.  Now  this 
was  a  circumstance  in  the  bad  disposition  of 
Diocletian,  that  whenever  he  determined  to  do 
good,  he  did  it  without  advice,  that  the  praise 
might  be  all  his  own  ;  but  whenever  he  deter- 
mined to  do  ill,  which  he  was  sensible  would  be 
blamed,  he  called  in  many  advisers,  that  his 
own  fault  might  be  imputed  to  other  men  :  and 
therefore  a  few  civil  magistrates,  and  a  few  mili- 
tary commanders,  were  admitted  to  give  their 
counsel ;  and  the  question  was  put  to  them  ac- 
cording to  priority  of  rank.  Some,  through 
personal  ill-will  towards  the  Christians,  were  of 
opinion  that  they  ought  to  be  cut  off,  as  enemies 
of  the  gods  and  adversaries  of  the  established 
religious  ceremonies.     Others  thought  different- 


*  [A  just  statement  of  Diocletian's  earlier  disposition.     See.  vol. 
■VI.  p.  158,  the  beautiful  letter  of  Thconas.J 


ly,  but,  having  understood  the  will  of  Galerius, 
they,  either  from  dread  of  displeasing  or  from 
a  desire  of  gratifying  him,  concurred  in  the 
opinion  given  against  the  Christians.  Yet  not 
even  then  could  the  emperor  be  prevailed  upon 
to  yield  his  assent.  He  determined  above  all  to 
consult  his  gods ;  and  to  that  end  he  despatched 
a  soothsayer  to  inquire  of  Apollo  at  Miletus, 
whose  answer  was  such  as  might  be  expected 
from  an  enemy  of  the  divine  religion.  So 
Diocletian  was  drawn  over  from  his  purpose. 
But  although  he  could  struggle  no  longer  against 
his  friends,  and  against  Caesar  and  Apollo,  yet 
still  he  attempted  to  observe  such  moderation 
as  to  command  the  business  to  be  carried 
through  without  bloodshed ;  whereas  Galerius 
would  have  had  all  persons  burnt  alive  who  re- 
fused to  sacrifice. 

CHAP.    XII. 

A  fit  and  auspicious  day  was  sought  out  for 
the  accomplishment  of  this  undertaking  ;  and  the 
festival  of  the  god  Terminus,  celebrated  on  the 
seventh  of  the  kalends  of  March,=  was  chosen, 
in  preference  to  all  others,  to  terminate,  as  it 
were,  the  Christian  religion. 

"That  day,  the  harbinger  of  death,  arose, 
First  cause  of  ill,  and  long  enduring  woes;" 

of  woes  which  befell  not  only  the  Christians,  but 
the  whole  earth.  When  that  day  dawned,  in 
the  eighth  consulship  of  Diocletian  and  seventh 
of  Maximian,  suddenly,  while  it  was  yet  hardly 
light,  the  prefect,  together  with  chief  command- 
ers, tribunes,  and  officers  of  the  treasury,  came 
to  the  church  in  Nicomedia,  and  the  gates 
having  been  forced  open,  they  searched  every- 
where for  an  image  of  the  Divinity.  The  books 
of  the  Holy  Scriptures  were  found,  and  they 
were  committed  to  the  flames  ;  the  utensils  and 
furniture  of  the  church  were  abandoned  to  pil- 
lage :  all  was  rapine,  confusion,  tumult.  That 
church,  situated  on  rising  ground,  was  within 
view  of  the  palace ;  and  Diocletian  and  Galeri- 
us stood,  as  if  on  a  watch-tower,  disputing  long 
whether  it  ought  to  be  set  on  fire.  The  senti- 
ment of  Diocletian  prevailed,  who  dreaded  lest, 
so  great  a  fire  being  once  kindled,  some  part  of 
the  city  might  be  burnt ;  for  there  were  many 
and  large  buildings  that  surrounded  the  church. 
Then  the  Pretorian  Guards  came  in  batde  array, 
with  axes  and  other  iron  instruments,  and  having 
been  let  loose  everywhere,  they  in  a  few  hours 
levelled  that  very  lofty  edifice  with  the  ground.^ 

CHAP.    XIII. 

Next  day  an  edict  was  published,  depriving 
the   Christians   of    all   honours   and    dignities; 


2  23d  of  February. 

3  [bee  cap.  15,  I'/t/ra.} 


3o6      OF    THE    MANNER    IN    WHICH    THE    PERSECUTORS    DIED. 


ordaining  also  that,  witliout  any  distinction  of 
rank  or  degree,  they  should  be  subjected  to 
tortures,  and  that  every  suit  at  law  should  be 
received  against  them ;  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  they  were  debarred  from  being  plaintiffs 
in  questions  of  wrong,  adultery,  or  theft ;  and, 
finally,  that  they  should  neither  be  capable  of 
freedom,  nor  have  right  of  suffrage.  A  certain 
person  tore  down  this  edict,  and  cut  it  in  pieces, 
improperly  indeed,  but  with  high  spirit,  saying 
in  scorn,  "  These  are  the  triumphs  of  Goths  and 
Sarmatians."  Having  been  instandy  seized  and 
brought  to  judgment,  he  was  not  only  tortured, 
but  burnt  alive,  in  the  forms  of  law  ;  and  having 
displayed  ailmirable  patience  under  sufferings, 
he  was  consumed  to  ashes. 

CHAP.    XIV. 

But  Galerius,  not  satisfied  with  the  tenor  of 
the  edict,  sought  in  another  way  to  gain  on  the 
emperor.  That  he  might  urge  him  to  excess 
of  cruelty  in  persecution,  he  employed  private 
emissaries  to  set  the  palace  on  fire  ;  and  some 
part  of  it  having  been  burnt,  the  blame  was  laid 
on  the  Christians  as  public  enemies  ;  and  the 
very  appellation  of  Christian  grew  odious  '  on 
account  of  that  fire.  It  was  said  that  the  Chris- 
tians, in  concert  with  the  eunuchs,  had  plotted 
to  destroy  the  princes  ;  and  that  both  of  the 
princes  had  well-nigh  been  burnt  alive  in  their 
own  palace.  Diocletian,  shrewd  and  intelligent 
as  he  always  chose  to  appear,  suspected  nothing 
of  the  contrivance,  but,  inflamed  with  anger, 
immediately  commanded  that  all  his  own  domes- 
tics should  be  tortured  to  force  a  confession  of 
the  plot.  He  sat  on  his  tribunal,  and  saw  inno- 
cent men  tormented  by  fire  to  make  discovery. 
All  magistrates,  and  all  who  had  superintendency 
in  the  imperial  palace,  obtained  special  commis- 
sions to  administer  the  torture  ;  and  they  strove 
with  each  other  who  should  be  first  in  bringing 
to  light  the  conspiracy.  No  circumstances,  how- 
ever, of  the  fact  were  detected  anywhere  ;  for 
no  one  applied  the  torture  to  any  domestics  of 
Galerius.  He  himself  was  ever  with  Diocletian, 
constantly  urging  him,  and  never  allowing  the 
passions  of  the  inconsiderate  old  man  to  cool. 
Then,  after  an  interval  of  fifteen  days,  he  at- 
tempted a  second  fire  ;  but  that  was  perceived 
quickly,  and  extinguished.  Still,  however,  its 
author  remained  unknown.  On  that  very  day, 
Galerius,  who  in  the  middle  of  winter  had  pre- 
pared for  his  departure,  suddenly  hurried  out  of 
the  city,  protesting  that  he  fled  to  escape  being 
burnt  alive. 

CHAP.    XV. 

And  now  Diocletian  raged,  not  only  against 
his  own  domestics,  but  indiscriminately  against 


'  [That  it  had  become  in  some  degree  popular,  see  evidence, 
voL  VI.  pp.  158-160.]  -  « 


all ;  and  he  began  by  forcing  his  daughter  Valeria 
and  his  wife  Prisca  to  be  polluted  by  sacrificing. 
Eunuchs,  once  the  most  powerful,  and  who  had 
chief  authority  at  court  and  with  the  emperor, 
were  slain.  Presbyters  and  other  officers  of  the 
Church  were  seized,  without  evidence  by  wit- 
nesses or  confession,  condemned,  and  together 
with  their  families  led  to  execution.  In  burning 
alive,  no  distinction  of  sex  or  age  was  regarded ; 
and  because  of  their  great  multitude,  they  were 
not  burnt  one  after  another,  but  a  herd  of  them 
were  encircled  with  the  same  fire  ;  and  servants, 
having  millstones  tied  about  their  necks,  were 
cast  into  the  sea.  Nor  was  the  persecution  less 
grievous  on  the  rest  of  the  people  of  God ;  for 
the  judges,  dispersed  through  all  the  temples, 
sought  to  compel  every  one  to  sacrifice.  The 
prisons  were  crowded  ;  tortures,  hitherto  unheard 
of,  were  invented  ;  and  lest  justice  should  be  in- 
advertently administered  to  a  Christian,  altars 
were  placed  in  the  courts  of  justice,  hard  by  the 
tribunal,  that  every  litigant  might  offer  incense 
before  his  cause  could  be  heard.  Thus  judges 
were  no  otherwise  approached  than  divinities. 
Mandates  also  had  gone  to  Maximian  Herculius 
and  Constantius,  requiring  their  concurrence  in 
the  execution  of  the  edicts ;  for  in  matters  even 
of  such  mighty  importance  their  opinion  was 
never  once  asked.  Herculius,  a  person  of  no 
merciful  temper,  yielded  ready  obedience,  and 
enforced  the  edicts  throughout  his  dominions  of 
Italy.  Constantius,  on  the  other  hand,  lest  he 
should  have  seemed  to  dissent  from  the  injunc- 
tions of  his  superiors,  permitted  the  demolition 
of  churches,  —  mere  walls,  and  capable  of  being 
built  up  again,  —  but  he  preserved  entire  that 
true  temple  of  God,  which  is  the  human  body.^ 

CHAP.    XVI. 

Thus  was  all  the  earth  afflicted  ;  and  from  east 
to  west,  except  in  the  territories  of  Gaul,  three 
ravenous  wild  beasts  continued  to  rage. 

"  Had  I  a  hundred  mouths,  a  hundred  tongues, 
A  voice  of  brass,  and  adamantine  lungs, 
Not  half  the  dreadful  scene  could  I  disclose," 

or  recount  the  punishments  inflicted  by  the  rulers 
in  every  province  on  religious  and  innocent  men. 
But  what  need  of  a  particular  recital  of  those 
things,  especially  to  you,  my  best  beloved  Do- 
natus,3  who  above  all  others  was  exposed  to  the 
storm  of  that  violent  persecution?  For  when 
you  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  prefect 
Flaccinian,  no  puny  murderer,  and  afterwards  of 
Hierocles,  who  from  a  deputy  became  president 
of  Bithynia,  the  author  and  adviser  of  the  perse- 
cution, and  last  of  all  into  the  hands  of  his  suc- 


2  [Truly  an  eloquent  passage,  and  a  tribute  to  Constantius,  which 
Constantine,  in  filial  humour,  must  have  relished.] 
i  [See  p.  301,  supra. \ 


OF   THE    MANNER    IN   WHICH    THE    PERSECUTORS    DIED.      307 


cessor  Priscillian,  you  displayed  to  mankind  a 
pattern  of  invincible  magnanimity.  Having 
been  nine  times  exposed  to  racks  and  diversified 
torments,  nine  times  by  a  glorious  profession  of 
your  faith  you  foiled  the  adversary ;  in  nine 
combats  you  subdued  the  devil  and  his  chosen 
soldiers  ;  and  by  nine  victories  you  triumphed 
over  this  world  and  its  terrors.  How  pleasing 
the  spectacle  to  God,  when  He  beheld  you  a 
conqueror,  yoking  in  your  chariot  not  white 
horses,  nor  enormous  elephants,  but  those  very 
men  who  had  led  captive  the  nations  !  After 
this  sort  to  lord  it  over  the  lords  of  the  earth  is 
triumph  indeed  !  Now,  by  your  valour  were 
they  conquered,  when  you  set  at  defiance  their 
flagitious  edicts,  and,  through  stedfast  faith  and 
the  fortitude  of  your  soul,  you  routed  all  the 
vain  terrors  of  tyrannical  authority.  Against 
you  neither  scourges,  nor  iron  claws,  nor  fire, 
nor  sword,  nor  various  kinds  of  torture,  availed 
aught ;  and  no  violence  could  bereave  you  of 
your  fidelity  and  persevering  resolution.  This 
it  is  to  be  a  disciple  of  God,  and  this  it  is 
to  be  a  soldier  of  Christ ;  a  soldier  whom  no 
enemy  can  dislodge,  or  wolf  snatch,  from  the 
heavenly  camp ;  no  artifice  ensnare,  or  pain  of 
body  subdue,  or  torments  overthrow.  At  length, 
after  those  nine  glorious  combats,  in  which  the 
devil  was  vanquished  by  you,  he  dared  not  to 
enter  the  lists  again  with  one  whom,  by  repeated 
trials,  he  had  found  unconquerable  ;  and  he  ab- 
stained from  challenging  you  any  more,  lest  you 
should  have  laid  hold  on  the  garland  of  victory 
already  stretched  out  to  you  ;  an  unfading  gar- 
land, which,  although  you  have  not  at  present 
received  it,  is  laid  up  in  the  kingdom  of  the 
Lord  for  your  virtue  and  deserts.  But  let  us 
now  return  to  the  course  of  our  narrative. 

CHAP.  XVII. 

The  wicked  plan  having  been  carried  into  exe- 
cution, Diocletian,  whom  prosperity  had  now 
abandoned,  set  out  instandy  for  Rome,  there 
to  celebrate  the  commencement  of  the  twen- 
tieth year  of  his  reign.  That  solemnity  was 
performed  on  the  twelfth  of  the  kalends  of 
December ;  '  and  suddenly  the  emperor,  unable 
to  bear  the  Roman  freedom  of  speech,  peevish- 
ly and  impatiently  burst  away  from  the  city. 
The  kalends  of  January^  approached,  at  which 
day  the  consulship,  for  the  ninth  time,  was  to  be 
offered  to  him  ;  yet,  rather  than  continue  thir- 
teen days  longer  in  Rome,  he  chose  that  his  first 
appearance  as  consul  should  be  at  Ravenna. 
Having,  however,  begun  his  journey  in  winter, 
amidst  intense  cold  and  incessant  rains,  he  con- 
tracted a  slight   but  lingering  disease  :    it   har- 


'  2oth  of  November. 
*  ist  of  January. 


assed  him  without  intermission,  so  that  he  was 
obliged  for  the  most  part  to  be  carried  in  a  lit- 
ter. Then,  at  the  close  of  summer,  he  made  a 
circuit  along  the  banks  of  the  Danube,  and  so 
came  to  Nicomedia.  His  disease  had  now  be- 
come more  grievous  and  oppressing ;  yet  he 
caused  himself  to  be  brought  out,  in  order  to 
dedicate  that  circus  which,  at  the  conclusion  of 
the  twentieth  year  of  his  reign,  he  had  erected. 
Immediately  he  grew  so  languid  and  feeble,  that 
prayers  for  his  life  were  put  up  to  all  the  gods. 
Then  suddenly,  on  the  ides  of  December,^  there 
was  heard  in  the  palace  sorrow,  and  weeping, 
and  lamentation,  and  the  courtiers  ran  to  and 
fro  ;  there  was  silence  throughout  the  city,  and 
a  report  went  of  the  death,  and  even  of  the  bur- 
ial, of  Diocletian  :  but  early  on  the  morrow  it 
was  suddenly  rumoured  that  he  still  lived.  At 
this  the  countenance  of  his  domestics  and  cour- 
tiers changed  from  melancholy  to  gay.  Never- 
theless there  were  who  suspected  his  death  to 
be  kept  secret  until  the  arrival  of  Galerius  Cae- 
sar, lest  in  the  meanwhile  the  soldiery  should 
attempt  some  change  in  the  government ;  and 
this  suspicion  grew  so  universal,  that  no  one 
would  believe  the  emperor  alive,  until,  on  the 
kalends  of  March,'*  he  appeared  in  public,  but 
so  wan,  his  illness  having  lasted  almost  a  year, 
as  hardly  to  be  known  again.  The  fit  of  stupor, 
resembling  death,  happened  on  the  ides  of  De- 
cember ;  and  although  he  in  some  measure  re- 
covered, yet  he  never  attained  to  perfect  health 
again,  for  he  became  disordered  in  his  judgment, 
being  at  certain  times  insane  and  at  others  of 
sound  mind. 

CHAP.  xvni. 

Within  a  few  days  Galerius  Caesar  arrived,  not 
to  congratulate  his  father-in-law  on  the  re-estab- 
lishment of  his  health,  but  to  force  him  to  resign 
the  empire.  Already  he  had  urged  Maximian 
Herculius  to  the  like  purpose,  and  by  the  alarm 
of  civil  wars  terrified  the  old  man  into  compli- 
ance ;  and  he  now  assailed  Diocletian.  At  first, 
in  gentle  and  friendly  terms,  he  said  that  age 
and  growing  infirmities  disabled  Diocletian  for 
the  charge  of  the  commonweal,  and  that  he  had 
need  to  give  himself  some  repose  after  his  la- 
bours. Galerius,  in  confirmation  of  his  argument, 
produced  the  example  of  Nerva,  who  laid  the 
weight  of  empire  on  Trajan. 

But  Diocletian  made  answer,  that  it  was  unfit 
for  one  who  had  held  a  rank,  eminent  above  all 
others  and  conspicuous,  to  sink  into  the  obscurity 
of  a  low  station  ;  neither  indeed  was  it  safe,  be- 
cause in  the  course  of  so  long  a  reign  he  must 
unavoidably  have  made  many  enemies.  That 
the  case  of  Nerva  was  very  different :  he,  after 


3  13th  of  December. 
*  I  St  of  March. 


3o8      OF   THE    MANNER    IN    WHICH    THE    PERSECUTORS    DIED. 


having  reigned  a  single  year,  felt  himself,  either 
from  age  or  from  inexperience  in  business,  un- 
equal to  affairs  so  momentous,  and  therefore 
threw  aside  the  helm  of  government,  and  returned 
to  that  private  life  in  which  he  had  already  grown 
old.  But  Diocletian  added,  that  if  Galerius 
wished  for  the  title  of  emperor,  there  was  nothing 
to  hinder  its  being  conferred  on  him  and  Con- 
stantius,  as  well  as  on  Maximian  Herculius. 

Galerius,  whose  imagination  already  grasped 
at  the  whole  empire,  saw  that  little  but  an  un- 
substantial name  would  accrue  to  him  from  this 
proposal,  and  therefore  replied  that  the  settle- 
ment made  by  Diocletian  himself  ought  to  be 
inviolable ;  a  settlement  which  provided  that 
there  should  be  two  of  higher  rank  vested  with 
supreme  power,  and  two  others  of  inferior,  to 
assist  them.  Easily  might  concord  be  preserved 
between  two  equals,  never  amongst  four  ;^  that 
he,  if  Diocletian  would  not  resign,  must  consult 
his  own  interests,  so  as  to  remain  no  longer  in 
an  inferior  rank,  and  the  last  of  that  rank ;  that 
for  fifteen  years  past  he  had  been  confined,  as 
an  exile,  to  Illyricum  and  the  banks  of  the 
Danube,  perpetually  struggling  against  barbarous 
nations,  while  others,  at  their  ease,  governed 
dominions  more  extensive  than  his,  and  better 
civilized. 

Diocletian  already  knew,  by  letters  from  Max- 
imian Herculius,  all  that  Galerius  had  spoken  at 
their  conference,  and  also  that  he  was  augment- 
ing his  army  ;  and  now,  on  hearing  his  discourse, 
the  spiritless  old  man  burst  into  tears,  and  said, 
'•  Be  it  as  you  will." 

It  remained  to  choose  Ccesars  by  common 
consent.  "  But,"  said  Galerius,  "  why  ask  the 
advice  of  Maximian  and  Constantius,  since  they 
must  needs  acquiesce  in  whatever  we  do?"  — 
"  Certainly  they  will,"  replied  Diocletian,  "  for 
we  must  elect  their  sons." 

Now  Maximian  Herculius  had  a  son,  Maxen- 
tius,  married  to  the  daughter  of  Galerius,  a  man 
of  bad  and  mischievous  dispositions,  and  so 
proud  and  stubborn  withal,  that  he  would  never 
pay  the  wonted  obeisance  either  to  his  father  or 
father-in-law,  and  on  that  account  he  was  hated 
by  them  both.  Constantius  also  had  a  son, 
Constantine,  a  young  man  of  very  great  worth, 
and  well  meriting  the  high  station  of  Ccesar. 
The  distinguished  comeliness  of  his  figure,  his 
strict  attention  to  all  military  duties,  his  virtuous 
demeanour  and  singular  affability,  had  endeared 
him  to  the  troops,  and  made  him  the  choice  of 
every  individual.  He  was  then  at  court,  having 
long  before  been  created  by  Diocletian  a  tribune 
of  the  first  order. 

"What  is  to  be  done?"  said  Galerius,  "for 
that  Maxentius  deserves  not  the  office.    He  who, 

'  [See  p.  303,  supra.\ 


while  yet  a  private  man,  has  treated  me  with 
contumely,  how  will  he  act  when  once  he  obtains 
power?"  —  "But  Constantine  is  amiable,  and 
will  so  rule  as  hereafter,  in  the  opinion  of  man- 
kind, to  surpass  the  mild  virtues  of  his  father." 

—  "Be  it  so,  if  my  inclinations  and  judgment 
are  to  be  disregarded.  Men  ought  to  be  ap- 
pointed who  are  at  my  disposal,  who  will  dread 
me,  and  never  do  anything  unless  by  my  or- 
ders."—  "Whom  then  shall  we  appoint?"  — 
"  Severus."  —  "  How  !  that  dancer,  that  habitual 
drunkard,  who  turns  night  into  day,  and  day 
into  night?  "  —  "  He  deserves  the  office,  for  he 
has  approved  himself  a  faithful  paymaster  and 
purveyor  of  the  army ;  and,  indeed,  I  have  al- 
ready despatched  him  to  receive  the  purple  from 
the  hands  of  Maximian."  —  "Well,  I  consent; 
but  whom  else  do  you  suggest?  "  —  "  Him,"  said 
Galerius,  pointing  out  Daia,  a  young  man,  half- 
barbarian.  Now  Galerius  had  lately  bestowed 
part  of  his  own  name  on  that  youth,  and  called 
him  Maximin,  in  like  manner  as  Diocletian  'for- 
merly bestowed  on  Galerius  the  name  of  Max- 
bnian,  for  the  omen's  sake,  because  Maximian 
Herculius  had  served  him  with  unshaken  fidelity. 

—  "Who  is  that  you  present?"  —  "A  kinsman 
of  mine."  —  "  Alas  !  "  said  Diocletian,  heaving 
a  deep  sigh,  "  you  do  not  propose  men  fit  for 
the  charge  of  public  affairs  !  "  —  "I  have  tried 
them."  — "  Then  do  you  look  to  it,  who  are 
about  to  assume  the  administration  of  the  em- 
pire :  as  for  77ie,  while  I  continued  emperor,  long 
and  diligent  have  been  my  labours  in  providing 
for  the  security  of  the  commonweal ;  and  now, 
should  anything  disastrous  ensue,  the  blame  will 
not  be  mine." 

CHAP.    XIX. 

Matters  having  been  thus  concerted,  Diocletian 
and  Galerius  went  in  procession  to  publish  the 
nomination  of  Ccesars.  Every  one  looked  at 
Constantine  ;  for  there  was  no  doubt  that  the 
choice  would  fall  on  him.  The  troops  present, 
as  well  as  the  chief  soldiers  of  the  other  legions, 
who  had  been  summoned  to  the  solemnity,  fixed 
their  eyes  on  Constantine,  exulted  in  the  hope 
of  his  approaching  election,  and  occupied  tliem- 
selves  in  prayers  for  his  prosperity.  Near  three 
miles  from  Nicomedia  there  is  an  eminence,  on 
the  summit  of  which  Galerius  formerly  received 
the  purple  ;  and  there  a  pillar,  with  the  statue  of 
Jupiter,  was  placed.  Thither  the  procession 
went.  An  assembly  of  the  soldiers  was  called. 
Diocletian,  with  tears,  harangued  them,  and  said 
that  he  was  become  infirm,  that  he  needed  re- 
pose after  his  fatigues,  and  that  he  would  resign 
the  enipire  into  hands  more  vigorous  and  able, 
and  at  the  same  time  appoint  new  Ccesars.  The 
spectators,  with  the  utmost  earnestness,  waited 
for  the  nomination.     Suddenly  he  declared  that 


OF   THE    MANNER    IN   WHICH    THE    PERSECUTORS    DIED.      309 


the  Ccesars  were  Severus  and  Maximin.  The 
amazement  was  universal.  Constantine  stood 
near  in  pubhc  view,  and  men  began  to  question 
amongst  themselves  whether  his  name  too  had 
not  been  changed  into  Maximin ;  when,  in  the 
sight  of  all,  Galerius,  stretching  back  his  hand, 
put  Constantine  aside,  and  drew  Daia  forward, 
and,  having  divested  him  of  the  garb  of  a  private 
person,  set  him  in  the  most  conspicuous  place. 
All  men  wondered  who  he  could  be,  and  from 
whence  he  came  ;  but  none  ventured  to  inter- 
pose or  move  objections,  so  confounded  were 
their  minds  at  the  strange  and  unlooked-for  event. 
Diocletian  took  off  his  purple  robe,  put  it  on 
Daia,  and  resumed  his  own  original  name  of 
Diodes.  He  descended  from  the  tribunal,  and 
passed  through  Nicomedia  in  a  chariot ;  and  then 
this  old  emperor,  like  a  veteran  soldier  freed 
from  military  service,  was  dismissed  into  his  own 
country ;  while  Daia,  lately  taken  from  the  tend- 
ing of  cattle  in  forests  to  serve  as  a  common 
soldier,  immediately  made  one  of  the  life-guard, 
presently  a  tribune,  and  next  day  Ccesar,  obtained 
authority  to  trample  under  foot  and  oppress  the 
empire  of  the  East ;  a  person  ignorant  alike  of 
war  and  of  civil  affairs,  and  from  a  herdsman  be- 
come a  leader  of  armies. 


CHAP.    XX. 

Galerius  having  effected  the  expulsion  of  the 
two  old  men,  began  to  consider  himself  alone  as 
the  sovereign  of  the  Roman  empire.  Necessity 
had  required  the  appointment  of  Constantius  to 
the  first  rank  ;  but  Galerius  made  small  account 
of  one  who  was  of  an  easy  temper,  and  of  health 
declining  and  precarious.  He  looked  for  the 
speedy  death  of  Constantius.  And  although  that 
prince  should  recover,  it  seemed  not  difficult  to 
force  him  to  put  off  the  imperial  purple  ;  for 
what  else  could  he  do,  if  pressed  by  his  three  col- 
leagues to  abdicate  ?  Galerius  had  Licinius  ever 
about  his  person,  his  old  and  intimate  acquaint- 
ance, and  his  earliest  companion  in  arms,  whose 
counsels  he  used  in  the  management  of  all  affairs  ; 
yet  he  would  not  nominate  Licinius  to  the  dignity 
of  Ccesar,  with  the  title  of  son,  for  he  purposed 
to  nominate  him,  in  the  room  of  Constantius,  to 
the  dignity  of  emperor,  with  the  title  of  brother, 
while  he  himself  might  hold  sovereign  authority, 
and  rule  over  the  whole  globe  with  unbounded 
licence.  After  that,  he  meant  to  have  solemnized 
the  vicennial  festival ;  to  have  conferred  on  his 
son  Candidianus,  then  a  boy  of  nine  years  of 
age,  the  office  of  Ccesar ;  and,  in  conclusion,  to 
have  resigned,  as  Diocletian  had  done.  And 
thus,  Licinius  and  Severus  being  emperors,  and 
Maximin  and  Candidianus  in  the  next  station  of 
Cccsars,  he  fancied  that,  environed  as  it  were  by 
an  impregnable  wall,  he  should  lead  an  old  age 


of  security  and  peace.  Such  were  his  projects  ; 
but  God,  whom  he  had  made  his  adversary,  frus- 
trated all  those  imaginations. 


CHAP.    XXI. 

Having  thus  attained  to  the  highest  power,  he 
bent  his  mind  to  afflict  that  empire  into  which 
he  had  opened  his  way.  It  is  the  manner  and 
practice  of  the  Persians  for  the  people  to  yield 
themselves  slaves  to  their  kings,  and  for  the 
kings  to  treat  their  people  as  slaves.  This  flagi- 
tious man,  from  the  time  of  his  victories  over  the 
Persians,  was  not  ashamed  incessantly  to  extol 
such  an  institution,  and  he  resolved  to  establish 
it  in  the  Roman  dominions ;  and  because  he 
could  not  do  this  by  an  express  law,  he  so  acted, 
in  imitation  of  the  Persian  kings,  as  to  bereave 
men  of  their  liberties.  He  first  of  all  degraded 
those  whom  he  meant  to  punish ;  and  then  not 
only  were  inferior  magistrates  put  to  the  torture 
by  him,  but  also  the  chief  men  in  cities,  and 
persons  of  the  most  eminent  rank,  and  this  too 
in  matters  of  little  moment,  and  in  civil  questions. 
Crucifixion  was  the  punishment  ready  prepared 
in  capital  cases ;  and  for  lesser  crimes,  fetters. 
Matrons  of  honourable  station  were  dragged 
into  workhouses ;  and  when  any  man  was  to  be 
scourged,  there  were  four  posts  fixed  in  the 
ground,  and  to  them  he  was  tied,  after  a  manner 
unknown  in  the  chastisement  of  slaves.  What 
shall  I  say  of  his  apartment  for  sport,  and  of  his 
favourite  diversions?  He  kept  bears,  most  re- 
sembling himself  in  fierceness  and  bulk,  whom 
he  had  collected  together  during  the  course  of 
his  reign.  As  often  as  he  chose  to  indulge  his 
humour,  he  ordered  some  particular  bear  to  be 
brought  in,  and  men  were  thrown  to  that  savage 
animal,  rather  to  be  swallowed  up  than  devoured  ; 
and  when  their  limbs  were  torn  asunder,  he 
laughed  with  excessive  complacency  :  nor  did  he 
ever  sup  without  being  spectator  of  the  effusion 
of  human  blood.  Men  of  private  station  were 
condemned  to  be  burnt  alive ;  and  he  began 
this  mode  of  execution  by  edicts  against  the 
Christians,  commanding  that,  after  torture  and 
condemnation,  they  should  be  burnt  at  a  slow 
fire.  They  were  fixed  to  a  stake,  and  first  a 
moderate  flame  was  applied  to  the  soles  of  their 
feet,  until  the  muscles,  contracted  by  burning, 
were  torn  from  the  bones ;  then  torches,  lighted 
and  put  out  again,  were  directed  to  all  the  mem- 
bers of  their  bodies,  so  that  no  part  had  any  ex- 
emption. Meanwhile  cold  water  was  continually 
poured  on  their  faces,  and  their  mouths  mois- 
tened, lest,  by  reason  of  their  jaws  being  parched, 
they  should  expire.  At  length  they  did  exj)ire, 
when,  after  many  hours,  the  violent  heat  had 
consumed  their  skin  and  penetrated  into  their 
intestines.     The  dead   carcases  were  laid  on  a 


lo     OF   THE   MANNER   IN   WHICH   THE   PERSECUTORS   DIED. 


funeral  pile,  and  wholly  burnt ;  their  bones  were 
gathered,  ground  to  powder,  and  thrown  into 
the  river,  or  into  the  sea. 


CHAP.    XXII. 

And  now  that  cruelty,  which  he  had  learned 
in  torturing  the  Christians,  became  habitual,  and 
he  exercised  it  against  all  men  indiscriminately.' 
He  was  not  wont  to  inflict  the  slighter  sorts  of 
punishment,  as  to  banish,  to  imprison,  or  to  send 
criminals  to  work  in  the  mines  ;  but  to  burn,  to 
crucify,  to  expose  to  wild  beasts,  were  things 
done  daily,  and  without  hesitation.  For  smaller 
offences,  those  of  his  own  household  and  his 
stewards  were  chastised  with  lances,  instead  of 
rods ;  and,  in  great  offences,  to  be  beheaded 
was  an  indulgence  shown  to  very  few  ;  and  it 
seemed  as  a  favour,  on  account  of  old  services, 
when  one  was  permitted  to  die  in  the  easiest 
manner.  But  these  were  slight  evils  in  the  gov- 
ernment of  Galerius,  when  compared  with  what 
follows.  For  eloquence  was  extinguished,  plead- 
ers cut  off,  and  the  learned  in  the  laws  either 
exiled  or  slain.  Useful  letters  came  to  be  viewed 
in  the  same  light  as  magical  and  forbidden  arts ; 
and  all  who  possessed  them  were  trampled  upon 
and  execrated,  as  if  they  had  been  hostile  to 
government,  and  public  enemies.  Law  was  dis- 
solved, and  unbounded  licence  permitted  to 
judges,  —  to  judges  chosen  from  amongst  the 
soldiery,  rude  and  illiterate  men,  and  let  loose 
upon  the  provinces,  without  assessors  to  guide  or 
control  them. 

CHAP.    XXIII. 

But  that  which  gave  rise  to  public  and  uni- 
versal calamity,  was  the  tax  imposed  at  once  on 
each  province  and  city.  Surveyors  having  been 
spread  abroad,  and  occupied  in  a  general  and 
severe  scrutiny,  horrible  scenes  were  exhibited, 
like  the  outrages  of  victorious  enemies,  and  the 
wretched  state  of  captives.  Each  spot  of  ground 
was  measured,  vines  and  fruit-trees  numbered, 
hsts  taken  of  animals  of  every  kind,  and  a  capi- 
tation-roll made  up.  In  cities,  the  common 
people,  whether  residing  within  or  without  the 
walls,  were  assembled,  the  market-places  filled 
with  crowds  of  families,  all  attended  with  their 
children  and  slaves,  the  noise  of  torture  and 
scourges  resounded,  sons  were  hung  on  the  rack 
to  force  discovery  of  the  effects  of  their  fathers, 
the  most  trusty  slaves  compelled  by  pain  to  bear 
witness  against  their  masters,  and  wives  to  bear 
witness  against  their  husbands.  In  default  of  all 
other  evidence,  men  were  tortured  to  speak 
against  themselves  ;  and  no  sooner  did  agony 
oblige  them  to  acknowledge  what  they  had  not. 


*  [A  course  of  conduct  which,  providentially,  tended  to  stop  the 
chronic  bcveiity  againit  believers.] 


but  those  imaginary  effects  were  noted  down  in 
the  lists.     Neither  youth,  nor  old  age,  nor  sick- 
ness, afforded  any  exemption.    The  diseased  and 
the  infirm  were  carried  in ;  the  age  of  each  was 
estimated  ;  and,  that  the  capitation-tax  might  be 
enlarged,  years  were  added  to  the  young  and 
struck  off  from  the  old.     General  lamentation 
and  sorrow   prevailed.     Whatever,  by  the  laws 
of  war,  conquerors  had  done  to  the  conquered, 
the  like  did  this  man   presume   to   perpetrate 
against  Romans  and  the  subjects  of  Rome,  be- 
cause his  forefathers  had  been  made  liable  to  a 
like  tax  imposed  by  the  victorious  Trajan,  as  a 
penalty  on  the  Dacians  for  their  frequent  rebel- 
lions.     After  this,  money  was  levied   for  each 
head,  as  if  a  price  had  been  paid  for  liberty  to 
exist ;  yet  full  trust  was  not  reposed  on  the  same 
set  of  surveyors,  but  others  and  others  still  were 
sent  round  to  make  further  discoveries  ;  and  thus 
the  tributes  were  redoubled,  not  because  the  new 
surveyors  made  any  fresh  discoveries,  but  because 
they  added  at  pleasure  to  the  former  rates,  lest 
they  should  seem  to  have  been  employed  to  no 
purpose.     Meanwhile  the  number  of  animals  de- 
creased, and  men  died  ;  nevertheless  taxes  were 
paid  even  for  the  dead,  so  that  no  one  could 
either  live  or  cease  to  live  without  being  subject 
to   impositions.      There    remained    mendicants 
alone,  from  whom  nothing  could  be  exacted,  and 
whom    their  misery  and  wretchedness   secured 
from    ill-treatment.      But    this    pious    man    had 
compassion  on  them,  and  determining  that  they 
should  remain  no  longer  in  indigence,  he  caused 
them  all  to  be  assembled,  put  on  board  vessels, 
and  sunk  in  the  sea.      So  merciful  was  he  in 
making  provision  that  under  his  administration 
no  man  should  want  !     And  thus,  while  he  took 
effectual  measures  that  none,  under  the  feigned 
pretext  of  poverty,  should  elude  the  tax,  he  put 
to  death  a  multitude  of  real  wretches,  in  viola- 
tion of  every  law  of  humanity. 

CHAP.    XXIV. 

Already  the  judgment  of  God  approached  him, 
and  that  season  ensued  in  which  his  fortunes  be- 
gan to  droop  and  to  waste  away.  While  occupied 
in  the  manner  that  I  have  described  above,  he 
did  not  set  himself  to  subvert  or  expel  Constan- 
tius,  but  waited  for  his  death,  not  imagining, 
however,  that  it  was  so  nigh.  Constantius,  hav- 
ing become  exceedingly  ill,  wrote  to  Galerius, 
and  requested  that  his  son  Constantine  might  be 
sent  to  see  him.  He  had  made  a  like  request 
long  before,  but  in  vain;  for  Galerius  meant 
nothing  less  than  to  grant  it.  On  the  contrary, 
he  laid  repeated  snares  for  the  life  of  that  young 
man,  because  he  durst  not  use  open  violence, 
lest  he  should  stir  up  civil  wars  against  himself, 
and  incur  that  which  he  most  dreaded,  the  hate 


OF    THE    MANNER    IN   WHICH    THE    PERSECUTORS    DIED. 


1 1 


and  resentment  of  the  army.  Under  pretence 
of  manly  exercise  and  recreation,  he  made  him 
combat  with  wild  beasts  :  but  this  device  was 
frustrated  ;  for  the  power  of  God  protected  Con- 
stantine,  and  in  the  very  moment  of  jeopardy 
rescued  him  from  the  hands  of  Galerius.  At 
length,  Galerius,  when  he  could  no  longer  avoid 
complying  with  the  request  of  Constantius,  one 
evening  gave  Constantine  a  warrant  to  depart, 
and  commanded  him  to  set  out  next  morning  with 
the  imperial  despatches.  Galerius  meant  either 
to  find  some  pretext  for  detaining  Constantine, 
or  to  forward  orders  to  Severus  for  arresting  him 
on  the  road.  Constantine  discerned  his  pur- 
pose ;  and  therefore,  after  supper,  when  the 
emperor  was  gone  to  rest,  he  hasted  away,  car- 
ried off  from  the  principal  stages  all  the  horses 
maintained  at  the  public  expense,  and  escaped. 
Next  day  the  emperor,  having  purposely  remained 
in  his  bed-chamber  until  noon,  ordered  Constan- 
tine to  be  called  into  his  presence  ;  but  he  learnt 
that  Constantine  had  set  out  immediately  after 
supper.  Outrageous  with  passion,  he  ordered 
horses  to  be  made  ready,  that  Constantine  might 
be  pursued  and  dragged  back ;  and  hearing  that 
all  the  horses  had  been  carried  off  from  the  great 
road,  he  could  hardly  refrain  from  tears.  Mean- 
while Constantine,  journeying  with  incredible 
rapidity,  reached  his  father,  who  was  already 
about  to  expire.  Constantius  recommended  his 
son  to  the  soldiers,  delivered  the  sovereign 
authority  into  his  hands,  and  then  died,  as  his 
wish  had  long  been,  in  peace  and  quiet. 

Constantine  Augustus,  having  assumed  the 
government,  made  it  his  first  care  to  restore  the 
Christians  to  the  exercise  of  their  worship  and 
to  their  God  ;  and  so  began  his  administration 
by  reinstating  '  the  holy  religion, 

CHAP.    XXV. 

Some  few  days  after,  the  portrait  of  Constan- 
tine, adorned  with  laurels,  was  brought  to  the 
pernicious  wild  beast,  that,  by  receiving  that  sym- 
bol, he  might  acknowledge  Constantine  in  the 
quality  of  emperor.  He  hesitated  long  whether 
to  receive  it  or  not,  and  he  was  about  to  commit 
both  the  portrait  and  its  bearer  to  the  flames, 
but  his  confidants  dissuaded  him  from  a  resolu- 
tion so  frantic.  They  admonished  him  of  the 
danger,  and  they  represented  that,  if  Constantine 
came  with  an  armed  force,  all  the  soldiers,  against 
whose  inclination  obscure  or  unknown  Ccesars 
had  been  created,  would  acknowledge  him,  and 
crowd  eagerly  to  his  standard.  So  Galerius,  al- 
though with  the  utmost  unwillingness,  accepted 
the  portrait,  and  sent  the  imperial  purple  to  Con- 

'  [Re-establishing  (Edin  )  is  too  strong  a  term.  He  refers  to 
the  restoration,  from  ruins,  of  churches,  etc.  (cap.  12,  p.  305,  supra). 
See  caps.  34,  48,  t>ifra."\ 


stantine,  that  he  might  seem  of  his  own  accord 
to  have  received  that  prince  into  partnership  of 
power  with  him.  And  now  his  plans  were  de- 
ranged, and  he  could  not,  as  he  intended  for- 
merly, admit  Licinius,  without  exceeding  the 
limited  number  of  emperors.  But  this  he  de- 
vised, that  Severus,  who  was  more  advanced  in 
life,  should  be  named  emperor,  and  that  Constan- 
tine, instead  of  the  title  of  emperor,  to  which  he 
had  been  named,  should  receive  that  of  Ccesar 
in  common  with  Maximin  Daia,  and  so  be  de- 
graded from  the  second  place  to  the  fourth. 

CHAP.    XXVI. 

Things  seemed  to  be  arranged  in  some  measure 
to  the  satisfaction  of  Galerius,  when  another  alarm 
was  brought,  that  his  son-in-law  Maxentius  had 
been  declared  emperor  at  Rome.  The  cause 
was  this  :  Galerius  having  resolved  by  permanent 
taxes  to  devour  the  empire,  soared  to  such  ex- 
travagance in  folly,  as  not  to  allow  an  exemption 
from  that  thraldom  even  to  the  Romnn  people. 
Tax-gatherers  therefore  were  appointed  to  go  to 
Rome,  and  make  out  lists  of  the  citizens.  Much 
about  the  same  time  (jalerius  had  reduced  the 
Pretorian  Guards.  There  remained  at  Rome  a 
few  soldiers  of  that  body,  who,  profiting  of  the 
opportunity,  put  some  magistrates  to  death,  and, 
with  the  acquiescence  of  the  tumultuary  popu- 
lace, clothed  Maxentius  in  the  imperial  purple. 
Galerius,  on  receiving  this  news,  was  disturbed 
at  the  strangeness  of  the  event,  but  not  much 
dismayed.  He  hated  Maxentius,  and  he  could 
not  bestow  on  him  the  dignity  of  Ccesar,  already 
enjoyed  by  two  (Daia  and  Constantine)  ;  besides, 
he  thought  it  enough  for  him  to  have  once  be- 
stowed that  dignity  against  his  inclination.  So 
he  sent  for  Severus,  exhorted  him  to  regain  his 
dominion  and  sovereignty,  and  he  put  under  his 
command  that  army  which  Maximian  Herculius 
had  formerly  commanded,  that  he  might  attack 
Maxentius  at  Rome.  There  the  soldiers  of 
Maximian  had  been  oftentimes  received  with 
every  sort  of  luxurious  accommodation,  so  that 
they  were  not  only  interested  to  preserve  the  city, 
but  they  also  longed  to  fix  their  residence  in  it. 

Maxentius  well  knew  the  enormity  of  his  own 
offences ;  and  although  he  had  as  it  were  an 
hereditary  claim  to  the  services  of  his  father's 
army,  and  might  have  hoped  to  draw  it  over  to 
himself,  yet  he  reflected  that  this  consideration 
might  occur  to  Galerius  also,  and  induce  him  to 
leave  Severus  in  lUyricum,  and  march  in  person 
with  his  own  army  against  Rome.  Under  such 
apprehensions,  Maxentius  sought  to  protect  him- 
self from  the  danger  that  hung  over  him.  To 
his  father,  who  since  his  abdication  resided  in 
Campania,  he  sent  the  purple,  and  saluted  him 
again  Augustus.     Maximian,   given   to    change. 


312      OF   THE   MANNER   IN   WHICH   THE   PERSECUTORS    DIED. 


eagerly  resumed  that  purple  of  which  he  had 
unwillingly  divested  himself.  Meanwhile  Severus 
marched  on,  and  with  his  troops  approached  the 
walls  of  the  city.  Presently  the  soldiers  raised 
up  their  ensigns,  abandoned  Severus,  and  yielded 
themselves  to  Maxentius,  against  whom  they  had 
come.  What  remained  but  flight  for  Severus, 
thus  deserted?  He  was  encountered  by  Max- 
imian,  who  had  resumed  the  imperial  dignity. 
On  this  he  took  refuge  in  Ravenna,  and  shut 
himself  up  there  with  a  few  soldiers.  But  per- 
ceiving that  he  was  about  to  be  dehvered  up,  he 
voluntarily  surrendered  himself,  and  restored  the 
purple  to  him  from  whom  he  had  received  it ; 
and  after  this  he  obtained  no  other  grace  but 
that  of  an  easy  death,  for  he  was  compelled  to 
open  his  veins,  and  in  that  gentle  manner  expired. 

CHAP.    XXVII. 

But  Maximian,  who  knew  the  outrageous  tem- 
per of  Galerius,  began  to  consider  that,  fired 
with  rage  on  hearing  of  the  death  of  Severus, 
he  would  march  into  Italy,  and  that  possibly  he 
might  be  joined  by  Daia,  and  so  bring  into  the 
field  forces  too  powerful  to  be  resisted.  Having 
therefore  fortified  Rome,  and  made  diligent  pro- 
vision for  a  defensive  war,  Maximian  went  into 
Gaul,  that  he  might  give  his  younger  daughter 
Fausta  in  marriage  to  Constantine,  and  thus  win 
over  that  prince  to  his  interest.  Meantime  Ga- 
lerius assembled  his  troops,  invaded  Italy,  and 
advanced  towards  Rome,  resolving  to  extinguish 
the  senate  and  put  the  whole  people  to  the 
sword.  But  he  found  everything  shut  and  forti- 
fied against  him.  There  was  no  hope  of  carry- 
ing the  place  by  storm,  and  to  besiege  it  was 
an  arduous  undertaking ;  for  Galerius  had  not 
brought  w-ith  him  an  army  sufficient  to  invest 
the  walls.  Probably,  having  never  seen  Rome, 
he  imagined  it  to  be  little  superior  in  size  to 
those  cities  with  which  he  was  acquainted.  But 
some  of  his  legions,  detesting  the  wicked  enter- 
prise of  a  father  against  his  son-in-law,  and  of 
Romans  against  Rome,  renounced  his  authority, 
'and  carried  over  their  ensigns  to  the  enemy. 
Already  had  his  remaining  soldiers  begun  to 
waver,  when  Galerius,  dreading  a  fate  like  that 
of  Severus,  and  having  his  haughty  spirit  broken 
and  humiliated,  threw  himself  at  the  feet  of  his 
soldiers,  and  continued  to  beseech  them  that  he 
might  not  be  delivered  to  the  foe,  until,  by  the 
promise  of  mighty  largesses,  he  prevailed  on 
them.  Then  he  retreated  from  Rome,  and  fled 
in  great  disorder.  Easily  might  he  have  been 
cut  off  in  his  flight,  had  any  one  pursued  him 
even  with  a  small  body  of  troops.  He  was 
aware  of  his  danger,  and  allowed  his  soldiers  to 
disperse  themselves,  and  to  plunder  and  destroy 
fjar  and  wide,  that,  if  there  were  any  pursuers, 


they  might  be  deprived  of  all  means  of  subsist- 
ence in  a  ruined  country.  So  the  parts  of  Italy 
through  which  that  pestilent  band  took  its  course 
were  wasted,  all  things  pillaged,  matrons  forced, 
virgins  violated,  parents  and  husbands  compelled 
by  torture  to  disclose  where  they  had  concealed 
their  goods,  and  their  wives  and  daughters ; 
flocks  and  herds  of  cattle  were  driven  ofl"  like 
spoils  taken  from  barbarians.  And  thus  did  he, 
once  a  Roman  emperor,  but  now  the  ravager  of 
Italy,  retire  into  his  own  territories,  after  having 
afflicted  all  men  indiscriminately  with  the  calami- 
ties of  war.  Long  ago,  indeed,  and  at  the  very 
time  of  his  obtaining  sovereign  power,  he  had 
avowed  himself  the  enemy  of  the  Roman  name  ; 
and  he  proposed  that  the  empire  should  be 
called,  not  the  Roman,  but  the  Dacian  empire. 

CHAP.    XXVIII. 

After  the  flight  of  Galerius,  Maximian,  having 
returned  from  Gaul,  held  authority  in  common 
with  his  son ;  but  more  obedience  was  yielded 
to  the  young  man  than  to  the  old  :  for  Maxen- 
tius had  most  power,  and  had  been  longest  in 
possession  of  it ;  and  it  was  to  him  that  Maxim- 
ian owed  on  this  occasion  the  imperial  dignity. 
The  old  man  was  impatient  at  being  denied  the 
exercise  of  uncontrolled  sovereignty,  and  envied 
his  son  with  a  childish  spirit  of  rivalry ;  and 
therefore  he  began  to  consider  how  he  might  ex- 
pel Maxentius  and  resume  his  ancient  dominion. 
This  appeared  easy,  because  the  soldiers  who 
deserted  Severus  had  originally  served  in  his  own 
army.  He  called  an  assembly  of  the  people  of 
Rome,  and  of  the  soldiers,  as  if  he  had  been  to 
make  an  harangue  on  the  calamitous  situation 
of  public  affairs.  After  having  spoken  much  on 
that  subject,  he  stretched  his  hands  towards  his 
son,  charged  him  as  author  of  all  ills  and  prime 
cause  of  the  calamities  of  the  state,  and  then 
tore  the  purple  from  his  shoulders.  Maxentius, 
thus  stripped,  leaped  headlong  from  the  tribunal, 
and  was  received  into  the  arms  of  the  soldiers. 
Their  rage  and  clamour  confounded  the  unnatu- 
ral old  man,  and,  like  another  Tarquin  the 
Proud,  he  was  driven  from  Rome. 

CHAP.    XXIX. 

Then  Maximian  returned  into  Gaul ;  and  after 
having  made  some  stay  in  those  quarters,  he 
went  to  Galerius,  the  enemy  of  his  son,  that 
they  might  confer  together,  as  he  pretended, 
about  the  settlement  of  the  commonweal ;  but 
his  true  purpose  was,  under  colour  of  reconcilia- 
tion, to  find  an  opportunity  of  murdering  Crale- 
rius,  and  of  seizing  his  share  of  the  empire, 
instead  of  his  own,  from  which  he  had  been 
everywhere  excluded. 


OF  THE    MANNER   IN   WHICH    THE    PERSECUTORS    DIED.      313 


Diodes  was  at  the  court  of  Galerius  when 
Maximian  arrived  ;  for  Galerius,  meaning  now 
to  invest  Licinius  with  the  ensigns  of  supreme 
power  in  the  room  of  Severus,  had  lately  sent 
for  Diodes  to  be  present  at  the  solemnity.  So 
it  was  performed  in  presence  both  of  him  and 
of  Maximian ;  and  thus  there  were  six  who 
ruled  the  empire  at  one  and  the  same  time.' 

Now  the  designs  of  Maximian  having  been 
frustrated,  he  took  flight,  as  he  had  done  twice 
before,  and  returned  into  Gaul,  with  a  heart  full 
of  wickedness,  and  intending  by  treacherous 
devices  to  overreach  Constantine,  who  was  not 
only  his  own  son-in-law,  but  also  the  child  of 
his  son-in-law ;  and  that  he  might  the  more 
successfully  deceive,  he  laid  aside  the  imperial 
purple.  The  Franks  had  taken  up  arms.  Max- 
imian advised  the  unsuspecting  Constantine  not 
to  lead  all  his  troops  against  them,  and  he  said 
that  a  few  soldiers  would  suffice  to  subdue  those 
barbarians.  He  gave  this  advice  that  an  army 
might  be  left  for  him  to  win  over  to  himself,  and 
that  Constantine,  by  reason  of  his  scanty  forces, 
might  be  overpowered.  The  young  prince  be- 
lieved the  advice  to  be  judicious,  because  given 
by  an  aged  and  experienced  commander ;  and 
he  followed  it,  because  given  by  a  father-in-law. 
He  marched,  leaving  the  most  considerable  part 
of  his  forces  behind.  Maximian  waited  a  few 
days  ;  and  as  soon  as,  by  his  calculation,  Con- 
stantine had  entered  the  territory  of  the  barba- 
rians, he  suddenly  resumed  the  imj^erial  purple, 
seized  the  public  treasures,  after  his  wont  made 
ample  donatives  to  the  soldiery,  and  feigned 
that  such  disasters  had  befallen  Constantine  as 
soon  after  befell  himself.  Constantine  was  pres- 
ently informed  of  those  events,  and,  by  marches 
astonishingly  rapid,  he  flew  back  with  his  army. 
Maximian,  not  yet  prepared  to  oppose  him,  was 
overpowered  at  unawares,  and  the  soldiers  re- 
turned to  their  duty.  Maximian  had  possessed 
himself  of  Marseilles  (he  fled  thither),  and  shut 
the  gates.  Constantine  drew  nigh,  and  seeing 
Maximian  on  the  walls,  addressed  him  in  no 
harsh  or  hostile  language,  and  demanded  what 
he  meant,  and  what  it  was  that  he  wanted,  and 
why  he  had  acted  in  a  way  so  peculiarly  unlje- 
coming  him.  But  Maximian  from  the  walls 
incessantly  uttered  abuse  and  curses  against 
Constantine.  Then,  of  a  sudden,  the  gates  on 
the  opposite  side  having  been  unbarred,  the 
besiegers  were  admitted  into  the  city.  The 
rebel  emperor,  and  unnatural  parent  and  a 
perfidious  father-in-law,  was  dragged  into  the 
presence  of  Constantine,  heard  a  recital  made 
of  his  crimes,  was  divested  of  his  imperial 
robe,  and,  after  this  reprimand,  obtained  his 
life. 


'  [See  pp.  303  (cap.  vii.)  and  308,  at  note  i,  supra.] 


CHAP.    XXX. 

Maximian,  having  thus  forfeited  the  respect 
due  to  an  emperor  and  a  father-in-law,  grew 
impatient  at  his  abased  condition,  and,  embold- 
ened by  impunity,  formed  new  plots  against  Con- 
stantine. He  addressed  himself  to  his.  daughter 
Fausta,  and,  as  well  by  entreaties  as  by  the 
soothing  of  flattery,  solicited  her  to  betray  her 
husband.  He  promised  to  obtain  for  her  a 
more  honourable  alliance  than  that  with  Con- 
stantine ;  and  he  requested  her  to  allow  the 
bed-chamber  of  the  emperor  to  be  left  open, 
and  to  be  slightly  guarded.  Fausta  undertook 
to  do  whatever  he  asked,  and  instantly  revealed 
the  whole  to  her  husband.  A  plan  was  laid  for 
detecting  Maximian  in  the  very  execution  of  his 
crime.  They  placed  a  base  eunuch  to  be  mur- 
dered instead  of  the  emperor.  At  the  dead  of 
night  Maximian  arose,  and  perceived  all  things 
to  be  favourable  for  his  insidious  purpose. 
There  were  few  soldiers  on  guard,  and  these  too 
at  some  distance  from  the  bed-chamber.  How- 
ever, to  prevent  suspicion,  he  accosted  them, 
and  said  that  he  had  had  a  dream  which  he 
wished  to  communicate  to  his  son-in-law.  He 
went  in  armed,  slew  the  eunuch,  sprung  forth 
exultingly,  and  avowed  the  murder.  At  that 
moment  Constantine  showed  himself  on  the 
opposite  side  with  a  band  of  soldiers  ;  the  dead 
body  was  brought  out  of  the  bed-chamber ;  the 
murderer,  taken  in  the  fact,  all  aghast, 

"  Stood  like  a  stone,  silent  and  motionless;  " 

while  Constantine  upbraided  him  for  his  impiety 
and  enormous  guilt.  At  last  Maximian  obtained 
leave  that  the  manner  of  his  death  sliould  be  at 
his  own  choice,  and  he  strangled  himself. 

Thus  that  mightiest  sovereign  of  Rome  — 
who  ruled  so  long  with  exceeding  glory,  and  who 
celebrated  his  twentieth  anniversary  —  thus  that 
most  haughty  man  had  his  neck  broken,  and 
ended  his  detestable  life  by  a  death  base  and 
ignominious. 

CHAP.  XXXI. 

From  Maximian,  God,  the  avenger  of  reli- 
gion and  of  His  people,  turned  his  eyes  to 
Galerius,  the  author  of  the  accursed  persecution, 
that  in  his  punishment  also  He  might  manifest 
the  power  of  His  majesty.  Galerius,  too,  was 
purposing  to  celebrate  his  twentieth  anniversary  ; 
and  as,  under  that  pretext,  he  had,  by  new  taxes 
payable  in  gold  and  silver,  oppressed  the  prov- 
inces, so  now,  that  he  might  recompense  them 
by  celebrating  the  promised  festival,  he  used  the 
like  pretext  for  repeating  his  oppressions.  Who 
can  relate  in  fit  terms  the  methods  used  to 
harass  mankind  in  levying  the  tax,  and  espe- 
cially with  regard  to  corn  and  the  other  fruits  of 
the  earth?     The  officers,  or  rather  the  execu- 


14     OF   THE   MANNER   IN   WHICH   THE    PERSECUTORS  DIED. 


tioners,  of  all  the  different  magistrates,  seized 
on  each  individual,  and  would  never  let  go  their 
hold.  No  man  knew  to  whom  he  ought  to  make 
payment  first.  There  was  no  dispensation  given 
to  those  who  had  nothing;  and  they  were  re- 
quired, under  pain  of  being  variously  tortured, 
instantly  to  pay,  notwithstanding  their  inability. 
Many  guards  were  set  round,  no  breathing  time 
was  granted,  or,  at  any  season  of  the  year,  the 
least  respite  from  exactions.  Different  magis- 
trates, or  the  officers  of  different  magistrates, 
frequently  contended  for  the  right  of  levying 
the  tax  from  the  same  persons.  No  threshing- 
floor  without  a  tax-gatherer,  no  vintage  without 
a  watch,  and  nought  left  for  the  sustenance  of 
the  husbandman  !  That  food  should  be  snatched 
fi\:/in  Lne  mouths  of  those  who  had  earned  it  by 
toil,  was  grievous  :  the  hope,  however,  of  being 
afterwards  reKeved,  might  have  made  that  griev- 
ance supportable  ;  but  it  was  necessary  for  every 
one  who  appeared  at  the  anniversary  festival  to 
provide  robes  of  various  kinds,  and  gold  and 
silver  besides.  And  one  might  have  said,  "  How 
shall  I  furnish  myself  with  those  things,  O  tyrant 
void  of  understanding,  if  you  carry  off  the  whole 
fruits  of  my  ground,  and  violently  seize  its  ex- 
pected produce?"  Thus,  throughout  the  do- 
minions of  Galerius,  men  were  spoiled  of  their 
goods,  and  all  was  raked  together  into  the  impe- 
rial treasury,  that  the  emperor  might  be  enabled 
to  perform  his  vow  of  celebrating  a  festival  which 
he  was  doomed  never  to  celebrate. 


CHAP.    XXXII. 

Maximin  Daia  was  incensed  at  the  nomination 
of  Licinius  to  the  dignity  of  emperor,  and  he 
would  no  longer  be  called  Ccesar,  or  allow  him- 
self to  be  ranked  as  third  in  authority.  Galerius, 
by  repeated  messages,  besought  Daia  to  yield, 
and  to  acquiesce  in  his  arrangement,  to  give 
place  to  age,  and  to  reverence  the  grey  hairs  of 
Licinius.  But  Daia  became  more  and  more  in- 
solent. He  urged  that,  as  it  was  he  who  first 
assumed  the  purple,  so,  by  possession,  he  had 
right  to  priority  in  rank ;  and  he  set  at  nought 
the  entreaties  and  the  injunctions  of  Galerius. 
That  brute  animal  was  stung  to  the  quick,  and 
bellowed  when  the  mean  creature  whom  he  had 
made  Ccesar^  in  expectation  of  his  thorough  ob- 
sequiousness, forgot  the  great  favour  conferred 
on  him,  and  impiously  withstood  the  requests 
and  will  of  his  benefactor.  Galerius  at  length, 
overcome  by  the  obstinacy  of  Daia,  abolished 
the  subordinate  title  of  Ccesar,  gave  to  himself 
and  Licinius  that  of  the  Augusii,  and  to  Daia 
and  Constantine  that  of  sons  of  the  Augusti. 
Daia,  some  time  after,  in  a  letter  to  Galerius, 
took  occasion  to  observe,  that  at  the  last  general 
muster  he  had  been  saluted  by  his  army  under  the 


title  of  Augustus.  Galerius,  vexed  and  grieved 
at  this,  commanded  that  all  the  four  should  have 
the  appellation  of  emperor.^ 

CHAP.    XXXIII. 

And  now,  when  Galerius  was  in  the  eighteenth 
year  of  his  reign,  God  struck  him  with  an  in- 
curable plague.  A  malignant  ulcer  formed  itself 
low  down  in  his  secret  parts,  and  spread  by  de- 
grees. The  physicians  attempted  to  eradicate 
it,  and  healed  up  the  place  affected.  But  the 
sore,  after  having  been  skinned  over,  broke  out 
again  ;  a  vein  burst,  and  the  blood  flowed  in  such 
quantity  as  to  endanger  his  life.  The  blood, 
however,  was  stopped,  although  with  difficulty. 
The  physicians  had  to  undertake  their  operations 
anew,  and  at  length  they  cicatrized  the  wound. 
In  consequence  of  some  slight  motion  of  his 
body,  Galerius  received  a  hurt,  and  the  blood 
streamed  more  abundantly  than  before.  He 
grew  emaciated,  pallid,  and  feeble,  and  the  bleed- 
ing then  stanched.  The  ulcer  began  to  be  in- 
sensible to  the  remedies  applied,  and  a  gangrene 
seized  all  the  neighbouring  parts.  It  diffused 
itself  the  wider  the  more  the  corrupted  flesh  was 
cut  away,  and  everything  employed  as  the  means 
of  cure  served  but  to  aggravate  the  disease. 

"  The  masters  of  the  healing  art  withdrew." 

Then  famous  physicians  were  brought  in  from 
all  quarters  ;  but  no  human  means  had  any  suc- 
cess. Apollo  and  ^Esculapius  were  besought 
importunately  for  remedies :  Apollo  did  pre- 
scribe, and  the  distemper  augmented.  Already 
approaching  to  its  deadly  crisis,  it  had  occupied 
the  lower  regions  of  his  body  :  his  bowels  came 
out,  and  his  whole  seat  putrefied.  The  luckless 
physicians,  although  without  hope  of  overcoming 
the  malady,  ceased  not  to  apply  fomentations 
and  administer  medicines.  The  humours  having 
been  repelled,  the  distemper  attacked  his  in- 
testines, and  worms  were  generated  in  his  body. 
The  stench  was  so  foul  as  to  pervade  not  only 
the  palace,  but  even  the  whole  city ;  and  no 
wonder,  for  by  that  time  the  passages  from  his 
bladder  and  bowels,  having  been  devoured  by 
the  worms,  became  indiscriminate,  and  his  body, 
with  intolerable  anguish,  was  dissolved  into  one 
mass  of  corruption.^ 

"  Stung  to  the  soul,  he  bellowed  with  the  pain, 
So  roars  the  wounded  bull." —  Pitt. 

They  applied  warm  flesh  of  animals  to  the 
chief  seat  of  the  disease,  that  the  warmth  might 
draw  out  those  minute  worms  ;  and  accordingly, 
when  the  dressings  were  removed,  there  issued 
forth  an  innumerable  swarm  :   nevertheless  the 


I   [One  wonders  that  this  history  was  not  more  efficacious  in  en- 
forcins  the  hint  on  p.  12,  at  note  i,  su/>ra.] 
^  f.-^cts  xii.  23.] 


OF   THE   MANNER   IN   WHICH    THE   PERSECUTORS   DIED.      315 


prolific  disease  had  hatched  swarms  much  more 
abundant  to  prey  upon  and  consume  his  intes- 
tines. Already,  through  a  complication  of  dis- 
tempers, the  different  parts  of  his  body  had  lost 
their  natural  form  :  the  superior  part  was  dry, 
meagre,  and  haggard,  and  his  ghastly- looking 
skin  had  settled  itself  deep  amongst  his  bones  ; 
while  the  inferior,  distended  like  bladders,  re- 
tained no  appearance  of  joints.  These  things 
happened  in  the  course  of  a  complete  year  ;  and 
at  length,  overcome  by  calamities,  he  was  obliged 
to  acknowledge  God,  and  he  cried  aloud,  in  the 
intervals  of  raging  pain,  that  he  would  re-edify 
the  Church  which  he  had  demolished,  and  make 
atonement  for  his  misdeeds  ;  and  when  he  was 
near  his  end,  he  published  an  edict  of  the  tenor 
following :  — 

CHAP.    XXXIV. 

"Amongst  our  other  regulations  for  the  per- 
manent advantage  of  the  commonweal,  we  have 
hitherto  studied  to  reduce  all  things  to  a  con- 
formity with  the  ancient  laws  and  public  disci- 
pline of  the  Romans. 

"  It  has  been  our  aim  in  an  especial  manner, 
that  the  Christians  also,  who  had  abandoned  the 
rehgion  of  their  forefathers,  should  return  to  right 
opinions.  '  For  such  wilfulness  and  folly  had,  we 
know  not  how,  taken  possession  of  them,  that 
instead  of  observing  those  ancient  institutions, 
which  possibly  their  own  forefathers  had  estab- 
lished, they,  through  caprice,  made  laws  to  them- 
selves, and  drew  together  into  different  societies 
many  men  of  widely  different  persuasions. 

"After  the  publication  of  our  edict,  ordaining 
the  Christians  to  betake  themselves  to  the  ob- 
servance of  the  ancient  institutions,  many  of 
them  were  subdued  through  the  fear  of  danger, 
and  moreover  many  of  them  were  exposed  to 
jeopardy ;  nevertheless,  because  great  numbers 
still  persist  in  their  opinions,  and  because  we 
have  perceived  that  at  present  they  neither  pay 
reverence  and  due  adoration  to  the  gods,  nor 
yet  worship  their  own  God,  therefore  we,  from 
our  wonted  clemency  in  bestowing  pardon  on 
all,  have  judged  it  fit  to  extend  our  indulgence 
to  those  men,  and  to  permit  them  again  to  be 
Christians,  and  to  establish  the  places  of  their 
religious  assemblies  ;  yet  so  as  that  they  offend 
not  against  good  order. 

"By  another  mandate  we  purpose  to  signify 
unto  magistrates  how  they  ought  herein  to  de- 
mean themselves. 

"  Wherefore  it  will  be  the  duty  of  the  Chris- 
tians, in  consequence  of  this  our  toleration,  to 
pray  to  their  God  for  our  welfare,  and  for  that  of 
the  public,  and  for  their  own  ;  that  the  common- 
weal may  continue  safe  in  every  quarter,  and 
that  they  themselves  may  live  securely  in  their 
habitations." 


CHAP.    XXXV. 

This  edict  was  promulgated  at  Nicomedia  on 
the  day  preceding  the  kalends  of  May,'  in  the 
eighth  consulship  of  Galerius,  and  the  second  of 
Maximin  Daia.  Then  the  prison-gates  having 
been  thrown  open,  you,  my  best  beloved  Dona- 
tus,^  together  with  the  other  confessors  for  the 
faith,  were  set  at  liberty  from  a  jail,  which  had 
been  your  residence  for  six  years.  Galerius, 
however,  did  not,  by  publication  of  this  edict, 
obtain  the  divine  forgiveness.  In  a  few  days 
after  he  was  consumed  by  the  horrible  disease 
that  had  brought  on  an  universal  putrefaction. 
Dying,  he  recommended  his  wife  and  son  to  Li- 
cinius,  and  delivered  them  over  into  his  hands. 
This  event  was  known  at  Nicomedia  before  the 
end  of  the  month.^  His  vicennial  anniversary 
was  to  have  been  celebrated  on  the  ensuing 
kalends  of  March.* 

CHAP.    XXXVI. 

Daia,  on  receiving  this  news,  hasted  with  re- 
lays of  horses  from  the  East,  to  seize  the  domin- 
ions of  Galerius,  and,  while  Licinius  lingered  in 
Europe,  to  arrogate  to  himself  all  the  country  as 
far  as  the  narrow  seas  of  Chalcedon,  On  his 
entry  into  Bithynia,  he,  with  the  view  of  acquir- 
ing immediate  popularity,  abolished  Galerius' 
tax,  to  the  great  joy  of  all.  Dissension  arose 
between  the  two  emperors,  and  almost  an  open 
war;  They  stood  on  the  opposite  shores  with 
their  armies.  Peace,  however,  and  amity  were 
established  under  certain  conditions.  Licinius 
and  Daia  met  on  the  narrow  sees,  concluded  a 
treaty,  and  in  token  of  friendship  joined  hands. 
Then  Daia,  believing  all  things  to  be  in  security, 
returned  (to  Nicomedia),  and  was  in  his  new 
dominions  what  he  had  been  in  Syria  and  Egypt. 
First  of  all,  he  took  away  the  toleration  and 
general  protection  granted  by  Galerius  to  the 
Christians,  and,  for  this  end,  he  secredy  pro- 
cured addresses  from  different  cities,  requesting 
that  no  Christian  church  might  be  built  within 
their  walls ;  and  thus  he  meant  to  make  that 
which  was  his  own  choice  appear  as  if  extorted 
from  him  by  importunity.  In  compliance  with 
those  addresses,  he  introduced  a  new  mode  of 
government  in  things  respecting  religion,  and  for 
each  city  he  created  a  high  priest,  chosen  from 
among  the  persons  of  most  distinction.  The 
office  of  those  men  was  to  make  daily  sacrifices 
to  all  their  gods,  and,  with  the  aid  of  the  former 
priests,  to  prevent  the  Christians  from  erecting 
churches,  or  from  worshipping  God  either  pub- 
licly or  in  private ;  and  he  authorized  them  to 
compel  the  Christians  to  sacrifice  to  idols,  and, 


'  30th  of  April. 

2  [See  p.  301,  supra,  and  p,  316,  in/ra.\ 

3  May. 

•<  ist  of  March  following. 


3^6 


OF   THE   MANNER   IN   WHICH    THE   PERSECUTORS   DIED. 


on  their  refusal,  to  bring  them  before  the  civil 
magistrate  ;  and,  as  if  this  had  not  been  enough, 
in  every  province  he  established  a  superintend- 
ent priest,  one  of  chief  eminence  in  the  state  ; 
and  he  commanded  that  all  those  priests  newly 
instituted  should  appear  in  white  habits,  that 
being  the  most  honourable  distinction  of  dress." 
And  as  to  the  Christians,  he  purposed  to  follow 
the  course  that  he  had  followed  in  the  East,  and, 
affecting  the  show  of  clemency,  he  forbade  the 
slaying  of  God's  servants,  but  he  gave  command 
that  they  should  be  mutilated.  So  the  confess- 
ors for  the  faith  had  their  ears  and  nostrils  slit, 
their  hands  and  feet  lopped  off,  and  their  eyes 
dug  out  of  the  sockets. 

CHAP.    XXXVII. 

While  occupied  in  this  plan,  he  received  let- 
ters from  Constantine  which  deterred  him  from 
proceeding  in  its  execution,  so  for  a  time  he  dis- 
sembled his  purpose  ;  nevertheless  any  Christian 
that  fell  within  his  power  was  privily  thrown  into 
the  sea.  Neither  did  he  cease  from  his  custom 
of  sacrificing  every  day  in  the  palace.  It  was 
also  an  invention  of  his  to  cause  all  animals 
used  for  food  to  be  slaughtered,  not  by  cooks, 
but  by  priests  at  the  altars  ;  so  that  nothing  was 
ever  served  up,  unless  foretasted,  consecrated, 
and  sprinkled  with  wine,  according  to  the  rites 
of  paganism  ;  and  whoever  was  invited  to  an 
entertainment  must  needs  have  returned  from  it 
impure  and  defiled.  In  all  things  else  he  re- 
sembled his  preceptor  Galerius.  For  if  aught 
chanced  to  have  been  left  untouched  by  Diodes 
and  Maximian,  //la^  did  Daia  greedily  and 
shamelessly  carry  off.  And  now  the  granaries 
of  each  individual  were  shut,  and  all  warehouses 
sealed  up,  and  taxes,  not  yet  due,  were  levied 
by  anticipation.  Hence  famine,  from  neglect  of 
cultivation,  and  the  prices  of  all  things  enhanced 
beyond  measure.  Herds  and  flocks  were  driven 
from  their  pasture  for  the  daily  sacrifice.  By 
gorging  his  soldiers  with  the  flesh  of  sacrifices, 
he  so  corrupted  them,  that  they  disdained  their 
wonted  pittance  in  corn,  and  wantonly  threw  it 
away.  Meanwhile  Daia  recompensed  his  body- 
guards, wiio  were  very  numerous,  with  costly 
raiment  and  gold  medals,  made  donatives  in 
silver  to  the  common  soldiers  and  recruits,  and 
bestowed  every  sort  of  largess  on  the  barbarians 
who  served  in  his  army.  As  to  grants  of  the 
property  of  living  persons,  which  he  made  to  his 
favourites  whenever  they  chose  to  ask  what  be- 
longed to  another,  I  know  not  whether  the  same 
thanks  might  not  be  due  to  him  that  are  given 
to  merciful  robbers,  who  spoil  without  murder- 
ing. 


\  [Singular  that  he  does  not  assert  that  in   this  he  imitated  the 
Christian  discipline.] 


CHAP.    XXXVIII. 

But  //;<?/ which  distinguished  his  character,  and 
in  which   he   transcended   all   former  emperors, 
was   his   desire   of  debauching  women.     What 
else  can  I  call  it  but  a  blind  and  headstrong 
passion?     Yet  such  epithets  feebly  express  my 
indignation   in   reciting    his    enormities.      The 
magnitude  of  the  guilt  overpowers  my  tongue, 
and  makes  it  unequal   to  its  office.     Eunuchs 
and  panders  made  search  everywhere,  and  no 
sooner  was   any  comely  face    discovered,  than 
husbands  and  parents  were  obliged  to  withdraw. 
Matrons  of  quality  and  virgins  were  stripped  of 
their  robes,  and  all  their  limbs  were  inspected, 
lest  any  part  should  be  unworthy  of  the  bed 
of  the  emperor.     Whenever  a  woman  resisted, 
death  by  drowning  was  inflicted  on  her ;  as  if, 
under  the  reign  of  this  adulterer,  chastity  had 
been  treason.     Some  men  there  were,  who,  be- 
holding the  violation  of  wives  whom  for  virtue 
and  fidelity  they  affectionately  loved,  could  not 
endure    their   anguish   of  mind,  and   so   killed 
themselves.     While  this   monster  ruled,  it  was 
singular  deformity  alone  which  could  shield  the 
honour  of  any  female  from  his  savage  desires. 
i?t  length  he   introduced  a   custom   prohibiting 
marriage   unless  with  the   imperial   permission; 
and  he  made  this  an  instrument  to  serve  the 
purposes   of  his   lewdness.      After   having   de- 
bauched freeborn   maidens,  he   gave    them    for 
wives  to  his  slaves.     His  courtiers  also  imitated 
the  example  of  the  emperor,  and  violated  with 
impunity  the   beds   of  their   dependants.     For 
who  was  there  to  punish  such  offences  ?     As  for 
the  daughters  of  men  of  middle  rank,  any  who 
were  inclined  took  them  by  force.     Ladies  of 
quality,  who  could  not  be  taken  by  force,  were 
petitioned  for,  and  obtained  from  the  emperor 
by  way  of  free  gift.     Nor  could  a  father  oppose 
this  ;  for  the  imperial  warrant  having  been  once 
signed,  he  had  no  alternative  but  to  die,  or  to 
receive  some  barbarian  as  his  son-in-law.     For 
hardly  was  there  any  person  in  the  life-guard 
except  of  those  people,  who,  having  been  driven 
from  their  habitations  by  the  Goths  in  the  twen- 
tieth year  of  Diocletian,  yielded  themselves  to 
Galerius,  and  entered  into  his  service.     It  was 
ill  for  humankind,  that  men  who  had  fled  from 
the  bondage  of  barbarians  should  thus  come  to 
lord  it  over  the   Romans.     Environed  by  such 
guards,  Daia  oppressed  and  insulted  the  Eastern 
empire. 

CHAP.    XXXIX. 

Now  Daia,  in  gratifying  his  libidinous  desires, 
made  his  own  will  the  standard  of  right ;  and 
therefore  he  would  not  refrain  from  soliciting 
the  widow  of  Galerius,  the  Empress  Valeria,  to 
whom  he  had  lately  given  the  appellation  of 
mother.     After  the  death  of  her  husband,  she 


OF   THE    MANNER    IN    WHICH    THE    PERSECUTORS    DIED.      317 


had  repaired  to  Daia,  because  she  imagined  that 
she  might  live  with  more  security  in  his  domin- 
ions than  elsewhere,  especially,  as  he  was  a  mar- 
ried man ;  but  the  flagitious  creature  became 
instantly  inflamed  with  a  passion  for  her.  Va- 
leria was  still  in  weeds,  the  time  of  her  mourn- 
ing not  being  yet  expired.  He  sent  a  message 
to  her  proposing  marriage,  and  offering,  on  her 
compliance,  to  put  away  his  wife.  She  frankly 
returned  an  answer  such  as  she  alone  could  dare 
to  do  :  first,  that  she  would  not  treat  of  marriage 
while  she  was  in  weeds,  and  while  the  ashes  of 
Galerius,  her  husband,  and,  by  adoption,  the 
father  of  Daia,  were  yet  warm  ;  next,  that  he 
acted  impiously,  in  proposing  to  divorce  a  faith- 
ful wife  to  make  room  for  another,  whom  in  her 
turn  he  would  also  cast  off;  and,  lastly,  that  it 
was  indecent,  unexampled,  and  unlawful  for  a 
woman  of  her  title  and  dignity  to  engage  a  sec- 
ond time  in  wedlock.'  This  bold  answer  having 
been  reported  to  Daia,  presently  his  desires 
changed  into  rage  and  furious  resentment.  He 
pronounced  sentence  of  forfeiture  against  the 
princess,  seized  her  goods,  removed  her  attend- 
ants, tortured  her  eunuchs  to  death,  and  ban- 
ished her  and  her  mother  Prisca :  but  he 
appointed  no  particular  place  for  her  residence 
while  in  banishment ;  and  hence  he  insultingly 
expelled  her  from  every  abode  that  she  took  in 
the  course  of  her  wanderings  ;  and,  to  complete 
all,  he  condemned  the  ladies  who  enjoyed  most 
of  her  friendship  and  confidence  to  die  on  a 
false  accusation  of  adultery. 

CHAP.    XL. 

There  was  a  certain  matron  of  high  rank  who 
already  had  grandchildren  by  more  than  one 
son.  Her  Valeria  loved  like  a  second  mother, 
and  Daia  suspected  that  her  advice  had  pro- 
duced that  refusal  which  Valeria  gave  to  his 
matrimonial  offers ;  and  therefore  he  charged 
the  president  Eratineus  to  have  her  put  to  death 
in  a  way  that  might  injure  her  fame.  To  her 
two  others,  equally  noble,  were  added.  One  of 
them,  who  had  a  daughter  a  Vestal  virgin  at 
Rome,  maintained  an  intercourse  by  stealth  with 
the  banished  Valeria,  The  other,  married  to  a 
senator,  was  intimately  connected  with  the  em- 
press. Excellent  beauty  and  virtue  proved  the 
cause  of  their  death.  They  were  dragged  to  the 
tribunal,  not  of  an  upright  judge,  but  of  a  robber. 
Neither  indeed  was  there  any  accuser,  until  a  cer- 
tain Jew,  one  charged  with  other  offences,  was 
induced,  through  hope  of  pardon,  to  give  false 
evidence  against  the  innocent.  The  equitable 
and  vigilant  magistrate  conducted  him  out  of 
the  city  under  a  guard,  lest  the  populace  should 
have  stoned  him.     This  tragedy  was  acted  at 


'  [Language  greatly  the  product  of  Christian  influences.] 


Nicaea.  The  Jew  was  ordered  to  the  torture  till 
he  should  speak  as  he  had  been  instructed,  while 
the  torturers  by  blows  prevented  the  women 
from  speaking  in  their  own  defence.  The  in- 
nocent were  condemned  to  die.  Then  there 
arose  wailing  and  lamentation,  not  only  of  the 
senator,  who  attended  on  his  well-deserving  con- 
sort, but  amongst  the  spectators  also,  whom  this 
proceeding,  scandalous  and  unheard  of,  had 
brought  together ;  and,  to  prevent  the  multi- 
tude from  violently  rescuing  the  condemned 
persons  out  of  the  hands  of  the  executioners, 
military  commanders  followed  with  light  infan- 
try and  archers.  And  thus,  under  a  guard  of 
armed  soldiers,  they  were  led  to  punishment. 
Their  domestics  having  been  forced  to  flee,  they 
would  have  remained  without  burial,  had  not 
the  compassion  of  friends  interred  them  by 
stealth.  Nor  was  the  promise  of  pardon  made 
good  to  the  feigned  adulterer,  for  he  was  fixed 
to  a  gibbet,  and  then  he  disclosed  the  whole 
secret  contrivance ;  and  with  his  last  breath  he 
protested  to  all  the  beholders  that  the  women 
died  innocent. 

CHAP.    XLL 

But  the  empress,  an  exile  in  some  desert 
region  of  Syria,  secretly  informed  her  father 
Diocletian  of  the  calamity  that  had  befallen  her. 
He  despatched  messengers  to  Daia,  requesting 
that  his  daughter  might  be  sent  to  him.  He 
could  not  prevail.  Again  and  again  he  en- 
treated ;  yet  she  was  not  sent.  At  length  he 
employed  a  relation  of  his,  a  military  man  high 
in  power  and  authority,  to  implore  Daia  by  the 
remembrance  of  past  favours.  This  messenger, 
equally  unsuccessful  in  his  negotiation  as  the 
others,  reported  to  Diocletian  that  his  prayers 
were  vain. 

CHAP.    XLII. 

At  this  time,  by  command  of  Constantine,  the 
statues  of  Maximian  Herculius  were  thrown 
down,  and  his  portraits  removed  ;  and,  as  the 
two  old  emperors  were  generally  delineated  in 
one  piece,  the  portraits  of  both  were  removed 
at  the  same  time.  Thus  Diocletian  lived  to  see 
a  disgrace  which  no  former  emperor  had  ever 
seen,  and,  under  the  double  load  of  vexation  of 
spirit  and  bodily  maladies,  he  resolved  to  die. 
Tossing  to  and  fro,  with  his  soul  agitated  by 
grief,  he  could  neither  eat  nor  take  rest.  He 
sighed,  groaned,  and  wept  often,  and  incessantly 
threw  himself  into  various  postures,  now  on  his 
couch,  and  now  on  the  ground.  So  he,  who  for 
twenty  years  was  the  most  prosperous  of  emperors, 
having  been  cast  down  into  the  obscurity  of  a 
private  station,  treated  in  the  most  contumelious 
manner,  and  compelled  to  abhor  life,  became 
incapable  of  receiving  nourishment,  and,  worn 
out  with  anguish  of  mind,  expired. 


i8      OF   THE    MANNER    IN    WHICH    THE    PERSECUTORS    DIED. 


CHAP.    XLIII. 

Of  the  adversaries  of  God  there  still  remained 
one,  whose  overthrow  and  end  I  am  now  to 
relate. 

Daia  had  entertained  jealousy  and  ill-will 
against  Licinius  from  the  time  that  the  prefer- 
ence was  given  to  him  by  Galerius ;  and  those 
sentiments  still  subsisted,  notwithstanding  the 
treaty  of  peace  lately  concluded  between  them. 
When  Daia  heard  that  the  sister  of  Constantine 
was  betrothed  to  Licinius,  he  apprehended  that 
the  two  emperors,  by  contracting  this  affinity, 
meant  to  league  against  him ;  so  he  privily  sent 
ambassadors  to  Rome,  desiring  a  friendly  alliance 
with  Maxentius  :  he  also  wrote  to  him  in  terms 
of  cordiality.  The  ambassadors  were  received 
courteously,  friendship  established,  and  in  token 
of  it  the  effigies  of  Maxentius  and  Daia  were 
placed  together  in  public  view.  Maxentius  will- 
ingly embraced  this,  as  if  it  had  been  an  aid 
from  heaven  ;  for  he  had  already  declared  war 
against  Constantine,  as  if  to  revenge  the  death  of 
his  father  Maximian.  From  this  appearance 
of  filial  piety  a  suspicion  arose,  that  the  detest- 
able old  man  had  but  feigned  a  quarrel  with  his 
son  that  he  might  have  an  opportunity  to  destroy 
his  rivals  in  power,  and  so  make  way  for  himself 
and  his  son  to  possess  the  whole  empire.  This 
conjecture,  however,  had  no  foundation ;  for  his 
true  purpose  was  to  have  destroyed  his  son  and 
the  others,  and  then  to  have  reinstated  himself 
and  Diocletian  in  sovereign  authority. 

CHAP.    XLIV. 

And  now  a  civil  war  broke  out  between  Con- 
stantine and  Maxentius.  Although  Maxentius 
kept  himself  within  Rome,  because  the  sooth- 
sayers had  foretold  that  if  he  went  out  of  it  he 
should  perish,  yet  he  conducted  the  military 
operations  by  able  generals.  In  forces  he  ex- 
ceeded his  adversary  ;  for  he  had  not  only  his 
father's  army,  which  deserted  from  Severus,  but 
also  his  own,  which  he  had  lately  drawn  together 
out  of  Mauritania  and  Italy.  They  fought,  and 
the  troops  of  Maxentius  prevailed.  At  length 
Constantine,  with  steady  courage  and  a  mind 
prepared  for  every  event,  led  his  whole  forces 
to  the  neighbourhood  of  Rome,  and  encamped 
them  opposite  to  the  Milvian  bridge.  The  anni- 
versary of  the  reign  of  Maxentius  approached, 
that  is,  the  sixth  of  the  kalends  of  November,' 
and  the  fifth  year  of  his  reign  was  drawing  to  an 
end. 

Constantine  was  directed  in  a  dream  to  cause 
the  heavenly  sign  to  be  delineated  on  the  shields 
of  his  soldiers,  and  so  to  proceed  to  battle.  He 
did  as  he  had  been  commanded,  and  he  marked  i 

'  27th  of  October. 


on  their  shields  the  letter  X,  with  a  perpendicular 
line  drawn  through  it  and  turned  round  thus  at 
D  the  top,  being  the  cipher  of  Christ.  Having 
<T^  this  sign,  his  troops  stood  to  arms.  The 
enemies  advanced,  but  without  their  emperor, 
and  they  crossed  the  bridge.  The  armies  met, 
and  fought  with  the  utmost  exertions  of  valour, 
and  firmly  maintained  their  ground.  In  the 
meantime  a  sedition  arose  at  Rome,  and  Max- 
entius was  reviled  as  one  who  had  abandoned 
all  concern  for  the  safety  of  the  commonweal ; 
and  suddenly,  while  he  exhibited  the  Circensian 
games  on  the  anniversary  of  his  reign,  the  people 
cried  with  one  voice,  "  Constantine  cannot  be 
overcome  !  "  Dismayed  at  this,  Maxentius  burst 
from  the  assembly,  and  having  called  some  sena-" 
tors  together,  ordered  the  Sibylline  books  to  be 
searched.     In  them  it  was  found  that :  — 

"On  the  same  day  the  enemy  of  the  Romans  should 
perish." 

Led  by  this  response  to  the  hopes  of  victory,  he 
went  to  the  field.  The  bridge  in  his  rear  was 
broken  down.  At  sight  of  that  the  battle  grew 
hotter.  The  hand  of  the  Lord  prevailed,  and 
the  forces  of  Maxentius  were  routed.  He  fled 
towards  the  broken  bridge  ;  but  the  multitude 
pressing  on  him,  he  was  driven  headlong  into 
the  Tiber. 

This  destructive  war  being  ended,  Constantine 
was  acknowledged  as  emperor,  with  great  rejoi- 
cings, by  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome.  And 
now  he  came  to  know  the  perfidy  of  Daia ;  for 
he  found  the  letters  written  to  Maxentius,  and 
saw  the  statues  and  portraits  of  the  two  associates 
which  had  been  set  up  together.  The  senate,  in 
reward  of  the  valour  of  Constantine,  decreed  to 
him  the  title  of  Maximus  (the  Greatest),  a  title 
which  Daia  had  always  arrogated  to  himself. 
Daia,  when  he  heard  that  Constantine  was  victo- 
rious and  Rome  freed,  expressed  as  much  sorrow 
as  if  he  himself  had  been  vanquished  ;  but  after- 
wards, when  he  heard  of  the  decree  of  the  sen- 
ate, he  grew  outrageous,  avowed  enmity  towards 
Constantine,  and  made  his  title  of  the  Greatest 
a  theme  of  abuse  and  raillery. 

CHAP.    XLV. 

Constantine  having  settled  all  things  at  Rome, 
went  to  Milan  about  the  beginning  of  winter. 
Thither  also  Licinius  came  to  receive  his  wife 
Constantia.  When  Daia  understood  that  they 
were  busied  in  solemnizing  the  nuptials,  he  moved 
out  of  Syria  in  the  depth  of  a  severe  winter,  and 
by  forced  marches  he  came  into  Bithynia  with  an 
army  much  impaired  ;  for  he  lost  all  his  beasts 
of  burden,  of  whatever  kind,  in  consequence  of 
excessive  rains  and  snow,  miry  ways,  cold  and 
fatigue.      Their   carcases,   scattered    about   the 


OF   THE   MANNER   IN   WHICH   THE   PERSECUTORS   DIED.     319 


roads,  seemed  an  emblem  of  the  calamities  of 
the  impending  war,  and  the  presage  of  a  like 
destruction  that  awaited  the  soldiers.  Daia  did 
not  halt  in  his  own  territories ;  but  immediately 
crossed  the  Thracian  Bosphorus,  and  in  a  hos- 
tile manner  approached  the  gates  of  Byzantium. 
There  was  a  garrison  in  the  city,  established  by 
Licinius  to  check  any  invasion  that  Daia  might 
make.  At  first  Daia  attempted  to  entice  the 
soldiers  by  the  promise  of  donatives,  and  then 
to  intimidate  them  by  assault  and  storm.  Yet 
neither  promises  nor  force  availed  aught.  After 
eleven  days  had  elapsed,  within  which  time 
Licinius  might  have  learned  the  state  of  the 
garrison,  the  soldiers  surrendered,  not  through 
treachery,  but  because  they  were  too  weak  to 
make  a  longer  resistance.  Then  Daia  moved 
on  to  Heraclea  (otherwise  called  Perinthus), 
and  by  delays  of  the  like  nature  before  that  place 
lost  some  days.  And  now  Licinius  by  expedi- 
tious marches  had  reached  Adrianople,  but  with 
forces  not  numerous.  Then  Daia,  having  taken 
Perinthus  by  capitulation,  and  remained  there 
for  a  short  space,  moved  forwards  eighteen 
miles  to  the  first  station.  Here  his  progress 
was  stopped ;  for  Licinius  had  already  occu- 
pied the  second  station,  at  the  distance  also  of 
eighteen  miles.  Licinius,  having  assembled  what 
forces  he  could  from  the  neighbouring  quarters, 
advanced  towards  Daia,  rather  indeed  to  retard 
his  operations  than  with  any  purpose  of  fighting, 
or  hope  of  victory  :  for  Daia  had  an  army  of 
seventy  thousand  men,  while  he  himself  had 
scarce  thirty  thousand ;  for  his  soldiers  being 
dispersed  in  various  regions,  there  was  not  time, 
on  that  sudden  emergency,  to  collect  all  of  them 
together. 

CHAP.    XLVI. 

The  armies  thus  approaching  each  other, 
seemed  on  the  eve  of  a  battle.  Then  Daia 
made  this  vow  to  Jupiter,  that  if  he  obtained  vic- 
tory he  would  extinguish  and  utterly  efface  the 
name  of  the  Christians.  And  on  the  following 
night  an  angel  of  the  Lord  seemed  to  stand 
before  Licinius  while  he  was  asleep,  admonish- 
ing him  to  arise  immediately,  and  with  his  whole 
army  to  put  up  a  prayer  to  the  Supreme  God, 
and  assuring  him  that  by  so  doing  he  should 
obtain  victory.  Licinius  fancied  that,  hearing 
this,  he  arose,  and  that  his  monitor,  who  was 
nigh  him,  directed  how  he  should  pray,  and  in 
what  words.  Awaking  from  sleep,  he  sent  for 
one  of  his  secretaries,  and  dictated  these  words 
exactly  as  he  had  heard  them  :  — 

"  Supreme  God,  we  beseech  Thee  ;  Holy  God,  we  be- 
seech Thee;  unto  Thee  we  commend  all  right; 
unto  Thee  we  commend  our  safety  ;  unto  Thee 
we  commend  our  cm])ire.  By  Thee  we  live,  by 
Thee  we  are  victorious  and  happy.  Supreme 
Holy  God,  hear  our  prayers  ;  to  Thee  we  stretch 
forth  our  arms.     Hear,  Holy  Supreme  God." 


Many  copies  were  made  of  these  words,  and 
distributed  amongst  the  principal  commanders, 
who  were  to  teach  them  to  the  soldiers  under 
their  charge.  At  this  all  men  took  fresh  cour- 
age, in  the  confidence  that  victory  had  been 
announced  to  them  from  heaven.  Licinius  re- 
solved to  give  battle  on  the  kalends  of  May ; ' 
for  precisely  eight  years  before  Daia  had  re- 
ceived the  dignity  of  Ccesar,  and  Licinius  chose 
that  day  in  hopes  that  Daia  might  be  vanquished 
on  the  anniversary  of  his  reign,  as  Maxentius 
had  been  on  his.  Daia,  however,  purposed  to 
give  battle  earlier,  to  fight  on  the  day  before 
those  kalends,^  and  to  triumph  on  the  anniver- 
sary of  his  reign.  Accounts  came  that  Daia  was 
in  motion  ;  the  soldiers  of  Licinius  armed  them- 
selves, and  advanced.  A  barren  and  open  plain, 
called  Campus  Serenus,  lay  between  the  two 
armies.  They  were  now  in  sight  of  one  another. 
The  soldiers  of  Licinius  placed  their  shields  on 
the  ground,  took  off  their  helmets,  and,  follow- 
ing the  example  of  their  leaders,  stretched  forth 
their  hands  towards  heaven.  Then  the  emperor 
uttered  the  prayer,  and  they  all  repeated  it  after 
him.  The  host,  doomed  to  speedy  destruction, 
heard  the  murmur  of  the  prayers  of  their  ad- 
versaries. And  now,  the  ceremony  having  been 
thrice  performed,  the  soldiers  of  Licinius  be- 
came full  of  courage,  buckled  on  their  helmets 
again,  and  resumed  their  shields.  The  two  em- 
perors advanced  to  a  conference :  but  Daia 
could  not  be  brought  to  peace ;  for  he  held 
Licinius  in  contempt,  and  imagined  that  the 
soldiers  would  presently  abandon  an  emperor 
parsimonious  in  his  donatives,  and  enter  into  the 
service  of  one  liberal  even  to  profusion.  And 
indeed  it  was  on  this  notion  that  he  began  the 
war.  He  looked  for  the  voluntary  surrender  of 
the  armies  of  Licinius  ;  and,  thus  reinforced,  he 
meant  forthwith  to  have  attacked  Constantine. 

CHAP.    XLVII, 

So  the  two  armies  drew  nigh  ;  the  trumpets 
gave  the  signal ;  the  military  ensigns  advanced ; 
the  troops  of  Licinius  charged.  But  the  ene- 
mies, panic-struck,  could  neither  draw  their 
swords  nor  yet  throw  their  javelins.  Daia  went 
about,  and,  alternately  by  entreaties  and  prom- 
ises, attempted  to  seduce  the  soldiers  of  Licinius. 
But  he  was  not  hearkened  to  in  any  quarter,  and 
they  drove  him  back.  Then  were  the  troops  of 
Daia  slaughtered,  none  making  resistance  ;  and 
such  numerous  legions,  and  forces  so  mighty, 
were  mowed  down  by  an  inferior  enemy.  No 
one  called  to  mind  his  reputation,  or  former 
valour,  or  the  honourable  rewards  which  had 
been  conferred  on  him.  The  Supreme  God  did 
so  place  their  necks  under  the  sword  of  their 


'  ist  of  May.     [As  to  the  angel,  see  Gibbon,  cap.  xx.  note  41.] 
*  30th  of  April.     [Note  these  dates,  p.  315.] 


-,20     OF   THE    MANNER    IN   WHICH    THE    PERSECUTORS    DIED. 


foes,  that  they  seemed  to  have  entered  the  field, 
not  as  combatants,  but  as  men  devoted  to  death. 
After  great  numbers  had  fallen,  Daia  perceived 
that  everything  went  contrary  to  his  hopes ;  and 
therefore  he  threw  aside  the  purple,  and  having 
put  on  the  habit  of  a  slave,  hasted  across  the 
Thracian  Bosphorus.  One  half  of  his  army  per- 
ished in  battle,  and  the  rest  either  surrendered 
to  the  victor  or  fled ;  for  now  that  the  emperor 
himself  had  deserted,  there  seemed  to  be  no 
shame  in  desertion.  Before  the  expiration  of 
the  kalends  of  May,  Daia  arrived  at  Nicomedia, 
although  distant  one  hundred  and  sixty  miles 
from  the  field  of  battle.  So  in  the  space  of  one 
day  and  two  nights  he  performed  that  journey. 
Having  hurried  away  with  his  children  and  wife, 
and  a  few  officers  of  his  court,  he  went  towards 
Syria ;  but  having  been  joined  by  some  troops 
from  those  quarters,  and  having  collected  to- 
gether a  part  of  his  fugitive  forces,  he  halted  in 
Cappadocia,  and  then  he  resumed  the  imperial 
garb. 

CHAP.    XLVIII. 

Not  many  days  after  the  victory,  Licinius, 
having  received  part  of  the  soldiers  of  Daia  into 
his  service,  and  properly  distributed  them,  trans- 
ported his  army  into  Bithynia,  and  having  made 
his  entry  into  Nicomedia,  he  returned  thanks  to 
God,  through  whose  aid  he  had  overcome  ;  and 
on  the  ides  of  June,'  while  he  and  Constantine 
were  consuls  for  the  third  time,  he  commanded 
the  following  edict  for  the  restoration  of  the 
Church,  directed  to  the  president  of  the  prov- 
ince, to  be  promulgated  :  — 

"  When  we,  Constantine  and  Licinius,  empe- 
rors, had  an  interview  at  Milan,  and  conferred 
together  with  respect  to  the  good  and  security  of 
the  commonweal,  it  seemed  to  us  that,  amongst 
those  things  that  are  profitable  to  mankind  in 
general,  the  reverence  paid  to  the  Divinity  mer- 
ited our  first  and  chief  attention,  and  that  it  was 
proper  that  the  Christians  and  all  others  should 
have  liberty  to  follow  that  mode  of  religion 
which  to  each  of  them  appeared  best ;  so  that 
that  God,  who  is  seated  in  heaven,  might  be 
benign  and  propitious  to  us,  and  to  every 
one  under  our  government.  And  therefore  we 
judged  it  a  salutary  measure,  and  one  highly 
consonant  to  right  reason,  that  no  man  should 
be  denied  leave  of  attaching  himself  to  the  rites 
of  the  Christians,  or  to  whatever  other  religion 
his  mind  directed  him,  that  thus  the  supreme 
Divinity,  to  whose  worship  we  freely  devote  our- 
selves, might  continue  to  vouchsafe  His  favour 
and  beneficence  to  us.  And  accordingly  we 
give  you  to  know  that,  without  regard  to  any 
provisos  in  our  former  orders  to  you  concerning 
the  Christians,  all  who  choose  that  religion  are 

'  13th  of  June.     [Note  the  rise  oi^etieral  toleration.] 


to  be  permitted,  freely  and  absolutely,  to  remain 
in  it,  and  not  to  be  disturbed  any  ways,  or  mo- 
lested. And  we  thought  fit  to  be  thus  special 
in  the  things  committed  to  your  charge,  that  you 
might  understand  that  the  indulgence  which  we 
have  granted  in  matters  of  religion  to  the  Chris- 
tians is  ample  and  unconditional  ;  and  perceive 
at  the  same  time  that  the  open  and  free  exercise 
of  their  respective  religions  is  granted  to  all  oth- 
ers, as  well  as  to  the  Christians.  For  it  befits 
the  well-ordered  state  and  the  tranquillity  of  our 
times  that  each  individual  be  allowed,  according 
to  his  own  choice,  to  worship  the  Divinity ;  and 
we  mean  not  to  derogate  aught  from  the  honour 
due  to  any  religion  or  its  votaries.  Moreover, 
with  respect  to  the  Christians,  we  formerly  gave 
certain  orders  concerning  the  places  appropri- 
ated for  their  religious  assemblies  ;  but  now  we 
will  that  all  persons  who  have  purchased  such 
places,  either  from  our  exchequer  or  from  any 
one  else,  do  restore  them  to  the  Christians,  with- 
out money  demanded  or  price  claimed,  and  that 
this  be  performed  peremptorily  and  unambigu- 
ously ;  and  we  will  also,  that  they  who  have  ob- 
tained any  right  to  such  places  by  form  of  gift 
do  forthwith  restore  them  to  the  Christians  :  re- 
serving always  to  such  persons,  who  have  either 
purchased  for  a  price,  or  gratuitously  acquired 
them,  to  make  application  to  the  judge  of  the 
district,  if  they  look  on  themselves  as  entitled 
to  any  equivalent  from  our  beneficence. 

"  All  those  places  are,  by  your  intervention,  to 
be  immediately  restored  to  the  Christians.  And 
because  it  appears  that,  besides  the  places  ap- 
propriated to  religious  worship,  the  Christians  did 
possess  other  places,  which  belonged  not  to  in- 
dividuals, but  to  their  society  in  general,  that  is, 
to  their  churches,  we  comprehend  all  such  with- 
in the  regulation  aforesaid,  and  we  will  that  you 
cause  them  all  to  be  restored  to  the  society  or 
churches,  and  thai  without  hesitation  or  contro- 
versy :  Provided  always,  that  the  persons  mak- 
ing restitution  without  a  price  paid  shall  be  at 
liberty  to  seek  indemnification  from  our  bounty. 
In  furthering  all  which  things  for  the  behoof  of 
the  Christians,  you  are  to  use  your  utmost  dili- 
gence, to  the  end  that  our  orders  be  speedily 
obeyed,  and  our  gracious  purpose  in  securing 
the  public  tranquillity  promoted.  So  shall  that 
divine  favour  which,  in  affairs  of  the  mightiest 
importance,  we  have  already  experienced,  con- 
tinue to  give  success  to  us,  and  in  our  successes 
make  the  commonweal  happy.  And  that  the 
tenor  of  this  our  gracious  ordinance  may  be 
made  known  unto  all,  we  will  that  you  cause  it 
by  your  authority  to  be  published  everywhere." 

Licinius  having  issued  this  ordinance,  made  an 
harangue,  in  which  he  exhorted  the  Christians  to 
rebuild  their  religious  edifices. 

And  thus,  from  the  overthrow  of  the  Church 


OF   THE    MANNER    IN    WHICH    THE    PERSECUTORS    DIED.      321 


until  its  restoration,  there  was  a  space  of  ten 
years  and  about  four  months. 

CHAP.    XLIX. 

While  Licinius  pursued  with  his  army,  the 
fugitive  tyrant  retreated,  and  again  occupied  the 
passes  of  mount  Taurus ;  and  there,  by  erecting 
parapets  and  towers,  attempted  to  stop  the  march 
of  Licinius.  But  the  victorious  troops,  by  an 
attack  made  on  the  right,  broke  through  all  ob- 
stacles, and  Daia  at  length  fled  to  Tarsus.  There, 
being  hard  pressed  both  by  sea  and  land,  he 
despaired  of  finding  any  place  for  refuge  ;  and 
in  the  anguish  and  dismay  of  his  mind,  he  sought 
death  as  the  only  remedy  of  those  calamities  that 
God  had  heaped  on  him.  But  first  he  gorged 
himself  with  food,  and  large  draughts  of  wine,  as 
those  are  wont  who  believe  that  they  eat  and 
drink  for  the  last  time  ;  and  so  he  swallowed 
poison.  However,  the  force  of  the  poison,  re- 
pelled by  his  full  stomach,  could  not  immediately 
operate,  but  it  produced  a  grievous  disease,  re- 
sembling the  pestilence  ;  and  his  life  was  pro- 
longed only  that  his  sufferings  miglit  be  more 
severe.  And  now  the  poison  began  to  rage,  and 
to  burn  up  everything  within  him,  so  that  he  was 
driven  to  distraction  with  the  intolerable  pain  ; 
and  during  a  fit  of  frenzy,  which  lasted  four  days, 
he  gathered  handfuls  of  earth,  and  greedily 
devoured  it.  Having  undergone  various  and 
excruciating  torments,  he  dashed  his  forehead 
against  the  wall,  and  his  eyes  started  out  of  their 
sockets.  And  now,  become  blind,  he  imagined 
that  he  saw  God,  with  His  servants  arrayed  in 
white  robes,  sitting  in  judgment  on  him.  He 
roared  out  as  men  on  the  rack  are  wont,  and 
exclaimed  that  not  he,  but  others,  were  guilty. 
In  the  end,  as  if  he  had  been  racked  into  con- 
fession, he  acknowledged  his  own  guilt,  and 
lamentably  implored  Christ  to  have  mercy  upon 
him.  Then,  amidst  groans,  like  those  of  one 
burnt  alive,  did  he  breathe  out  his  guilty  soul  in 
the  most  horrible  kind  of  death. 

CHAP.    L. 

Thus  did  God  subdue  all  those  who  perse- 
cuted His  name,  so  that  neither  root  nor  branch 
of  them  remained  \  for  Licinius,  as  soon  as  he 
was  established  in  sovereign  authority,  com- 
manded that  Valeria  should  be  put  to  death. 
Daia,  although  exasperated  against  her,  never 
ventured  to  do  this,  not  even  after  his  discom- 
fiture and  flight,  and  when  he  knew  that  his  end 
approached.  Licinius  commanded  that  Can- 
didianus  also  should  be  put  to  death.  He  was 
the  son  of  Galerius  by  a  concubine,  and  Valeria, 
having  no  children,  had  adopted  him.  On  the 
news  of  the  death  of  Daia,  she  came  in  disguise 
to  the  court  of  Licinius,  anxious  to  observe  what 


might  befall  Candidianus.  The  youth,  present- 
ing himself  at  Nicomedia,  had  an  outward  show 
of  honour  paid  to  him,  and,  while  he  suspected 
no  harm,  was  killed.  Hearing  of  this  catastrophe, 
Valeria  immediately  fled.  The  Emperor  Severus 
left  a  son,  Severianus,  arrived  at  man's  estate, 
who  accompanied  Daia  in  his  flight  from  the 
field  of  battle.  Licinius  caused  him  to  be  con- 
demned and  executed,  under  the  pretence  that, 
on  the  death  of  Daia,  he  had  intentions  of 
assuming  the  imperial  purple.  Long  before  this 
time,  Candidianus  and  Severianus,  apprehending 
evil  from  Licinius,  had  chosen  to  remain  with 
Daia ;  while  Valeria  favoured  Licinius,  and  was 
willing  to  bestow  on  him  that  which  she  had  de- 
nied to  Daia,  all  rights  accruing  to  her  as  the 
widow  of  Galerius.  Licinius  also  put  to  death 
Maximus,  the  son  of  Daia,  a  boy  eight  years  old, 
and  a  daughter  of  Daia,  who  was  seven  years 
old,  and  had  been  betrothed  to  Candidianus. 
But  before  their  death,  their  mother  had  been 
thrown  into  the  Orontes,  in  which  river  she  her- 
self had  frequently  commanded  chaste  women  to 
be  drowned.  So,  by  the  unerring  and  just  judg- 
ment of  God,  all  the  impious  received  according 
to  the  deeds  that  they  had  done. 

CHAP.    LI. 

Valeria,  too,  who  for  fifteen  months  had  wan- 
dered under  a  mean  garb  from  province  to  prov- 
ince, was  at  length  discovered  in  Thessalonica,  was 
apprehended,  together  with  her  mother  Prisca, 
and  suffered  capital  punishment.  Both  the  ladies 
were  conducted  to  execution  ;  a  fall  from  gran- 
deur which  moved  the  pity  of  the  multitude  of 
beholders  that  the  strange  sight  had  gathered 
together.  They  were  beheaded,  and  their  bodies 
cast  into  the  sea.  Thus  the  chaste  demeanour 
of  Valeria,  and  the  high  rank  of  her  and  her 
mother,  proved  fatal  to  both  of  tliem." 

CHAP.    LIT. 

1  relate  all  those  things  on  the  authority  of 
well-informed  persons  ;  and  I  thought  it  proper 
to  commit  them  to  writing  exactly  as  they  hap- 
pened, lest  the  memory  of  events  so  imjiortant 
should  perish,  and  lest  any  future  historian  of 
the  persecutors  should  corrupt  the  truth,  either 
by  suppressing  their  offences  against  God,  or  the 
judgment  of  God  against  them.  To  His  ever- 
lasting mercy  ought  we  to  render  thanks,  that, 
having  at  length  looked  on  the  earth.  He  deigned 
to  collect  again  and  to  restore  His  flock,  partly 
laid  waste  by  ravenous  wolves,  and  partly  s(-at- 
tered  abroad,  and  to  extirpate  those  noxious 
wild  beasts  who  had  trod  down  its  pastures,  and 
destroyed  its  resting-places.^      Where  now  are 

'   [See  cap.  39,  p.  317,  suf>ra  ] 

2  [Let  us  recall  our  Lord's  forewarning:  Matt.  x.  16  and  Luke  x. 

3-1 


322 


ELUCIDATION. 


the  surnames  of  the  Jovii  and  the  Herculii, 
once  so  glorious  and  renowned  amongst  the  na- 
tions ;  surnames  insolently  assumed  at  first  by 
Diodes  and  Maximian,  and  afterwards  trans- 
feiTed  to  their  successors  ?  The  Lord  has  blot- 
ted them  out  and  erased  them  from  the  earth. 
Let  us  therefore  with  exultation  celebrate  the 
triumphs  of  God,  and  oftentimes  with  praises 
make  mention  of  His  victory ;  let  us  in  our 
prayers,  by  night  and  by  day,  beseech  Him  to 


confirm  for  ever  that  peace  which,  after  a  war- 
fare of  ten  years,  He  has  bestowed  on  His  own  : 
and  do  you,  above  all  others,  my  best  beloved 
Donatus,  who  so  well  deserve  to  be  heard,  im- 
plore the  Lord  that  it  would  please  Him  pro- 
pitiously and  mercifully  to  continue  His  pity 
towards  His  servants,  to  protect  His  people 
from  the  machinations  and  assaults  of  the  devil, 
and  to  guard  the  now  flourishing  churches  in 
perpetual  felicity. 


ELUCIDATION. 

(On  the  tenth  of  the  kalends  of  April,  p.  301.) 

Serious  difficulties  are  encountered  by  the  learned  in  reconciling  Lactantius  with  himself,  if, 
indeed,  the  fault  be  not  one  of  his  copyists  rather  than  his  own.  In  the  fourth  book  of  the 
Institutes  '  his  language  is  thus  given  by  Baluzius  :  ^  — 

"  Extremis  temporibus  Tiberii  Cnesaris,  ut  scriptum  legittius,  Dominus  noster  Jesus  Christus, 
a  Judaeis  cruciatus  t%X.  post  diem  deciinum  kalendanim  Aprilis,  duobus  Geminis  consulibus." 

Lactantius  was  writing  in  Nicomedia,  and  may  have  quoted  from  memory  what  he  had  read, 
perhaps  in  the  report  of  Pilate  himself.  The  expression  post  diem  decimum  kalendarum  Aprilis 
is  ambiguous  :  and  Jarvis  says,  "  My  impression  is,  that  it  means  '  after  the  tenth  day  before  the 
kalends  of  April ; '  that  is,  after  the  23d  of  March."  ^ 

But  here  our  author  says,  according  to  the  accurate  edition  of  Walchius*  (a.d.  1715),  — 

"  Exinde  tetrarchas  habuerunt  usque  ad  Herodem,  qui  fuit  sub  imperio  Tiberii  Caesaris  :  cujus 
anno  quinto  decimo,  id  est  duobus  Geminis  consulibus,  ante  dietn  septimam  Calendanim  Apriiium, 
Judaei  Christum  cruci  afifixerunt." 

But  here,  on  the  authority  of  forty  manuscripts,  Du  Fresnoy  reads,  "  ante  diem  decimam," 
which  he  labours  to  reconcile  with  " post  ditva  decimum,"  as  above.  Jarvis  adheres  to  the  read- 
ing septi}?iam,  supported  by  more  than  fifty  manuscripts,  and  decides  for  the  23d  of  March. 

He  cites  Augustine  to  the  same  effect  in  the  noted  passage  :  5  — 

"  Ille  autem  mense  conceptum  et  passum  esse  Christum,  et  Paschae  observatio  et  dies  eccle- 
siis  notissimus  Nativitatis  ejus  ostendit.  Qui  enim  mense  nono  natus  est  octavo  kalendas  Janva- 
rias  profecto  mense  primo  conceptus  est  circa  octavum  kalendas  Aprilis,  quod  tempus  passionis 
ejus  fuit." 

This,  Augustine  considers  to  be  "  seething  a  kid  in  mother's  milk,"  after  a  mystical  sense  ; 
cruelly  making  the  cross  to  coincide  with  the  maternity  of  the  Virgin,  who  beheld  her  Son  an 
innocent  victim  on  the  anniversary  of  her  salutation  by  the  angel. 


*  See  note  1,  p.  log.  2  \^  cited  by  Jarvis,  Ititrod.,  p.  379.  3  Baluz  ,  Miscellanea,  torn.  i.  p.  2. 

'■  Opp.,  ed.  Walchii,  p.  435.  5  Qu<estt.  /«  Exod.,  lib.  ii.,  Opp.,  torn.  lii.  p.  337. 


FRAGMENTS    OF    LACTANTIUS. 


I.  Fear,  love,  joy,  sadness,  lust,  eager  desire, 
anger,  pity,  emulation,  admiration,  —  these  mo- 
tions or  affections  of  the  mind  exist  from  the 
beginning  of  man's  creation  by  the  Lord  ;  and 
they  were  usefully  and  advantageously  introduced 
into  human  nature,  that  by  governing  himself 
by  these  with  method,  and  in  accordance  with 
reason,  man  may  be  able,  by  acting  manfully,  to 
exercise  those  good  qualities,  by  means  of  which 
he  would  justly  have  deserved  to  receive  from 
the  Lord  eternal  life.  For  these  affections  of 
the  mind  being  restrained  within  their  proper 
limits,  that  is,  being  rightly  employed,  produce 
at  present  good  qualities,  and  in  the  future  eter- 
nal rewards.  But  when  they  advance  '  beyond 
their  boundaries,  that  is,  when  they  turn  aside 
to  an  evil  course,  then  vices  and  iniquities  come 
forth,  and  produce  everlasting  punishments.^ 

n.  Within  our  memory,  also,  Lactantius 
speaks  of  metres,  —  the  pentameter  (he  says) 
and  the  tetrameter. ^ 

IIL  Firmianus,  writing  to  Probus  on  the  me- 
tres of  comedies,  thus  speaks  :  "  For  as  to  the 
question  which  you  proposed  concerning  the 
metres  of  comedies,  I  also  know  that  many  are 
of  opinion  that  the  plays  of  Terence  in  particu- 
lar have  not  the  metre  of  Greek  comedy,  —  that 
is,  of  Menander,  Philemon,  and  Diphilus,  which 


1  Affluentes. 

2  From  Muratorii  Antiquit.  Ital.  nted.  cev. 

3  From  Maxim.  Victorin.  de  carmine  heroico.  Cf.  HIeron., 
Catal.,  c.  80.  We  have  also  another  treatise,  which  is  entitled  "  On 
Grammar." 


consist  of  trimeter  verses  ;  for  our  ancient  writ- 
ers of  comedies,  in  the  modulation  of  their 
plays,  preferred  to  follow  Eupolis,  Cratinus,  and 
Aristophanes,  as  has  been  before  said."  That 
there  is  a  measure  —  that  is,  metre  ■♦  —  in  the 
plays  of  Terence  and  Plautus,  and  of  the  other 
comic  and  tragic  writers,  let  these  declare  :  Ci- 
cero, Scaurus,  and  Firmianus. 5 

IV.  We  will  bring  forward  the  sentiments  of 
our  Lactantius,  which  he  expressed  in  words  in 
his  third  volume  to  Probus  on  this  subject.  The 
Gauls,  he  says,  were  from  ancient  times  called 
Galatians,  from  the  whiteness  of  their  body  ;  and 
thus  the  Sibyl  terms  them.  And  this  is  what  the 
poet  intended  to  signify  when  he  said,  — 

"Gold  collars  deck  their  milk-white  necks," '" 

when  he  might  have  used  the  word  white.  It 
is  plain  that  from  this  the  province  was  called 
Galatia,  in  which,  on  their  arrival  in  it,  the  Gauls 
united  themselves  with  Greeks,  from  which  cir- 
cumstance that  region  was  called  Gallograecia, 
and  afterwards  Galatia.  And  it  is  no  wonder  if 
he  said  this  concerning  the  Galatians,  and  re- 
lated that  a  people  of  the  West,  having  passed 
over  so  great  a  distance  in  the  middle  of  the 
earth,  settled  in  a  region  of  the  East.? 


4  ixirpov. 

5  From  Rufinus,  the  grammarian,  on  Comic  Metres,  p.  2712. 

6  Virg.,  /En.,  viii.  660. 

^  From  Hieron.,  Commentar.  in  ep.  ad  Gal.,  1.  ii.,  opp.  ed. 
Vallars.  viii.  i,  p.  426.  Hieron.,  De  Viris  Illus.,  c.  80:  we  have 
"  four  books  of  epistles  to  Probus." 


323 


THE    PHCENIX. 


BY   AN    UNCERTAIN    AUTHOR.     ATTRIBUTED   TO   LACTANTIUS.' 


There  is  a  happy  spot,  retired  ^  in  the  first 
East,  where  the  great  gate  of  the  eternal  pole 
hes  open.  It  is  not,  however,  situated  near  to 
his  rising  in  summer  or  in  winter,  but  where 
the  sun  pours  the  day  fi-om  his  vernal  chariot. 
There  a  plain  spreads  its  open  tracts ;  nor  does 
any  mound  rise,  nor  hollow  valley  open  ^  itself. 
But  through  twice  six  ells  that  place  rises  above 
the  mountains,  whose  tops  are  thought  to  be 
lofty  among  us.  Here  is  the  grove  of  the  sun  ; 
a  wood  stands  planted  with  many  a  tree,  bloom- 
ing with  the  honour  of  perpetual  foliage.  When 
the  pole  had  blazed  with  the  fires  of  Phaethon, 
that  place  was  uninjured  by  the  flames ;  and 
when  the  deluge  had  immersed  the  world  in 
waves,  it  rose  above  the  waters  of  Deucalion. 
No  enfeebling  diseases,  no  sickly  old  age,  nor 
cruel  death,  nor  harsh  fear,  approaches  hither, 
nor  dreadful  crime,  nor  mad  desire  of  riches, 
nor  Mars,  nor  fury,  burning  with  the  love  of 
slaughter.-*  Bitter  grief  is  absent,  and  want 
clothed  in  rags,  and  sleepless  cares,  and  violent 
hunger.  No  tempest  rages  there,  nor  dreadful 
violence  of  the  wind  ;  nor  does  the  hoar-frost 
cover  the  earth  with  cold  dew.  No  cloud  ex- 
tends its  fleecy  5  covering  above  the  plains,  nor 
does  the  turbid  moisture  of  water  fall  from  on 
high ;  but  there  is  a  fountain  in  the  middle, 
which  they  call  by  the  name  of  "  living  ;  "^  it  is 
clear,  gentle,  and  abounding  with  sweet  waters, 
which,  bursting  forth  once  during  the  space  of 
each  ^  month,  twelve  times  irrigates  all  the  grove 
with  waters.  Here  a  species  of  tree,  rising  with 
lofty  stem,  bears  mellow  fruits  not  about  to  fall 
on   the   ground.     This   grove,    these   woods,    a 

'  [A  curious  expansion  of  the  fable  so  long  supposed  to  be  au- 
thentic history  of  a  natural  wonder,  and  probably  derived  from  Ori- 
ental tales  corroborated  by  travellers,  hee  vol.  i.  p.  12;  also  iii. 
554.     Vezeedee  bird-worship  may  have  sprung  out  of  it  ] 

^  Remotus.  The  reference  is  supposed  to  be  to  Arabia,  though 
some  think  that  India  is  pointed  out  as  the  abode  of  the  phoenix. 

3  Hiat. 

*  Caidis  amore  furor.     There  is  another  reading,  "  cedit." 

5  Vetera,  "  thin  fleecy  clouds."  So  Virg.,  Georg.,  i.  397;  Tenuia 
nee  lans  per  coelum  vellera  ferri. 

^  Vivum. 

^  Per  singula  tempora  mensum. 

324 


single  ^  bird,  the  phoenix,  inhabits,  —  single,  but 
it  lives  reproduced  by  its  own  death.  It  obeys 
and  submits  ■=*  to  Phoebus,  a  remarkable  attend- 
ant. Its  parent  nature  has  given  it  to  possess 
this  ofiice.  When  at  its  first  rising  the  saffron 
morn  grows  red,  when  it  puts  to  flight  the  stars 
with  its  rosy  light,  thrice  and  four  times  she 
plunges  her  body  into  the  sacred  waves,  thrice 
and  four  times  she  sips  water  from  the  living 
stream. '°  She  is  raised  aloft,  and  takes  her  seat 
on  the  highest  top  of  the  lofty  tree,  which  alone 
looks  down  upon  the  whole  grove  ;  and  turning 
herself  to  the  fresh  risings  of  the  nascent  Phoe- 
bus, she  awaits  his  rays  and  rising  beam.  And 
when  the  sun  has  thrown  back  the  threshold  of 
the  shining  gate,  and  the  light  gleam"  of  the 
first  light  has  shone  forth,  she  begins  to  pour 
strains  of  sacred  song,  and  to  hail  '^  the  new 
light  with  wondrous  voice,  which  neither  the 
notes  of  the  nightingale  '^  nor  the  flute  of  the 
Muses  can  equal  with  Cyrrhsean  '^  strains.  But 
neither  is  it  thought  that  the  dying  swan  can 
imitate  it,  nor  the  tuneful  strings  of  the  lyre  of 
Mercury.  After  that  Phoebus  has  brought  back 
his  horses  to  the  open  heaven, '5  and  continually 
advancing,  has  displayed  '^  his  whole  orb ;  she 
applauds  with  thrice-repeated  flapping  of  her 
wings,  and  having  thrice  adored  the  fire-bearing 
head,  is  silent.  And  she  also  distinguishes  the 
swift  hours  by  sounds  not  liable  to  error  by  day 
and  night :  an  overseer  ^^  of  the  groves,  a  vener- 
able priestess  of  the  wood,  and  alone  admitted 
to  thy  secrets,  O  Phoebus.     And  when  she  has 


8  Unica,  "  the  only  one."  It  was  supposed  that  only  one  phoenix 
lived  at  one  time.     So  the  proverb,  "  Phoenice  rarior." 

9  Birds  were  considered  sacred  to  peculiar  gods;  thus  the  phoenix 
was  held  sacred  to  Phoebus.     [Layard,  Nineveh,  vol.  ii.  p.  462.] 

'°  Gurgite. 

"  Aura.  So  Virg.,  /Eneid,  vi.  204:  "Discolor  unde  auri  per 
ramos  aura  refulsit." 

'^  Ciere. 

'3  Aedonise  voces.  The  common  reading  is  "/Edonise,"  contrary 
to  the  metre. 

'•>  i.e.,  strains  of  Apollo  and  the  Muses,  for  Cyrrha  is  at  the  foot 
of  Parnassus,  their  favourite  haunt. 

'S  Aperta  Olympi,  when  he  has  mounted  above  the  horizon. 

"j  Protulit. 

I?  Antistes. 


THE    PHCENIX. 


325 


now  accomplished  the  thousand  years  of  her  Ufe, 
and  length  of  days  has  rendered  her  burden- 
some/ in  order  that  she  may  renew  the  age 
which  has  glided  by,  the  fates  pressing  ==  her,  she 
flees  from  the  beloved  couch  of  the  accustomed 
grove.  And  when  she  has  left  the  sacred  places, 
through  a  desire  of  being  born  ^  again,  then  she 
seeks  this  world,  where  death  reigns.  Full  of 
years,  she  directs  her  swift  flight  into  Syria,  to 
which  Venus  herself  has  given  the  name  of 
Phoenice ;  *  and  through  trackless  deserts  she 
seeks  the  retired  groves  in  the  place,  where  a 
remote  wood  lies  concealed  through  the  glens. 
Then  she  chooses  a  lofty  palm,  with  top  reach- 
ing to  the  heavens,  which  has  the  pleasing  5 
name  of  phoenix  from  the  bird,  and  where  ^  no 
hurtful  living  creature  can  break  through,  or 
shmy  serpent,  or  any  bird  of  prey.  Then  ^olus 
shuts  in  the  winds  in  hanging  caverns,  lest  they 
should  injure  the  bright''  air  with  their  blasts,  or 
lest  a  cloud  collected  by  the  south  wind  through 
the  empty  sky  should  remove  the  rays  of  the  sun, 
and  be  a  hindrance  ^  to  the  bird.  Afterwards 
she  builds  for  herself  either  a  nest  or  a  tomb, 
for  she  perishes  that  she  may  live ;  yet  she  pro- 
duces herself.  Hence  she  collects  juices  and 
odours,  which  the  Assyrian  gathers  from  the 
rich  wood,  which  the  wealthy  Arabian  gathers  ; 
which  either  the  Pygmcean'^  nations,  or  India 
crops,  or  the  Sabaean  land  produces  from  its  soft 
bosom.  Hence  she  heaps  together  cinnamon 
and  the  odour  of  the  far-scented  amomum,  and 
balsams  with  mixed  leaves.  Neither  the  twig 
of  the  mild  cassia  nor  of  the  fragrant  acanthus 
is  absent,  nor  the  tears  and  rich  drop  of  frank- 
incense. To  these  she  adds  tender  ears '°  of 
flourishing  spikenard,  and  joins  the  too  pleasing 
pastures "  of  myrrh.  Immediately  she  places 
her  body  about  to  be  changed  on  the  strewed 
nest,  and  her  quiet  limbs  on  such  '^  a  couch. 
Then  with  her  mouth  she  scatters  juices  around 
and  upon  her  limbs,  about  to  die  with  her  own 
funeral  rites.  Then  amidst  various  odours  she 
yields  up  '^  her  life,  nor  fears  the  faith  of  so  great  a 
deposit.  In  the  meantime,  her  body,  destroyed 
by  death,  which  proves  the  source  of  life,'*  is 
hot,  and  the  heat  itself  produces  a  flame  ;  and  it 
conceives  fire  afar  off  from  the  light  of  heaven  : 
it  blazes,  and  is  dissolved  into  burnt  ashes.    And 


'  Gravem,  i.e.,  a  burden  to  her.self. 

2  Fatis  urgentibus;  others  read  "  spatiis  vergentibus." 

3  Studio  renascendi. 

■*  Venus  was  worshipped  in  Syro-Phoenice. 

5  Gratum;   others  read  "  Graium,"  tJrecian. 

*  Qui;   another  reading  is  "  quain,"  that  which. 

'  Purpureum.     There  may  be  a  reference  to  the  ear'y  dawn. 

8  Obsit. 

9  Some  ancient  writers  place  these  fabulous  people  in  India,  others 
beyond  Arabia. 

>°  Aristas.     The  word  is  sometimes  applied,  as  here,  to  spikenard. 
"  Et  sociat  myrrha;  pascua  grata  nimis;  another  reading  is,  "  et 
sociam  myrrhs  vim,  Panachaia  tua;." 

'-  In  talique  toro;  others,  "  vitalique  toro,"  i.e.,  on  a  death-bed. 

'3  Commendat. 

M  Genilali,  "  productive;  "  observe  the  antithesis. 


these  ashes  collected  in  death  it  fuses, '5  as  it 
were,  into  a  mass,  and  has  an  effect  '^  resembling 
seed.  From  this  an  animal  is  said  to  arise  with- 
out limbs,  but  the  worm  is  said  to  be  of  a  milky 
colour.  And  it  suddenly  increases  vastly  with 
an  imperfectly  formed  '^  body,  and  collects  itself 
into  the  appearance  of  a  well-rounded  egg. 
After  this  it  is  formed  again,  such  as  its  figure 
was  before,  and  the  phoenix,  having  burst  her 
shell,'^  shoots  forth,  even  as  caterpillars  '9  in  the 
fields,  when  they  are  fastened  by  a  thread  to  a 
stone,  are  wont  to  be  changed  into  a  butterfly. 
No  food  is  appointed  for  her  in  our  world,  nor 
does  any  one  make  it  his  business  to  feed  her 
while  unfledged.  She  sips  the  delicate  ^°  ambro- 
sial dews  of  heavenly  nectar  which  have  fallen 
from  the  star-bearing  pole.  She  gathers  these  ; 
with  these  the  bird  is  nourished  in  the  midst  of 
odours,  until  she  bears  a  natural  form.  But 
when  she  begins  to  flourish  with  early  youth, 
she  flies  forth  now  about  to  return  to  her  native 
abode.  Previously,  however,  she  encloses  in  an 
ointment  of  balsam,  and  in  myrrh  and  dis- 
solved^' frankincense,  all  the  remains  of  her  own 
body,  and  the  bones  or  ashes,  and  relics-^  of 
herself,  and  with  pious  mouth  brings  it  into  a 
round  form,^^  and  carrying  this  with  her  feet,  she 
goes  to  the  rising  of  the  sun,  and  tarrying  at  the 
altar,  she  draws  it  forth  in  the  sacred  temple. 
She  shows  and  presents  herself  an  object  of  ad- 
miration to  the  beholder  ;  such  great  beauty  is 
there,  such  great  honour  abounds.  In  the  first 
place,  her  colour  is  like  the  brilliancy  ^-^  of  that 
which  the  seeds  of  the  pomegranate  when  ripe 
take  under  the  smooth  rind  ;  -5  such  colour  as  is 
contained  in  the  leaves  which  the  poppy  pro- 
duces in  the  fields,  when  Flora  spreads  her  gar- 
ments beneath  the  blushing  sky.  Her  shoulders 
and  beautiful  breasts  shine  with  this  covering ; 
with  this  her  head,  with  this  her  neck,  and  the 
upper  parts  of  her  back  shine.  And  her  tail  is 
extended,  varied  with  yellow  metal,  in  the  spots 
of  which  mingled  purple  blushes.  Between  her 
wings  there  is  a  bright  -''  mark  above,  as  ^7  Tris  on 
high  is  wont  to  paint  a  cloud  from  above.  She 
gleams  resplendent  with  a  mingling  of  the  green 
emerald,  and  a  shining  beak-*  of  pure  horn 
opens  itself.     Her  eyes  are  large  ;  ^^  you  might 


>5  Conflat. 

'*>  Effectum ;  others  read,  "  ad  foetum  seminis  instar  habent. 

'7  Cum  corpore  curto;  others  read,  "  cum  tempore  certo." 

'8  Ruptis  exuviis.  The  same  word  is  used  by  Virgil  to  describe 
the  serpent  slipping  its  skin  —  "  positis  exuviis." 

■9  Tinea;. 

'°  Tenues;  others  read  "  teneri." 

2'  Thure  soluto. 

22  Exuvias  suas. 

^3  In  formam  conglobat. 

^*  Quem  croceum.  The  word  is  properly  used  to  denote  the 
colour  of  saffron:  it  is  also  applied  to  other  bright  colours. 

25  Sub  cortice  la;vi;  the  common  reading  is  "  sub  sidere  cseli." 

26  Clarum  insigne;  others  read,  "  aurum  .  .  .  insigneque." 
2'  Ceu;  others  read,  "  seu." 

28  Gemmea  cuspis.  Her  beak  is  of  horn,  but  bright  and  trans- 
parent as  a  gem. 

29  Ingentes  ociili;  others  read,  "  oculos." 


,26 


THE   PHCENIX. 


believe  that  they  were  two  jacinths ; '  from  the 
middle  of  which  a  bright  flame  shines.  An  ir- 
radiated crown  is  fitted^  to  the  whole  of  hei 
head,  resembling  on  high  the  glory  of  the  head 
of  Phoebus.3  Scales  cover  her  thighs  spangled 
with  yellow  metal,  but  a  rosy  ■♦  colour  paints  her 
claws  with  honour.  Her  form  is  seen  to  blend 
the  figure  of  the  peacock  with  that  of  the  paint- 
ed bird  of  Phasis.5  The  winged  creature  which 
is  produced  in  the  lands  of  the  Arabians,  whether 
it  be  beast  or  bird,  can  scarcely  equal  her  mag- 
nitude.'' She  is  not,  however,  slow,  as  birds 
which  through  the  greatness  of  their  body  have 
sluggish  motions,  and  a  very  heavy  ^  weight. 
But  she  is  light  and  swift,  full  of  royal  beauty. 
Such  she  always  shows  herself^  in  the  sight  of 
men.     Egypt  comes  hither  to  such  a  wondrous  ^ 


'  Hyacinthos;  gems  of  this  colour. 

^  /Equatur. 

3  i.e.,  the  rays  of  the  sun. 

<  Roseus;  others  read,  "  roseo  honore." 

s  The  pheasant. 

6  Magniciem.  Some  take  this  as  denoting  the  name  of  a  bird, 
but  no  such  bird  is  known. 

'  Pergrave  pondus;  others  read,  "per  grave  pondus,"  by  reason 
of  the  heavy  weight. 

*  Se  exhibet;  others  read,  "  se  probat." 

9  Tanti  ad  rairacuia  visas.     [Deut.  iv.  17.] 


sight,  and  the  exulting  crowd  salutes  the  rare 
bird.  Immediately  they  carve  her  image  on  the 
consecrated  marble,  and  mark  both  the  occur- 
rence and  the  day  with  a  new  title.  Birds  of 
every  kind  assemble  together ;  none  is  mindful 
of  prey,  none  of  fear.  Attended  by  a  chorus 
of  birds,  she  flies  through  the  heaven,  and  a 
crowd  accompanies  her,  exulting  in  the  pious 
duty.  But  when  she  has  arrived  at  the  regions 
of  pure  ether,  she  presently  returns  ;  ■"  afterwards 
she  is  concealed  in  her  own  regions.  But  oh, 
bird  of  happy  lot  and  fate,"  to  whom  the  god 
himself  granted  to  be  born  from  herself! 
Whether  it  be  female,  or  male,  or  neither,  or 
both,  happy  she,  who  enters  into  '^  no  compacts 
of  Venus.  Death  is  Venus  to  her ;  her  only 
pleasure  is  in  death  :  that  she  may  be  born,  she 
desires  previously  to  die.  She  is  an  offspring  to 
herself,  her  own  father  and  heir,  her  own  nurse, 
and  always  a  foster-child  to  herself.  She  is  her- 
self indeed,  but  not  the  same,  since  she  is  herself, 
and  not  herself,  having  gained  eternal  hfe  by  the 
blessing  of  death. 


'°  Inde;  others  read,  "  ille,"  but  the  allusion  is  very  obscure. 

"   Fill,  "  the  thread,"  i.e.,  of  fate. 

'^  Colit.     [Badger's  Nestorians,  vol.  i.  p.  122.] 


A    POEM    ON    THE    PASSION    OF    THE    LORD. 


FORMERLY   ASCRIBED    TO   LACTANTIUS. 


Whoever  you  are  who  approach,  and  are  en- 
tering the  precincts '  of  the  middle  of  the  temple, 
stop  a  little  and  look  upon  me,  who,  though  in- 
nocent, suffered  for  your  crime  ;  lay  me  up  in 
your  mind,  keep  me  in  your  breast.  I  am  He 
who,  pitying  the  bitter  misfortunes  of  men,  came 
hither  as  a  messenger  ^  of  offered  peace,  and  as 
a  full  atonement  ^  for  the  fault  of  men.-*  Here 
the  brightest  light  from  above  is  restored  to  the 
earth  ;  here  is  the  merciful  image  of  safety  ;  here 
I  am  a  rest  to  you,  the  right  way,  the  true  re- 
demption, the  banner  5  of  God,  and  a  memorable 
sign  of  fate.  It  was  on  account  of  you  and  your 
life  that  I  entered  the  Virgin's  womb,  was  made 
man,  and  suffered  a  dreadful  death  ;  nor  did  I 
find  rest  anywhere  in  the  regions  of  the  earth,  but 
ever)'vvhere  threats,  everywhere  labours.  First 
of  all  a  wretched  dwelling  "^  in  the  land  of  Jud?ea 
was  a  shelter  for  me  at  my  birth,  and  for  my  moth- 
er with  me  :  here  first,  amidst  the  outstretched 
sluggish  cattle,  dry  grass  gave  me  a  bed  in  a 
narrow  stall.  I  passed  my  earliest  years  in  the 
Pharian  ^  regions,  being  an  exile  in  the  reign  of 
Herod  ;  and  after  my  return  to  Judcea  I  spent 
the  rest  of  my  years,  always  engaged  ^  in  fastings, 
and  the  extremity  of  poverty  itself,  and  the  lowest 
circumstances  ;  always  by  healthful  admonitions 
applying  the  minds  of  men  to  the  pursuit  of 
genial  uprightness,  uniting  with  wholesome  teach- 
mg  many  evident  miracles  :  on  which  account 
impious  Jerusalem,  harassed  by  the  raging  cares 
of  envy  and  cruel  hatred,  and  blinded  by  mad- 
ness, dared  to  seek  for  me,  though  innocent,  by 
deadly  punishment,  a  cruel  death  on  the  dreadful 
cross.  And  if  you  yourself  wish  to  discriminate 
these  things  more  fully,"?  and  if  it  delights  you  to 
go  through  all  my  groans,  and  to  experience 
griefs  with  me,  put  together '"  the  designs  and 

'  Limina,  "  the  threshold." 

*  Interpres 

3  Venia,  "  remission." 

*  Communis  culpae. 
5  Vexillum. 

*  Magalia. 

'  i.e.,  Egypt. 
'  Secutus. 

9  Latins,  "  more  widely,"  "  in  greater  detail." 
»o  CoUige. 


plots,  and  the  impious  price  of  my  innocent 
blood,  and  the  pretended  kisses  of  a  disciple," 
and  the  insults  and  strivings  of  the  cruel  multi- 
tude ;  and,  moreover,  the  blows,  and  tongues  pre- 
pared '^  for  accusations.  Picture  to  your  mind 
both  the  witnesses,  and  the  accursed  '^  judgment  of 
the  blinded  Pilate,  and  the  immense  cross  press- 
ing my  shoulders  and  wearied  back,  and  my 
painful  steps  to  a  dreadful  death.  Now  survey 
me  from  head  to  foot,  deserted  as  I  am,  and 
lifted  up  afar  from  my  beloved  mother.  Behold 
and  see  my  locks  clotted  with  blood,  and  my 
blood-stained  neck  under  my  very  hair,  and  my 
head  drained  '•*  with  cruel  thorns,  and  pouring 
down  like  rain  '5  from  all  sides  a  stream  '^  of 
blood  over  my  divine  face.  Survey  my  com- 
pressed and  sightless  eyes,  and  my  afflicted 
cheeks ;  see  my  parched  tongue  poisoned  with 
gall,  and  my  countenance  pale  with  death.  Be- 
hold my  hands  pierced  with  nails,  and  my  arms 
drawn  out,  and  the  great  wound  in  my  side  ;  see 
the  blood  streaming  from  it,  and  my  perforated  '7 
feet,  and  blood-stained  limbs.  Bend  your  knee, 
and  with  lamentation  adore  the  venerable  wood 
of  the  cross,  and  with  lowly  countenance  stoop- 
ing '^  to  the  earth,  which  is  wet  with  innocent 
blood,  sprinkle  it  with  rising  tears,  and  at  times  '^ 
bear  me  and  my  admonitions  in  your  devoted 
heart.  Follow  the  footsteps  of  my  life,  and 
while  you  look  upon  my  torments  and  cruel 
death,  remembering  my  innumerable  pangs  of 
body  and  soul,  learn  to  endure  hardships,^''  and 
to  watch  over  your  own  safety.  These  me- 
morials,^' if  at  any  time  you  find  pleasure  in 
thinking  over  them,  if  in  your  mind  there  is 
any  confidence  to  bear  anything  like  my  suffer- 


"  Clientis.     The  "  clicns  "  is  one  who  puts  himself  under  the  pro- 
tection of  a  "  patronus."     Here  it  is  used  of  a  follower. 
'-  Promptas. 

•3  Infanda,  "  unspeakable,"  "  wicked." 
'<  Haustum. 
"S  Pluens. 
"'  Vivum  cruorem. 
'^  Fossos. 
'8  Terram  petens. 

'9  Nonnunquam,  others  read,  "  nunquam  non,"  always. 
^°  Adversa. 
-'  Monumenta. 


328 


A    POEM    ON    THE    PASSION    OF   THE    LORD. 


ings),'  if  the  piety  due,  and  gratitude  worthy  of 
my  labours  shall  arise,  will  be  incitements^  to 
true  virtue,  and  they  will  be  shields  against  the 
snares  of  an  enemy,  aroused  ^  by  which  you  will 
be  safe,  and  as  a  conqueror  bear  off  the  palm  in 
every  contest.  If  these  memorials  shall  turn 
away  your  senses,  which  are  devoted  to  a  perish- 
able ■•  world,  from  the  fleeting  shadow  of  earthly 
beauty,  the  result  will  be,  that  you  will  not  ven- 
ture,5  enticed  by  empty  hope,  to  trust  the  frail  ^ 
enjoyments  of  fickle  fortune,  and  to  place  your 
hope  in  the  fleeting  years  of  life.  But,  truly, 
if  you   thus  regard  this  perishable  world, ^  and 


'  Meorum. 

2  Stimuli. 

3  Acer. 

•*  Labilis  orbis  amicos  sensus. 
S  Auseris,  an  unusual  form. 
*>  Occiduis  rebus. 
'  Ista  caduca  s£cula. 


through  your  love  of  a  better  country  deprive 
yourself^  of  earthly  riches  and  the  enjoyment  of 
present  things,^  the  prayers  of  the  pious  will 
bring  you  up  '°  in  sacred  habits,  and  in  the  hope 
of  a  happy  life,  amidst  severe  punishments,  will 
cherish  you  with  heavenly  dew,  and  feed  you 
with  the  sweetness  of  the  promised  good.  Until 
the  great  favour  of  God  shall  recall  your  happy  " 
soul  to  the  heavenly  regions,'^  your  body  being 
left  after  the  fates  of  death.  Then  freed  from 
all  labour,  then  joyfully  beholding  the  angelic 
choirs,  and  the  blessed  companies  of  saints  in 
perpetual  bliss,  it  shall  reign  with  me  in  the  happy 
abode  of  perpetual  peace. 


^  Exutum. 

9  Rerum  usus. 

'°  Extollent.     The  reading  is  uncertain; 
polient." 

"  Purpuream,  "  bright,  or  shining." 
'2  Sublimes  ad  auras. 


some  editions  have  "  ex- 


GENERAL   NOTE. 


There  is  no  ms.  authority  for  ascribing  the  above  to  Lactantius.  "  It  does  not,  in  the  least, 
come  up  to  the  purity  and  eloquence  of  his  style,"  says  Dupin ;  and  the  same  candid  author 
notes  the  "  adoration  of  the  cross  "  as  fatal  to  any  such  claim.' 

Of  the  following  poem,  on  Easter,  Dupin  says  :  "  It  is  attributed  to  Venantius  upon  the  testi- 
mony of  some  Mss.  in  the  Vatican  Library."  This  writer  became  known  to  Gregory  of  Tours, 
who  died  about  a.d.  595,  and  seems  to  have  succeeded  him  as  bishop,  dying  soon  after.  Bede 
quotes  his  verse  on  St.  Alban,^  — 

"  Albanum  egregium  fecunda  Britannia  profert," 

but   styles   him  "  presbyter  Fortunatus."      He  was  the  author  of  a  poem  on  Sf.  Martin,  and 
another.  In  Laude  Virginum.     His  works  were  edited  by  Brouverius,  a  Jesuit. 


'  Note  18,  p.  327. 

*  The  reader  will  be  pleased  with  a  reference,  on  p.  330,  infra,  to  the  (then  recent)  conversion  of  our  Saxon  forefathers  in  Kent. 


POEM    OF    VENANTIUS    HONORIUS'    CLEMENT!- 
ANUS    FORTUNATUS,    ON    EASTER. 


The  seasons  blush  varied  with  the  flowery, 
fair  weather,^  and  the  gate  of  the  pole  lies  open 
with  greater  light.  His  path  in  the  heaven  raises 
the  fire-breathing  3  sun  higher,  who  goes  forth 
on  his  course,^  and  enters  the  waters  of  the  ocean. 
Armed  with  rays  traversing  the  liquid  elements, 
in  this  5  brief  night  he  stretches  out  the  day  in  a 
circle.  The  brilliant  firmament'^  puts  forth  its 
clear  countenance,  and  the  bright  stars  show  their 
joy.  The  fruitful  earth  pours  forth  its  gifts  with 
varied  increase,''  when  the  year  has  well  returned 
its  vernal  riches.*^  Soft  beds  of  violets  paint  the 
purple  plain  ;  the  meadows  are  green  with  plants,'^ 
and  the  plant  shines  with  its  leaves.  By  degrees 
gleaming  brightness  of  the  flowers  '°  comes  forth  ; 
all  the  herbs  smile  with  their  blossoms."  The 
seed  being  deposited,  the  corn  springs  up  far 
and  wide  '^  in  the  fields,  promising  to  be  able  to 
overcome  the  hunger  of  the  husbandman.  Hav- 
ing deserted  its  stem,  the  vine-shoot  bewails  its 
joys ;  the  vine  gives  water  only  from  the  source 
from  which  it  is  wont  to  give  wine.  The  swell- 
ing bud,  rising  with  tender  down  from  the  back 
of  its  mother,  prepares  its  bosom  for  bringing 
forth.  Its  foliage  '^  having  been  torn  off  in  the 
wintry  season,  the  verdant  grove  now  renews  its 
leafy  shelter.  Mingled  together,  the  willow,  the 
fir,  the  hazel,  the  osier,'*  the  elm,  the  maple,  the 
walnut,  each  tree  applauds,  delightful  with  its 
leaves.  Hence  the  bee,  about  to  construct  its 
comb,  leaving  the  hive,  humming  over  the  flow- 
ers, carries  off  honey  with   its    leg.     The    bird 

'  Venantius  Honorius,  to  whom  this  poem  is  ascribed,  was  an 
Italian  presbyter  and  poet  In  some  editions  the  title  is  De  Resur- 
rectione.     It  was  addressed  to  the  bishop  Felix. 

2  Florigero  sereno. 

s  Ignivomus. 

*  Vagus. 

S  Hac  in  nocte  brevi.     Other  editions  read,  "  adhuc  nocte  brevi." 

*  ^.thera,  an  unusual  form. 
7  Foetu:   others  read  "  cultu 

'  Cum  bene  vernales  reddidit  annus  opes.     Another  reading  is, 
"  cum  bene  vernarit;   reddit  et  annus  opes." 
9  Herbis. 

'°  Stellantia  lumina  florum. 

''  Fioribus;   another  reading  is,  "  arridentque  oculis." 

'2  Late;  others  read,  "  lactens,"  juicy. 

'3  Foliorum  crine  revulso;   others  read,  "  refuso." 

'*  Slier,  supposed  to  be  the  osier,  but  the  notices  of  the  tree  are 
too  scanty  to  enable  us  to  identify  it.  See  Conington,  Virg.  Georg., 
ii.  12. 


which,  having  closed  its  song,  was  dumb,  slug- 
gish with  the  wintry  cold,  returns  to  its  strains. 
Hence  Philomela  attunes  her  notes  with  her  own 
instruments, '5  and  the  air  becomes  sweeter  with 
the  re-echoed  melody.  Behold,  the  favour  of 
the  reviving  world  bears  witness  that  all  gifts 
have  returned  together  with  its  Lord.  For  in 
honour  of  Christ  rising  triumphant  after  His 
descent  to  the  gloomy  Tartarus,  the  grove  on 
every  side  with  its  leaves  expresses  appfovat, 
the  plants  with  their  flowers  express  approval.'^ 
The  light,  the  heaven,  the  fields,  and  the  sea 
duly  praise  the  God  ascending  above  the  stars, 
having  crushed  the  laws  of  hell.  Behold,  He 
who  was  crucified  reigns  as  God  over  all  things, 
and  all  created  objects  offer  prayer  to  their 
Creator.  Hail,  festive  day,  to  be  reverenced 
throughout  the  world, '?  on  which  God  has  con- 
quered hell,  and  gains  the  stars  !  The  changes 
of  the  year  and  of  the  months,  the  bounteous 
light  of  the  days,  the  splendour  of  the  hours,  all 
things  with  voice  applaud.'^  Hence,  in  honour 
of  you,  the  wood  with  its  foliage  applauds  ;  hence 
the  vine,  with  its  silent  shoot,  gives  thanks. 
Hence  the  thickets  now  resound  with  the  whis- 
per of  birds ;  amidst  these  the  sparrow  sings 
with  exuberant  '9  love.  O  Christ,  Thou  Saviour 
of  the  world,  merciful  Creator  and  Redeemer, 
the  only  offspring  from  the  Godhead  of  the 
Father,  flowing  in  an  indescribable  ^°  manner 
;  from  the  heart  of  Thy  Parent,  Thou  self-existing 
Word,  and  powerful  from  the  mouth  of  Thy 
Father,  equal  to  Him,  of  one  mind  with  Him, 
His  fellow,  coeval  with  the  Father,  from  whom 
at   first ^'  the  world  derived  its  origin!     Thou 


■5  ?uis  attemperat  organa  cannis.     "  Canna  "  seems  to  be  used  for 
"  gutturis  canna,"  the  windpipe;  "  organura,"  often  used  for  a  musi- 
cal instrument. 
">  Favent. 

'^  Toto  venerabilis  sevo.     [Rev.  i.  lo.     Easter  in  Patmos,  I  sup- 
pose.] 

"  Mobilitas  anni,  mensum,  lux  alma  dierum 
Horarum  splendor,  stridula  cuncta  lavcnt. 
There  are  great  variations  in  the  readings  of  this  passage.    Some  read 
"  Nobilitas  anni,  mensum  decus,  alma  dierum, 
Horarum  splendor,  scriptula,  puncta  fovent." 
'9  Nimio;  another  reading  is,  "  minimus." 
-°  Irrecitabiliter. 
2'  Principe. 


;3o 


POEM    ON    EASTER. 


dost  suspend  the  firmament/  Thou  heapest  to- 
gether the  soil,  Thou  dost  pour  forth  the  seas, 
by  whose  ^  government  all  things  which  are  fixed 
in  their  places  flourish.  Who  seeing  that  the 
human  race  was  plunged  in  the  depth '  of  mis- 
en,  that  Thou  mightest  rescue  man,  didst  Thy- 
self also  become  man  :  nor  wert  Thou  willing 
only  to  be  born  with  a  body,''  but  Thou  becam- 
est  flesh,  which  endured  to  be  born  and  to  die. 
Thou  dost  undergo  5  funeral  obsequies,  Thyself 
the  author  of  life  and  framer  of  the  world. 
Thou  dost  enter  "^  the  path  of  death,  in  giving 
the  aid  of  salvation.  The  gloomy  chains  of  the 
infernal  law  yielded,  and  chaos  feared  to  be 
pressed  by  the  presence  ^  of  the  light.  Darkness 
perishes,  put  to  flight  by  the  brightness  of  Christ ; 
the  thick  pall  of  eternal  ^  night  falls.  But  restore 
the  promised  ^  pledge,  I  pray  Thee,  O  power 
benign  !  The  third  day  has  returned  ;  arise,  my 
buried  One ;  it  is  not  becoming  that  Thy  limbs 
should  lie  in  the  lowly  sepulchre,  nor  that  worth- 
less stones  should  press  that  which  is  the  ran- 
som '°  of  the  world.  It  is  unworthy  that  a  stone 
should  shut  in  with  a  confining  "  rock,  and  cover 
Him  in  whose  fist  '^  all  things  are  enclosed.  Take 
away  the  linen  clothes,  I  pray  ;  leave  the  napkins 
in  the  tomb  :  Thou  art  sufficient  for  us,  and 
without  Thee  there  is  nothing.  Release  the 
chained  shades  of  the  infernal  prison,  and  recall 
to  the  upper  regions  '^  whatever  sinks  to  the  low- 
est depths.  Give  back  Thy  face,  that  the  world 
may  see  the  light ;  give  back  the  day  which  flees 
from  us  at  Thy  death.  But  returning,  O  holy 
conqueror !  Thou  didst  altogether  fill  the 
heaven  !  '"*  Tartarus  lies  depressed,  nor  retains  its 
rights.  The  ruler  of  the  lower  regions,  insatiably 
opening  his  hollow  jaws,  who  has  always  been  a 
spoiler,  becomes  '5  a  prey  to  Thee.  Thou  res- 
cuest  an  innumerable  people  from  the  prison  of 


'  i^thera. 

2  Quo  moderante;  others  read,  "  quse  moderata." 

3  Profundo. 

*  Cum  corpore;  others  read,  "  nostro  e  corpora  nasci." 

i  Pateris  vitae  auctor;  others  have  "  patris  nevus  auctor." 

*  Intras;  others,  "  intra." 
7   Luminis  ore. 

*  /Eiernse;  another  reading  is,  "  et  tetrse." 
9  Pollicltam;  others  have  "  sollicitam." 

'°  Pretiiim  mundi. 
"  Rupe  vetante. 

'^  Pugillo.     Thus  Prov.  xxx.  4:  "  Who  hath  gathered  the  wind  in 
His  fists?  " 

'3  Kevoca  sursum. 

'*  Olympum;  others  read,  "  in  orbem,"  returning  to  the  world. 

'5  Fjt;  others  read,  "  sit." 


death,  and  they  follow  in  freedom  to  the  place 
whither  their  leader  '^  approaches.  The  fierce 
monster  in  alarm  vomits  forth  the  multitude 
whom  he  had  swallowed  up,  and  the  Lamb  '^ 
withdraws  the  sheep  from  the  jaw  of  the  wolf. 
Hence  re-seeking  the  tomb  from  the  lower  re- 
gions,'^ having  resumed  Thy  flesh,  as  a  warrior 
Thou  earnest  back  ample  trophies  to  the  heavens. 
Those  whom  chaos  held  in  punishment  '9  he^°  has 
now  restored ;  and  those  whom  death  might 
seek,  a  new  life  holds.  .  Oh,  sacred  King,  behold 
a  great  part  of  Thy  triumph  shines  forth,  when 
the  sacred  laver  blesses  pure  souls  !  A  host, 
clad  in  white,^'  come  forth  from  the  bright  waves, 
and  cleanse  their  old "  fault  in  a  new  stream. 
The  white  garment  also  designates  bright  souls, 
and  the  shepherd  has  enjoyments  from  the  snow- 
white  flock.  The  priest  Felix  is  added  sharing  -3 
in  this  reward,  w^ho  wishes  to  give  double  talents 
to  his  Lord.  Drawing  those  who  wander  in 
Gentile  error  to  better  things,  that  a  beast  of 
prey  may  not  carry  them  away,  He  guards  the 
fold  of  God.  Those  whom  guilty  Eve  had  be- 
fore infected,  He  now  restores,  fed  ^-^  with  abun- 
dant milk  at  the  bosom  of  the  Church.  By 
cultivating  rustic  hearts  with  mild  conversations, 
a  crop  is  produced  from  a  briar  by  the  bounty 
of  Felix.  The  Saxon,  a  fierce  nation,  living  as 
it  were  after  the  manner  of  wild  beasts,  when 
you,  O  sacred  One  !  apply  a  remedy,  the  beast 
of  prey  resembles  -^  the  sheep.  About  to  remain 
with  you  through  an  age  with  the  return  ^^  of  a 
hundred-fold,  you  fill  the  barns  with  the  produce 
of  an  abundant  harvest.  May  this  people,  free 
from  stain,  be  strengthened  ^^  in  your  arms,  and 
may  you  bear  to  the  stars  a  pure  pledge  to  God. 
May  one  crown  be  bestowed  on  you  from  on 
high  gained  from  yourself,^^  may  another  flour- 
ish gained  from  your  people. 


'^  Auctor. 

'7  i.e.,  "  the  Lamb  of  God." 

'5  [Post  Tartara.    Vol.  iv.  p.  140;  v.  pp.  153,  161,  174,  this  series.] 

'9  Pojnale. 

^°  Iste;  another  reading  is,  "  in  te." 

2'  An  allusion  to  the  white  garments  in  which  the  newly  baptized 
were  arrayed. 

--  Vetus  vitium,  "original  sin;"  as  it  was  termed,  "  peccatum 
originis." 

23  Consors;  others  read  "  concors,"  harmonious. 

2<  Pastos;  others,  "  pastor." 

25  Reddit. 

26  Centeno  reditu. 

27  Vegetetur;  another  reading  is,  "  agitetur." 

23  iJe  te;  others  read,  "  detur  et,"  with  injury  to  the  metre. 


GENERAL  NOTE. 

A  FINE  passage  illustrating  the  gush  of  early  Christian  devotion  at  Easter,  "  breaking  into  all 
the  heavenly  joy  of  the  new  creation,"  will  be  found  in  Professor  Milligan's  remarkable  work  on 
The  Resurrection  of  our  Lord  (London,  Macmillan,  1884).  The  author  is  "professor  of  divinity 
and  biblical  criticism  in  the  University  of  Aberdeen." 


ASTERIUS    URBANUS, 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE 

TO 

ASTERIUS  URBANUS. 


\_Circa  A.D.  232.]  Finding  these  fragments  relegated,  by  the  Edinburgh  editors,  to  a  place 
(unaccountably  chosen)  among  the  spurious  Decretals,'  and  dismissed  as  of  dubious  character, 
it  looked  as  if  modern  light  had  been  shed  upon  this  author,  and  as  if  he  had  better,  perhaps, 
be  classed  with  the  apocryphal  works  of  our  concluding  volume.  But,  after  considerable  inquiry, 
1  see  no  reason  to  dismiss  Asterius  from  the  respectable  position  assigned  him  by  Lardner  •,^  and  I 
now  wish  I  had  appended  these  fragments  to  those  of  the  Roman  presbyter  Caius,  to  which  the 
reader  is  referred. ^  It  is  true,  Lardner  is  quite  undecided  as  to  this  author,  though  he  accepts 
Tillemont's  conjecture  as  probable  ;  viz.,  that  the  Asterius  Urbanus  mentioned  by  Euseblus  is  the 
author  of  the  fragments,  and  that  his  work  against  the  Montanlsts  was  written  in  the  eleventh  year 
of  the  Emperor  Alexander,  circa  232.  It  Is  doubtful  whether  the  author  was  a  presbyter  or  a 
bishop.  On  some  occasions  he  seems  to  have  been  at  Ancyra  in  Galatia,  where  he  reluctantly 
consented  to  write  his  treatise  at  the  solicitation  of  the  presbytery  there,  and  particularly  of 
Abercius  ^  Marcellus,  to  whom  it  Is  Inscribed. 

The  translator  is  not  named,  but  here  follows  the  very  unsatisfactory  preface  of  the  Edinburgh 
edition  :  — 

Nothing  is  known  of  Asterius  Urbanus.  The  name  occurs  in  Fragment  IV. ;?  and  from  the 
allusion  made  to  him  there,  some  iiave  Inferred  that  he  was  the  author  of  the  work  against  the 
Montanists,  from  which  Euseblus  has  made  these  extracts.  The  inference  is  unfounded.  There 
is  no  clue  to  the  authorship.  It  has  been  attributed  by  different  critics  to  ApoUinaris,  Apollonlus, 
and  Rhodon. 

*  Edin.  ed.,  vol.  ix.  p   224.  3  Vol   v.  p   599,  this  series      See  note  3,  p   335,  mjra, 

2  Credit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  410.  *  Or  Avircius.     See  p.  335,  note  2,  iitjra. 

5  Translated  p.  336,  iitJra. 

333 


THE    EXTANT    WRITINGS    OF    ASTERIUS 

URBANUS.' 


I.   THE   EXORDIUM. 

Having  now  for  a  very  long  and  surely  a  very 
sufficient  period  had  the  charge  pressed  upon 
me  by  thee,  my  dear  Avircius^'  Marcellus,  to 
write  some  sort  of  treatise  against  the  heresy 
that  bears  the  name  of  Miltiades,^  I  have  some- 
how been  very  doubtfully  disposed  toward  the 
task  up  till  now ;  not  that  I  felt  any  difficulty  in 
refuting  the  falsehood,  and  in  bearing  my  testi- 
mony to  the  truth,  but  that  I  was  apprehensive 
and  fearful  lest  I  should  appear  to  any  to  be 
adding  some  new  word  or  precept  *  to  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Gospel  of  the  New  Testament,  with 
respect  to  which  indeed  it  is  not  possible  for 
one  who  has  chosen  to  have  his  manner  of  life 
in  accordance  with  the  Gospel  itself,  either  to 
add  anything  to  it  or  to  take  away  anything  from 
it.  Being  recently,  however,  at  Ancyra,  a  town 
of  Galatia,  and  finding  the  church  in  Pontus  s 
greatly  agitated^  by  this  new  prophecy,  as  they 
call  it,  but  which  should  rather  be  called  this 
false  prophecy,  as  shall  be  shown  presently,  I 
discoursed  to  the  best  of  my  ability,  with  the 
help  of  God,  for  many  days  in  the  church,  both 
on  these  subjects  and  on  various  others  ^  which 
were  brought  under  my  notice  by  them.  And 
this  I  did  in  such  manner  that  the  church  re- 
joiced and  was  strengthened  in  the  truth,  while 
the  adversaries  ^  were  forthwith  routed,  and  the 
opponents  put  to  grief.     And  the  presbyters  of 

'  Being  fragments  of  tliree  books  to  Aberciiis  Marcellus  against 
the  Montanists.  Gallandi,  vol.  iii.  p.  273,  from  Ensebius,  Nist.  Eccl., 
V.  ch    16,  17. 

-  The  manuscripts  write  the  name 'Aom'picio?,  Avircius:  but  Ni- 
cephoriis  (book  iv.)  gives  it  as  'A3ep)ctos,  Abercius. 

*  Nicephorus  adds  KTOf  6'  t\.-nt\v  Moi'Tai-ot',  which  seems,  how- 
ever, to  be  but  a  scholium.  It  may  appear  difficult  to  account  for  the 
fact  that  the  name  of  Miltiades  rather  than  that  of  Montanus  is  asso- 
ciated with  the  heresy  of  the  Cataphrygians,  and  some  consequently 
have  conjectured  that  we  should  read  here  Ahihiades,  as  that  is  a 
name  mentioned  in  concert  with  Montanus  and  Theodotus  m  Euseb. 
V.  3.  In  the  Muratorian  fragment,  however,  as  given  above  among 
the  writings  of  Cams,  we  find  again  a  Miltiades  named  among  the 
heretics.     [Vol.  v.  p.  604,  this  series  ] 

^  eTri(ruyypa</)cti/  ij  €7Tt<itaTa<7<7€a0at. 

5  itnra  TrorToi-.  But  the  Codex  Regius  reads  Kara  Torroi',  the 
church  0/ the  place,  i.e.,  the  church  of  Ancyra  itself.  This  reading 
is  confirmed  by  Nicephorus,  book  iv.  23,  and  is  adopted  by  the  Latin 
interpreter. 

6  6iaTf0puAAr;/ifi'T)i',  "  ringing  with  it,"  "deafened  by  it." 

^  tKumo.  Te.     Others  propose  iKamoTe,  "  constantly,"  "  daily." 
8  6.vTL9iTov<:.     Others  read  avTi.8iov;,  "  the  enemies  of  God." 


the  place  accordingly  requested  us  to  leave  be- 
hind us  some  memorandum  of  the  things  which 
we  alleged  in  opposition  to  the  adversaries  of 
the  truth,  there  being  present  also  our  fellow- 
presbyter  Zoticus  Otrenus.9  This,  however,  we 
did  not ;  but  we  promised,  if  the  Lord  gave  us 
opportunity,  to  write  down  the  matters  here,  and 
send  them  to  them  with  all  speed. 

II.    FROM    BOOK   I. 

Now  the  attitude  of  opposition  "°  which  they 
have  assumed,  and  this  new  heresy  of  theirs 
which  puts  them  in  a  position  of  separation 
from  the  Church,  had  their  origin  in  the  follow- 
ing manner.  There  is  said  to  be  a  certain  vil- 
lage called  Ardeba  "  in  the  Mysia,  which  touches 
Phrygia.'^  There,  they  say,  one  of  those  who 
had  been  but  recently  converted  to  the  faith,  a 
person  of  the  name  of  Montanus,  when  Gratus 
was  proconsul  of  Asia,  gave  the  adversary  en- 
trance against  himself  by  the  excessive  lust  of 
his  soul  after  taking  the  lead.  And  this  person 
was  carried  away  in  spirit ;  '^  and  suddenly  being 
seized  with  a  kind  of  frenzy  and  ecstasy,  he 
raved,  and  began  to  speak  and  to  utter  strange 
things,  and  to  prophesy  in  a  manner  contrary 
to  the  custom  of  the  Church,  as  handed  down 
from  early  times  and  preserved  thenceforward  in 
a  continuous  succession.  And  among  those 
who  were  present  on  that  occasion,  and  heard 
those  spurious  utterances,  there  were  some  who 
were  indignant,  and  rebuked  him  as  one  fren- 
zied, and  under  the  power  of  demons,  and  pos- 
sessed by  the  spirit  of  delusion,  and  agitating 
the  multitude,  and  debarred  him  from  speaking 
any  more  ;  for  they  were  mindful  of  the  Lord's 

9  ZujTiicoO  ToO  'GTpjjfoi).  Nicephorus  reads  'OcrTpiii'oO.  [Com- 
pare p.  336, 1'n/ra.  This  looks  like  a  bishop  or  a  presbyter  attending 
Asterius  (compare  Cyprian,  vol.  y.  p  319,  note  7,  this  series),  and 
is  a  token  that  our  author  was  a  bishop.  J 

''^   tMITTaCTl?. 

"  '.KpSafiav.     One  codex  makes  it  'Ap5a3a3. 

'-  iv  T^  Kara  T)7»'  <tpvy(.av  Mi/(ria.  Rufinus  renders  it,  apud 
Phrygiain  Mysite civitatem  ;  others  render  it,  npii/i  Mysiam  Phry- 
giie  ;  Migne  takes  it  as  defining  this  Mysia  to  be  the  .Asiatic  one,  m 
distinction  from  the  European  territorj',  which  the  Latins  called 
Moesia,  but  the  Greeks  also  Muffia. 

*^  ni'«vfiaTo</)opr)(*()»'ac, 

335 


00° 


THE   EXTANT   WRITINGS    OF   ASTERIUS    URBANUS. 


distinction  '  and  threatening,  whereby  He  warned 
them  to  be  on  their  guard  vigilantly  against  the 
coming  of  the  false  prophets.  But  there  were 
others  too,  who,  as  if  elated  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
and  the  prophetic  gift,  and  not  a  little  puffed  up, 
and  forgetting  entirely  the  Lord's  distinction, 
challenged  the  maddening  and  insidious  and  se- 
ductive spirit,  being  themselves  cajoled  and  mis- 
led by  him,  so  that  there  was  no  longer  any 
checking  him  to  silence.^  And  thus  by  a  kind 
of  artifice,  or  rather  by  such  a  process  of  craft, 
the  devil  having  devised  destruction  against 
those  who  were  disobedient  to  the  Lord's  warn- 
ing, and  being  unworthily  honoured  by  them, 
secretly  excited  and  inflamed  their  minds  that 
had  already  left  the  faith  which  is  according  to 
truth,  in  order  to  play  the  harlot  with  error. ^ 
For  he  stirred  up  two  others  also,  women,  and 
filled  them  with  the  spurious  spirit,  so  that  they 
too  spoke  in  a  frenzy  and  unseasonably,  and  in 
a  strange  manner,  like  the  person  already  men- 
tioned, while  the  spirit  called  them  happy  as 
they  rejoiced  and  exulted  proudly  at  his  work- 
ing, and  puffed  them  up  by  the  magnitude  of 
his  promises  ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  at  times 
also  he  condemned  them  skilfully  and  plausibly, 
in  order  that  he  might  seem  to  them  also  to 
have  the  power  of  reproof.'*  And  those  few  who 
were  thus  deluded  were  Phrygians.  But  the 
same  arrogant  spirit  taught  them  to  revile  the 
Church  universal  under  heaven,  because  that 
false  spirit  of  prophecy  found  neither  honour 
from  it  nor  entrance  into  it.  For  when  the 
faithful  throughout  Asia  met  together  often  and 
in  many  places  of  Asia  for  deliberation  on  this 
subject,  and  subjected  those  novel  doctrines  to 
examination,  and  declared  them  to  be  spurious, 
and  rejected  them  as  heretical,  they  were  in 
consequence  of  that  expelled  from  the  Church 
and  debarred  from  communion.5 

III.    FROM    BOOK   II. 

Wherefore,  since  they  stigmatized  us  as  slayers 
of  the  prophets'^  because  we  did  not  receive  their 
loquacious  ^  prophets,  —  for  they  say  that  these 
are  they  whom  the  Lord  promised  to  send  to 
the  people,  —  let  them  answer  us  in  the  name 
of  God,  and  tell  us,  O  friends,  whether  there  is 
any  one  among  those  who  began  to  speak  from 

2  €t?   TO  jLLrj<€Tt   KwXuetT^ai  <TU07rav, 

i  Tr\v  aTToK(Koi.u.riij.ivrtv,  etc",  the  verb  being  used  literally  of  the 
wife  who  proves  false  to  her  marriage  vow. 

*  eAeyxTticoi'.  Montanus,  that  is  to  say,  or  the  demon  that  spake 
by  Montanus,  knew  that  it  had  been  said  of  old  by  the  Lord,  that 
when  the  Spirit  came  He  would  convince  or  reprove  the  world  of 
sin;  and  hence  this  false  spirit,  with  the  view  of  confirming  his  hear- 
ers in  the  belief  that  he  was  the  true  Spirit  of  God,  sometimes  re- 
buked and  condemned  them.  See  a  passage  in  Ambrose's  Epistle  to 
the  Thessal.,  ch.  v.  (Migne). 

i   [Vol.  ii   pp.  4,  5.] 

*  [Compare  Num.  xvi.  41. J 

7  dixeTpoibiavovi;.  So  Homer  in  the  Iliad  calls  Thersites  o^ier- 
poeirijf,  "  unbridled  of  tongue,"  and  thus  also  nienJacioui. 


Montanus  and  the  women  onward  that  was  per- 
secuted by  the  Jews  or  put  to  death  by  the 
wicked?  There  is  not  one.  Not  even  one  of 
them  is  there  who  was  seized  and  crucified  for 
the  name  '^  of  Christ.  No  ;  certainly  not.  Nei- 
ther assuredly  was  there  one  of  these  women 
who  was  ever  scourged  in  the  synagogues  of  the 
Jews,  or  stoned.  No  ;  never  anywhere.  It  is 
indeed  by  another  kind  of  death  that  Montanus 
and  Maximilla  are  said  to  have  met  their  end. 
For  the  report  is,  that  by  the  instigation  of  that 
maddening  spirit  both  of  them  hung  themselves  ; 
not  together  indeed,  but  at  the  particular  time 
of  the  death  of  each,^  as  the  common  story  goes. 
And  thus  they  died,  and  finished  their  life  like 
the  traitor  Judas.  Thus,  also,  the  general  report 
gives  it  that  Theodotus  — that  astonishing  person 
who  was,  so  to  speak,  the  first  procurator  '°  of 
their  so-called  prophecy,  and  who,  as  if  he  were 
sometime  taken  up  and  received  into  the  heav- 
ens, fell  into  spurious  ecstasies,"  and  gave  him- 
self wholly  over  to  the  spirit  of  delusion  —  was 
at  last  tossed  by  him  '^  into  the  air,  and  met  his 
end  miserably.  People  say  then  that  this  took 
place  in  the  way  we  have  stated.  But  as  we  did 
not  see  '^  them  ourselves,  we  do  not  presume  to 
think  that  we  know  any  of  these  things  with  cer- 
tainty. And  it  may  therefore  have  been  in  this 
way  perhaps,  and  perhaps  in  some  other  way, 
that  Montanus  and  Theodotus  and  the  woman 
mentioned  above  perished. 

IV. 

And  let  not  the  spirit  of  Maximilla  say  (as  it 
is  found  in  the  same  book  of  xAsterius  Urbanus  '■*), 
"  I  am  chased  like  a  wolf  from  the  sheep ;  I  am 
no  wolf.  I  am  word,  and  spirit,  and  power." 
But  let  him  clearly  exhibit  and  prove  the  power 
in  the  spirit.  And  by  the  spirit  let  him  constrain 
to  a  confession  those  who  were  present  at  that 
time  for  the  very  purpose  of  trying  and  holding 
converse  with  the  talkative  spirit  —  those  men 
so  highly  reputed  as  men  and  bishops  —  namely, 
Zoticus  of  the  village  of  Comana,'5  and  Julian 


8  ToC  ov6ixaTO<;.  Nicephorus  reads  toC  vo/uiou,  "  for  the  law." 
[Compare  Tertullian,  vol.  iii.  cap.  2S,  p.  624.] 

9  <a.Ta.   6f   Toi/  €Ka<TToO   TcAfUTi)!  Kaipov. 

'°  olov  (TriTpoTrov.  Rufinus  renders  it,  "  veluti  primogenitum  pro- 
pheti;c  ipsorum,"  Migne  takes  it  as  meaning  .s/cjc^irf/,  manager  of 
a  common  fund  established  among  the  Montanists  for  the  support 
of  their  prophets.  Eusebius  (v.  18)  quotes  ApoUonius  as  saying  of 
Montanus,  that  he  estn/ilis/ted  exactors  0/  money,  and  provided 
salaries  for  those  who  preached  his  doctrine. 

"    TraptxtTTrjiai. 

'2  hiuK^vQivTa,  "  pitched  like  a  quoit." 

'3  The  text  is,  aAAa  /xrji-  ayev.  But  in  various  codices  we  have 
the  more  correct  reading,  dAAo  /ii)  dfev. 

'»  These  words  are  apparently  a  scholium,  which  Eusebius  him- 
self or  some  old  commentator  had  written  on  the  margin  of  his  copy 
We  gather  also  from  them  that  Aslerius  Urbanus  was  credited  with 
the  authorship  of  these  three  books,  and  not  ApoUinaris,  as  some 
have  supposed. 

'5  Comana  seems  to  have  been  a  town  of  Pamphylia.  At  least  a 
bishop  of  Comana  is  mentioned  in  the  epistle  of  the  bishops  of  Pam- 
phylia to  Leo  Augustus,  cited  in  the  third  part  of  the  Couuctl  of 
Chalcedon,  p.  391.     [See  p.  335,  note  9,  supru.\ 


THE    EXTANT    WRITINGS    OF   ASTERIUS    URBANUS. 


oj 


7 


of  Apamea,  whose  mouths  Tliemison  '  and  his 
followers  bridled,  and  prevented  the  false  and 
seductive  spirit  from  being  confuted  by  them. 


And  has  not  the  falsity  of  this  also  been  made 
manifest  already?  For  it  is  now  upwards  of 
thirteen  years  since  the  woman  died,  and  there 
has  arisen  neither  a  partial  nor  a  universal  war  in 
the  world.  Nay,  rather  there  has  been  steady 
and  continued  peace  to  the  Christians  by  the 
mercy  of  God. 

VI.    FROM    BOOK   III. 

But  as  they  have  been  refuted  in  all  their  al- 
legations, and  are  thus  at  a  loss  what  to  say, 
they  try  to  take  refuge  in  their  martyrs.  For 
they  say  that  they  have  many  martyrs,  and  that 
this  is  a  sure  proof  of  the  power  of  their  so- 
called  prophetic  spirit.  But  this  allegation,  as  it 
seems,  carries  not  a  whit  more  truth  with  it  than 
the  others.  For  indeed  some  of  the  other  her- 
esies have  also  a  great  multitude  of  martyrs  ; 
but  yet  certainly  we  shall  not  on  that  account 
agree  with  them,  neither  shall  we  acknowledge 
that  they  have  truth  in  them.  And  those  first 
heretics,  who  from  the  heresy  of  Marcion  are 
called  Marcionites,  allege  that  they  have  a  great 
multitude  of  martyrs  for  Christ.  But  yet  they  do 
not  confess  Christ  Himself  according  to  truth. 


Hence,  also,  whenever  those  who  have  been 
called  to  martyrdom  for  the  true  faith  by  the 
Church  happen  to  fall  in  with  any  of  those  so- 
called  martyrs  of  the  Phrygian  heresy,  they  al- 
ways separate  from  them,  and  die  without  having 
fellowship  with  them,  because  they  do  not  choose 
to  give  their  assent  to  the  spirit  of  Montanus 
and  the  women.  And  that  this  is  truly  the  case, 
and  that  it  has  actually  taken  place  in  our  own 
times  at  Apamea,  a  town  on  the  Mseander,  in 

'  Themison  was  a  person  of  note  among  the  Montanists,  who 
boasted  of  himself  as  a  confessor  and  martyr,  and  had  the  audacity 
to  write  a  catholic  epistle  to  the  churches  like  an  apostle,  with  the 
view  of  commending  the  new  prophecy  to  them.     See  Euseb.,  v.  i8. 


the  case  of  those  who  suffered  martyrdom  witli 
Caius  2  and  Alexander,  natiVes  of  Eumenia,  is 
clear  to  all. 

VIII, 

As  I  found  these  things  in  a  certain  writing  of 
theirs  directed  against  the  writing  of  our  brother 
Alcibiades,'  in  which  he  proves  the  impropriety 
of  a  prophet's  speaking  in  ecstasy,  I  made  an 
abridgment  of  that  work. 


IX. 

But  the  false  prophet  falls  into  a  spurious  ec- 
stasy, which  is  accompanied  by  a  want  of  all 
shame  and  fear.  For  beginning  with  a  voluntary 
(designed)  rudeness,  he  ends  with  an  involun- 
tary madness  of  soul,  as  has  been  already  stated. 
But  they  will  never  be  able  to  show  that  any  one 
of  the  Old  Testament  prophets,  or  any  one  of 
the  New,  was  carried  away  in  spirit  after  this 
fashion.  Nor  will  they  be  able  to  boast  that 
Agabus,  or  Judas,  or  Silas,  or  the  daughters  of 
Philip,  or  //i^  woman  Ammia  in  Philadelphia,  or 
Quadratus,  or  indeed  any  of  the  others  who  do 
not  in  any  respect  belong  to  them,  were  moved 
in  this  way. 

X. 

For  if,  after  Quadratus  and  the  woman  Am- 
mia in  Philadelphia,  as  they  say,  the  women  who 
attached  themselves  to  Montanus  succeeded  to 
the  gift  of  prophecy,  let  them  show  us  which  of 
them  thus  succeeded  Montanus  and  his  women. 
For  the  apostle  deems  that  the  gift  of  prophecy 
should  abide  in  all  the  Church  up  to  the  time 
of  the  final  advent.  But  they  will  not  be  able 
to  show  the  gift  to  be  in  their  possession  even 
at  the  present  time,  which  is  the  fourteenth  year 
only  from  the  death  of  Maximilla.-* 


2  «>■  Toi?  Tttp'i.  Vaiov  .  .  .  (xaprvpricracTi.  It  may  be  intended  for, 
"  In  the  case  of  the  martyrs  Caius  and  Alexander. 

3  Migne  is  of  opinion  that  there  has  been  an  interchange  of 
names  between  this  passage  and  the  Exordium,  and  that  we  should 
read  Miltiades  here,  and  .4lcibiades  there.  But  see  Exordium,  note 
3.  P-  335-  [And  compare  Eusebius,  book  v.  cap.  3,  where  two  of 
this  name  are  mentioned:   also  Ibid.,  cap.  17.] 

■•  This  seems  to  be  the  sense  of  the  text,  which  appears  to  be 
imperfect  here:  aAA'  ouk  q.v  €\ot€i'  Sei^at  Ttao'apt(7Katd€KaToi'  ijSi) 
iron  TouTO  tros  an-b  t^s    Ma|i(iiiAArj?  TeAevT^?. 


GENERAL   NOTE. 


The  reader  will  do  well  to  turn  back  to  my  Introductory  Notice  to  the  Epistle  of  Hennas,''  and 
also  to  the  elucidations  ^  which  are  appended  to  that  Epistle.  If  any  value  attaches  to  this  frag- 
ment, it  must  be  found  in  its  illustrations  of  Hermas  and  Tertullian.  These,  in  turn,  shed  light 
on  it. 


'  Vol.  ii.  p.  3,  this  series. 


2  Ibid.,  p.  56. 


338  ELUCIDATION. 


ELUCIDATION. 

(Aviricius  Marcellus,  p.  335,  supra.) 

Like  his  great  predecessor  in  Patristic  research  (Bishop  Pearson),  the  learned  and  indefati- 
gable Bishop  Lightfoot  will  leave  us  gold-dust  in  the  mere  sweepings  of  his  literary  work.  His 
recent  voluminous  edition  of  the  Apostolic  Fa  titers '  is  encyclopedic  in  its  treatment  of  the  sub- 
ject ;  and  I  had  hardly  corrected  the  last  proofs  of  the  fragments  ascribed  to  Asterius  Urbanus 
when  I  discovered,  in  one  of  his  notes  on  Polycarp,  a  most  brilliant  elucidation  of  a  matter 
which  I  had  supposed  involved  in  twofold  obscurity.  Asterius  is  a  mere  name  embedded  in 
Eusebius,  and  in  his  fragments  there  preserved  is  embedded  the  yet  obscurer  name  of  Aviricius 
Marcellus,  which  the  reader  will  find,  with  its  various  spellings,  in  one  of  the  translator's  notes.* 
Who  could  have  supposed  that  even  the  learning  and  ingenuity  of  Lightfoot  could  fish  out  of 
ver)'  dark  waters  such  shining  booty  as  fills  the  network  about  "  Abercius  of  Hierapolis?"  While 
he  does  not  even  name  Asterius,  the  mere  nominis  tnnbra  of  Aviricius  Marcellus  is  material  for  a 
truly  remarkable  dissertation  covering  nine  pages  of  fine  print,  and  enabling  us  to  conclude  that 
this  Aviricius  is  none  other  than  the  same  "  bishop  of  Hierapolis  "  about  whom  there  is  such  a 
long  story  in  the  Bollandist  Acta  Sanctorutn.^  The  story  is  a  silly  legend,  but  Lightfoot  under- 
stands the  art  ex  fuino  dare  lucein  ;  and  any  one  who  enjoys  following  up  such  elaborations  will 
find  most  curious  and  delightful  reading  in  the  pages  to  which  I  have  referred.  Our  Aviricius, 
then,  was  bishop  of  "  Hieropolis  of  Lesser  Phrygia,"  not  of  Hierapolis  on  the  Maeander,  and 
flourished  about  a.d.  163,  during  the  reign  of  M.  Aurelius.  This  date,  therefore,  must  correct 
the  conjecture  of  Tillemont  and  the  date  which  I  had  accepted  from  him  on  the  authority  of 
Dr,  Lardner.-* 

■  London,  Macmillans,  1885.     Refer  to  part  ii.  vol.  i.  pp.  476-485. 
^  See  p.  335,  supra,  note  2. 

3  Lightfoot  also  gives  a  reference  to  Migne's  Patrolcgia,  vol.  cxv.  p.  1211. 

■*  See  p.  333,  supra.  "  There  is  no  clue  to  the  authorship"  of  the  fragments,  says  the  translator;  but,  under  the  lead  of  a  Light- 
foot, who  nnay  not  hope  to  find  one  ?     I  commend  the  quarry  to  studious  readers. 

338 


VICTORINUS. 

[TRANSLATED    BY   THE   REV.    ROBERT   ERNEST   WALLIS,   Ph.D.] 


ON    THE    CREATION    OF    THE    WORLD.' 


To  me,  as  I  meditate  and  consider  in  my 
mind  concerning  the  creation  of  tliis  world  in 
which  we  are  kept  enclosed,  even  such  is  the 
rapidity  of  that  creation ;  as  is  contained  in  the 
book  of  Moses,  which  he  wrote  about  its  crea- 
tion, and  which  is  called  Genesis.  God  pro- 
duced that  entire  mass  for  the  adornment  of 
His  majesty  in  six  days  ;  on  the  seventh  to  which 
He  consecrated  it  .  .  .  with  a  blessing.  For 
this  reason,  therefore,  because  in  the  septenary 
number  of  days  both  heavenly  and  earthly 
things  are  ordered,  in  place  of  the  beginning  I 
will  consider  of  this  seventh  day  after  the  prin- 
ciple of  all  matters  pertaining  to  the  number  of 
seven ;  and  as  far  as  I  shall  be  able,  I  will  en- 
deavour to  portray  the  day  of  the  divine  power 
to  that  consummation. 

In  the  beginning  God  made  the  light,  and 
divided  it  in  the  exact  measure  of  twelve  hours 
by  day  and  by  night,  for  this  reason,  doubtless, 
that  clay  might  bring  over  the  night  as  an  occa- 
sion of  rest  for  men's  labours  ;  that,  again,  day 
might  overcome,  and  thus  that  labour  might  be 
refreshed  with  this  alternate  change  of  rest,  and 
that  repose  again  might  be  tempered  by  the  ex- 
ercise of  day.  "  On  the  fourth  day  He  made 
two  lights  in  the  heaven,  the  greater  and  the 
lesser,  that  the  one  might  rule  over  the  day, 
the  other  over  the  night,"  ^  —  the  lights  of  the 
sun  and  moon ;  and  He  placed  the  rest  of  the 
stars  in  heaven,  that  they  might  shine  upon 
the  earth,  and  by  their  positions  distinguish  the 
seasons,  and  years,  and  months,  and  days,  and 
hours. 

Now  is  manifested  the  reason  of  the  truth 
why  the  fourth  day  is  called  the  Tetras,  why 
we  fast  even  to  the  ninth  hour,  or  even  to  the 
evening,  or  why  there  should  be  a  passing  over 
even  to  the  next  day.  Therefore  this  world  of 
ours  is  composed  of  four  elements  —  fire,  water, 
heaven,  earth.  These  four  elements,  therefore, 
form  the  quaternion  of  times  or  seasons.     The 

'A  fragment  by  the  martyr  Victorinus,  bishop  of  Petau,  who 
flourished  towards  the  end  of  the  third  century.  [He  died  in  the  per- 
secution A.n.  304.  For  the  text  and  full  annotations,  see  Roulh,  iii. 
451-483.  His  See  must  not  be  confoiuided  with  the  Gallic  Poictiers. 
He  was  of  Petau  in  Austria  {I'a>i>io>tia  Superior) ,  as  Launoy 
demonstrated  a.d.  1653.] 

^  Gen  i   16,  17. 


sun,  also,  and  the  moon  constitute  throughout 
the  space  of  the  year  four  seasons — of  spring, 
summer,  autumn,  winter ;  and  these  seasons 
make  a  quaternion.  And  to  proceed  further 
still  from  that  principle,  lo,  there  are  four  living 
creatures  before  God's  throne,^  four  Gospels, 
four  rivers  flowing  in  paradise  ;  ■♦  four  genera- 
tions of  people  from  Adam  to  Noah,  from  Noah 
to  Abraham,  from  Abraham  to  Moses,  from 
Moses  to  Christ  the  Lord,  the  Son  of  God  ;  and 
four  living  creatures,  viz.,  a  man,  a  calf,  a  lion, 
an  eagle  ;  and  four  rivers,  the  Pison,  the  Gihon, 
the  Tigris,  and  the  Euphrates.  The  man  Christ 
Jesus,  the  originator  of  these  things  whereof  we 
have  above  spoken,  was  taken  prisoner  by  wicked 
hands,  by  a  quaternion  of  soldiers.  Therefore 
on  account  of  His  captivity  by  a  quaternion,  on 
account  of  the  majesty  of  His  works,  —  that  the 
seasons  also,  wholesome  to  humanity,  joyful  for 
the  harvests,  tranquil  for  the  tempests,  may  roll 
on,  —  therefore  we  make  the  fourth  day  a  sta- 
tion or  a  supernumerary  fast. 

On  the  fifth  day  the  land  and  water  brought 
forth  their  progenies.  On  the  sixth  day  the 
things  that  were  wanting  were  created  ;  and  thus 
God  raised  up  man  from  the  soil,  as  lord  of  all 
the  things  which  He  created  upon  the  earth  and 
the  water.  Yet  He  created  angels  and  arch- 
angels before  He  created  man,  placing  spiritual 
beings  before  earthly  ones.  For  light  was  made 
before  sky  and  the  earth.  This  sixth  day  is 
called  parasceve,^  that  is  to  say,  the  preparation 
of  the  kingdom.  For  He  perfected  Adam, 
whom  He  made  after  His  image  and  likeness. 
But  for  this  reason  He  completed  His  works 
before  He  created  angels  and  fashioned  man, 
lest  perchance  they  should  falsely  assert  that 
they  had  been  His  helpers.  On  this  day  also, 
on  account  of  the  passion  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  we  make  either  a  station  to  God,  or  a 
fast.  On  the  seventh  day  He  rested  from  all 
His  works,  and  blessed  it,  and  sanctified  it.  On 
the  former  day  we  are  accustomed  to  fast  rigor- 
ously, that  on  the  Lord's  day  we  may  go  forth 


'  Rev.  iv.  6.     [See  vol.  v.  note  3,  p.  618,  this  series.] 
*  Gen.  ii.  10. 
5   T!a.f>o.aKivr\. 

34> 


o4- 


ON    THE    CREATION    OF   THE   WORLD. 


to  our  bread  with  giving  of  thanks.  And  let 
the  parasceve  become  a  rigorous  fast,  lest  we 
should  appear  to  observe  any  Sabbath  with  the 
Jews,  which  Christ  Himself,  the  Lord  of  the 
Sabbath,  says  by  His  prophets  that  "  His  soul 
hateth  ;  "  '  which  Sabbath  He  in  His  body  abol- 
ished, although,  nevertheless,  He  had  formerly 
Himself  commanded  Moses  that  circumcision 
should  not  pass  over  the  eighth  day,  which  day 
very  frequendy  happens  on  the  Sabbath,  as  we 
read  written  in  the  Gospel.^  Moses,  foreseeing 
the  hardness  of  that  people,  on  the  Sabbath 
raised  up  his  hands,  therefore,  and  thus  figura- 
tively fastened  himself  to  a  cross. ^  And  in  the 
battle  they  were  sought  for  by  the  foreigners  on 
the  Sabbath-day,  that  they  might  be  taken  cap- 
tive, and,  as  if  by  the  very  strictness  of  the  law, 
might  be  fashioned  to  the  avoidance  of  its 
teaching.-* 

And  thus  in  the  sixth  Psalm  for  the  eighth 
day,5  David  asks  the  Lord  that  He  would  not 
rebuke  him  in  His  anger,  nor  judge  him  in  His 
fury ;  for  this  is  indeed  the  eighth  day  of  that 
future  judgment,  which  will  pass  beyond  the 
order  of  the  sevenfold  arrangement.  Jesus  also, 
the  son  of  Nave,  the  successor  of  Moses,  him- 
self broke  the  Sabbath-day  ;  for  on  the  Sabbath- 
day  he  commanded  the  children  of  Israel  ^  to 
go  round  the  walls  of  the  city  of  Jericho  with 
trumpets,  and  declare  war  against  the  aliens. 
Matthias  ^  also,  prince  of  Judah,  broke  the  Sab- 
bath ;  for  he  slew  the  prelect  of  Antiochus  the 
king  of  Syria  on  the  Sabbath,  and  subdued  the 
foreigners  by  pursuing  them.  And  in  Matthew 
we  read,  that  it  is  written  Isaiah  also  and  the 
rest  of  his  colleagues  broke  the  Sabbath  *  —  that 
that  true  and  just  Sabbath  should  be  observed  in 
the  seventh  millenary  of  years.  Wherefore  to 
those  seven  days  the  Lord  attributed  to  each  a 
thousand  years  ;  for  thus  went  the  warning  :  "  In 
Thine  eyes,  O  Lord,  a  thousand  years  are  as  one 
day."  9  Therefore  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  each 
thousand  of  years  is  ordained,  for  I  find  that 
the  Lord's  eyes  are  seven. '°  Wherefore,  as  I 
have  narrated,  that  true  Sabbath  will  be  in  the 
seventh  millenary  of  years,  when  Christ  with  His 
elect  shall  reign.  Moreover,  the  seven  heavens 
agree  with  those  days  ;  for  thus  we  are  warned  : 
"  By  the  word  of  the  Lord  were  the  heavens 
made,  and  all  the  powers  of  them  by  the  spirit 
of  His  mouth."  "  There  are  seven  spirits. 
Their  names  are  the  spirits  which  abode  on  the 

■  Isa.  i.  i^,  14. 
^  John  vii.  22. 
3  Exod.  xxii.  9,  12. 

*  1  Mace.  ii.  31-4' • 

S  Ps.  vi.  i;   [also  Ps.  xii.     On  Sheminith,  1  Chron.  xv.  21]. 

*"  Josh.  vi.  4. 

7  Mattathias,  interp.  Vulg. 

*  Matt.  xii.  5. 
9  Ps.  xc.  4. 

■°  Zech.  iv.  TO. 

"  Ps.  xxxiii.  6.  \^Seven,  say  the  Rabbis.  Vol.  ii.  note  7,  p.  43S, 
this  series.] 


Christ  of  God,  as  was  intimated  in  Isaiah  the 
prophet :  "  And  there  rests  upon  Him  the  spirit 
of  wisdom  and  of  understanding,  the  spirit  of 
counsel  and  might,  the  spirit  of  wisdom  '^  and 
of  piety,  and  the  spirit  of  God's  fear  hath  filled 
Him."  '3  Therefore  the  highest  heaven  is  the 
heaven  of  wisdom ;  the  second,  of  understand- 
ing ;  the  third,  of  counsel ;  the  fourth,  of  might ; 
the  fifth,  of  knowledge  ;  the  sixth,  of  piety  ;  the 
seventh,  of  God's  fear.  From  this,  therefore, 
the  thunders  bellow,  the  lightnings  are  kindled,"* 
the  fires  are  heaped  together;  fiery  darts  '5  ap- 
pear, stars  gleam,  the  anxiety  caused  by  the 
dreadful  comet  is  aroused.'^  Sometimes  it  hap- 
pens that  the  sun  and  moon  approach  one 
another,  and  cause  those  more  than  frightful 
appearances,  radiating  with  light  in  the  field  of 
their  aspect.  But  the  author  of  the  whole  crea- 
tion is  Jesus.  His  name  is  the  Word  ;  for  thus 
His  Father  says  :  "  My  heart  hath  emitted  a  good 
word."  '7  John  the  evangelist  thus  says  :  "  In 
the  beginning  was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was 
with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God.  The  same 
was  in  the  beginning  with  God.  All  things 
were  made  by  Him,  and  without  Him  was  noth- 
ing made  that  was  made."  '*^  Therefore,  first, 
was  made  the  creation ;  secondly,  man,  the  lord 
of  the  human  race,  as  says  the  apostle. '^  There- 
fore this  Word,  when  it  made  light,  is  called 
Wisdom  ;  when  it  made  the  sky,  Understand- 
ing ;  when  it  made  land  and  sea,  Counsel ;  when 
it  made  sun  and  moon  and  other  bright  things. 
Power ;  when  it  calls  forth  land  and  sea,  Knowl- 
edge ;  when  it  formed  man,  Piety  ;  when  it  blesses 
and  sanctifies  man,  it  has  the  name  of  God's  fear. 
Behold  the  seven  horns  of  the  Lamb,^°  the 
seven  eyes  of  God  ^'  —  the  seven  eyes  are  the 
seven  spirits  of  the  Lamb  ;  ^^  seven  torches  burn- 
ing before  the  throne  of  God  ^^  seven  golden 
candlesticks,^^  seven  young  sheep,^''  the  seven 
women  in  Isaiah,^s  the  seven  churches  in  Paul,^^ 
seven  deacons,^?  seven  angels, ^^  seven  trumpets,^^ 
seven  seals  to  the  book,  seven  periods  of  seven 
days  with  which  Pentecost  is  completed,  the 
seven  weeks  in  Daniel, ^°  also  the  forty-three 
weeks  in  Daniel ;  3'  with  Noah,  seven  of  all  clean 


'2  Probably  "  knowledge." 

'3  Isa.  XI.  2,  J. 

'<  Or,  "  the  rivers  are  spread  abroad." 

'5  Trabes.     [There  is  no  proof  of  seven  heavens  in  Scripture.] 

•*>  Coma  horribilis  ciirabitur. 

"  Ps.  xlv.  I.     [Vol.  i.  p.  213,  this  series] 

'^  John  i.  I,  2,  3. 

■9  I  Cor.  XV.  45-47. 

=°  Rev.  v.  6. 

^'  Zech.  iv.  10. 

^2  Rev.  iv.  5. 

«  Rev.  i.  13. 

^*  Lev.  xxiii    i8. 

^5  Isa.  iv.  1. 

^*  Acts  vi.  3? 

^'  Acts  vi.  3. 

2'  Rev.  passim. 

-9  Josh.  vi. ;   Rev.  viii. 

30  Dan.  ix.  25. 

3'  Dan.  ix. 


ON    THE    CREATION    OF   THE   WORLD. 


things  in  the  ark ;  •  seven  revenges  of  Cain,^ 
seven  years  for  a  debt  to  be  acquitted,^  the 
lamp  with  seven  orifices,"*  seven  pillars  of  wis- 
dom in  the  house  of  Solomon.5 

Now,  therefore,  you  may  see  that  it  is  being 
told  you  of  the  unerring  glory  of  God  in  provi- 
dence ;  yet,  as  far  as  my  small  capacity  shall  be 
able,  I  will  endeavour  to  set  it  forth.  That  He 
might  re-create  that  Adam  by  means  of  the 
week,  and  bring  aid  to  His  entire  creation,  was 
accomplished  by  the  nativity  of  His  Son  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.  Who,  then,  that  is  taught  in 
the  law  of  God,  who  that  is  filled  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  does  not  see  in  his  heart,  that  on  the 
same  day  on  which  the  dragon  seduced  Eve, 
the  angel  Gabriel  brought  the  glad  tidings  to 
the  Virgin  Mary ;  that  on  the  same  day  the 
Holy  Spirit  overflowed  the  Virgin  Mary,  on 
which  He  made  light ;  that  on  that  day  He 
was  incarnate  in  flesh,  in  which  He  made  the 
land  and  water  ;  that  on  the  same  day  He  was 
put  to  the  breast,  on  which  He  made  the  stars ; 
that  on  the  same  day  He  was  circumcised,^  on 
which  the  land  and  water  brought  forth  their 
offspring ;  that  on  the  same  day  He  was  incar- 
nated, on  which  He  formed  man  out  of  the 
ground  ;  that  on  the  same  day  Christ  was  born, 
on  which  He  formed  man  ;  that  on  that  day  He 


'  Gen.  vii.  2. 
^  Gen.  iv.  15. 
3  iJeut.  XV.  I. 
*  Zech.  iv.  2. 

5  Prov.  ,\i.  I. 

6  £a  die  in  sanguine. 


suffered,  on  which  Adam  fell ;  that  on  the  same 
day  He  rose  again  from  the' dead,  on  which  He 
created  light?  He,  moreover,  consummates  His 
humanity  in  the  number  seven  :  of  His  nativity, 
His  infancy,  His  boyhood,  His  youth,  His  young- 
manhood,  His  mature  age.  His  death.  I  have 
also  set  forth  His  humanity  to  the  Jews  in  these 
manners :  since  He  is  hungry,  is  thirsty  ;  since 
He  gave  food  and  drink  ;  since  He  walks,  and 
retired  ;  since  He  slept  upon  a  pillow ;  7  since, 
moreover,  He  walks  upon  the  stormy  seas  with 
His  feet.  He  commands  the  winds.  He  cures  the 
sick  and  restores  the  lame.  He  raises  the  blind 
by  His  speech,**  —  see  ye  that  He  declares  Him- 
self to  them  to  be  the  Lord. 

The  day,  as  I  have  above  related,  is  divided 
into  two  parts  by  the  number  twelve  —  by  the 
twelve  hours  of  day  and  night ;  and  by  these 
hours  too,  months,  and  years,  and  seasons,  and 
ages  are  computed.  Therefore,  doubtless,  there 
are  appointed  also  twelve  angels  of  the  day  and 
twelve  angels  of  the  night,  in  accordance,  to  wit, 
with  the  number  of  hours.  For  these  are  the 
twenty-four  witnesses  of  the  days  and  nights  ^ 
which  sit  before  the  throne  of  God,  having  golden 
crowns  on  their  heads,  whom  the  Apocalypse  of 
John  the  apostle  and  evangelist  calls  elders,  for 
the  reason  that  they  are  older  both  than  the 
other  angels  and  than  men. 


7  Mark  iv.  38. 

5  "  He  makes  the  deaf  to  hear,  and  recalls  the  dead: 
serted  conjecturally  by  Routh. 
9  Rev.  iv.  4. 


this  ii  in- 


\  ._ 


COMMENTARY    ON    THE    APOCALYPSE    OF    THE 

BLESSED    JOHN. 


FROM    THE    FIRST    CftAPTER. 

I.  "The  Revelation  of  Jesus  Christ,  which 
God  gave  to  Him,  and  showed  unto  His  servants 
things  which  must  shortly  come  to  pass,  and 
signified  it.  Blessed  are  they  who  read  and  hear 
the  words  of  this  prophecy,  and  keep  the  things 
which  are  written."  ]  The  beginning  of  the  book 
promises  blessing  to  him  that  reads  and  hears 
and  keeps,  that  he  who  takes  pains  about  the 
reading  may  thence  learn  to  do  works,  and  may 
keep  the  precepts. 

4.  "  Grace  unto  you,  and  peace,  from  Him 
which  is,  and  which  was,  and  which  is  to  come."  ] 
He  is,  because  He  endures  continually  ;  Be  was, 
because  with  the  Father  He  made  all  things,  and 
has  at  this  thiie  taken  a  beginning  from  the 
Virgin  ;  Be  is  to  come,  because  assuredly//.?  will 
come  to  judgment. 

"And  from  the  seven  spirits  which  are  before 
His  throne."  ]  We  read  of  a  sevenfold  spirit  in 
Isaiah,"  —  namely,  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  of 
understanding,  the  spirit  of  counsel  and  might, 
of  knowledge  and  of  piety,  and  the  spirit  of  the 
fear  of  the  Lord. 

5.  "And  from  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  faithful 
Witness,  the  first-begotten  of  the  dead."]  In 
taking  upon  Him  manhood.  He  gave  a  testimony 
in  the  world,  wherein  also  having  suffered.  He 
freed  us  by  His  blood  from  sin  ;  and  having 
vanquished  hell.  He  was  the  first  who  rose  from 
the  dead,  and  "  death  shall  have  no  more  do- 
minion over  Him,"^  but  by  His  own  reign  the 
kingdom  of  the  world  is  destroyed. 

6.  "  And  He  made  us  a  kingdom  and  priests 
unto  God  and  His  Father."]  That  is  to  say, 
a  Church  of  all  believers  ;  as  also  the  Apostle 
Peter  says  :  "  A  holy  nation,  a  royal  priesthood."  ^ 

7.  "  Behold,  He  shall  come  with  clouds,  and 
every  eye  shall  see  Him."]  .  For  He  who  at  first 
came  hidden  in  the  manhood  that  He  had  under- 
taken, shall  after  a  little  while  come  to  judgment 


manifest  in  majesty  and  glory.     And  what  saith 
He? 

12.  "And  I  turned,  and  saw  seven  golden 
candlesticks ;  and  in  the  midst  of  the  seven 
golden  candlesticks  one  like  unto  the  Son  of 
man."]  He  says  that  He  was  like  Him  after 
His  victory  over  death,  when  He  had  ascended 
into  the  heavens,  after  the  union  in  His  body  of 
the  power  which  He  received  from  the  Father 
with  the  spirit  of  His  glory. 

13.  "As  it  were  the  Son  of  man  walking  in 
the  midst  of  the  golden  candlesticks."]  He 
says,  in  the  midst  of  the  churches,  as  it  is  said 
in  Solomon,  "I  will  walk  in  the  midst  of  the 
paths  of  the  just,"  4  whose  antiquity  is  immor- 
tality, and  the  fountain  of  majesty. 

"  Clothed  with  a  garment  down  to  the  ankles."] 
In  the  long,  that  is,  the  priestly  garment,  these 
words  very  plainly  deliver  the  fiesh  which  was 
not  corrupted  in  death,  and  has  the  priesthood 
through  suffering. 

"And  He  was  girt  about  the  paps  with  a 
golden  girdle."]  His  paps  are  the  two  testa- 
ments, and  the  golden  girdle  is  the  choir  of 
saints,  as  gold  tried  in  the  fire.  Otherwise  the 
golden  girdle  bound  around  His  breast  indi- 
cates the  enlightened  conscience,  and  the  pure 
and  spiritual  apprehension  that  is  given  to  the 
churches. 

14.  "  And  His  head  and  His  hairs  were  white 
as  it  were  white  wool,  and  as  it  were  snow."] 
On  the  head  the  whiteness  is  shown  ;  "  but  the 
head  of  Christ  is  God."  s  In  the  white  hairs  is 
the  multitude  of  abbots  ^  like  to  wool,  in  respect 
of  simple  sheep ;  to  snow,  in  respect  of  the 
innumerable  crowd  of  candidates  taught  from 
heaven.  ^ 

"  His  eyes  were  as  a  flame  of  fire."]  God  s 
precepts  are  those  which  minister  light  to  be- 
lievers, but  to  unbelievers  burning. 

16.  "And  in  His  face  was  brightness  as  the 
sun."]     That  which   He  called  brightness  was 


'  Isa.  xi.  2.     [P.  342,  supra\ 

2  Rom.  vi.  Q. 

3  1  Pet.  ii.  9. 

344 


*  Prov.  viii.  20. 

5  I  Cor.  xi.  3. 

6  [^^.5a  =  father.     Fathers,  rather.  J 


COMMENTARY    ON    THE   APOCALYPSE. 


345 


the  appearance  of  that  in  which  He  spoke  to 
men  face  to  face.  But  the  glory  of  the  sun  is 
less  than  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  Doubtless  on 
account  of  its  rising  and  setting,  and  rising  again, 
that  He  was  born  and  suffered  and  rose  again, 
therefore  the  Scripture  gave  this  similitude,  liken- 
ing His  face  to  the  glory  of  the  sun. 

15.  "  His  feet  were  like  unto  yellow  brass,  as  if 
burned  in  a  furnace."]  He  calls  the  apostles  His 
feet,  who,  being  wrought  by  suffering,  preached 
His  word  in  the  whole  world  ;  for  He  rightly 
named  those  by  whose  means  the  preaching  went 
forth,  feet.  Whence  also  the  prophet  anticipated 
this,  and  said  :  "  We  will  worship  in  the  place 
where  His  feet  have  stood."  '  Because  where 
they  first  of  all  stood  and  confirmed  the  Church, 
that  is,  in  Judea,  all  the  saints  shall  assemble 
together,  and  will  worship  their  Lord. 

16.  "And  out  of  His  mouth  was  issuing  a 
sharp  two-edged  sword."]  By  the  twice-sharp- 
ened sword  going  forth  out  of  His  mouth  is 
shown,  that  it  is  He  Himself  who  has  both  now 
declared  the  word  of  the  Gospel,  and  previously 
by  Moses  declared  the  knowledge  of  the  law  to 
the  whole  world.  But  because  from  the  same 
word,  as  well  of  the  New  as  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, He  will  assert  Himself  upon  the  whole 
human  race,  therefore  He  is  spoken  of  as  two- 
edged.  For  the  sword  arms  the  soldier,  the 
sword  slays  the  enemy,  the  sword  punishes  the 
deserter.  And  that  He  might  show  to  the  apos- 
tles that  He  was  announcing  judgment,  He  says  : 
"  I  came  not  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword."  ^  And 
after  He  had  completed  His  parables,  He  says 
to  them  :  "  Have  ye  understood  all  these  things? 
And  they  said,  ^Ve  have.  And  He  added.  There- 
fore is  every  scribe  instructed  in  the  kingdom  of 
God  like  unto  a  man  that  is  a  father  of  a  family, 
bringing  forth  from  his  treasure  things  new  and 
old," -^  —  the  new,  the  evangelical  words  of  the 
apostles  ;  the  old,  the  precepts  of  the  law  and 
the  prophets  :  and  He  testified  that  these  pro- 
ceeded out  of  His  mouth.  Moreover,  He  also 
says  to  Peter  :  "  Go  thou  to  the  sea,  and  cast  a 
hook,  and  take  up  the  fish  that  shall  first  come 
up  ;  and  having  opened  its  mouth,  thou  shalt 
find  a  stater  (that  is,  two  denarii),  and  thou 
shalt  give  it  for  me  and  for  thee."  ■*  And  simi- 
larly David  says  by  the  Spirit :  "God  spake  once, 
twice  I  have  heard  the  same."  5  Because  (iod 
once  decreed  from  the  beginning  what  shall  be 
even  to  the  end.  Finally,  as  He  Himself  is  the 
Judge  appointed  by  the  Father,  on  account  of 
His  assumption  of  humanity,  wishing  to  show 
that  men  shall  be  judged  by  the  word  that  He 
had  declared,  He  says  :  "  Think  ye  that  I  will 

■  Ps.  cxxxii.  7. 

2  Matt.  X.  34. 

3  Matt.  xiii.  51,  52. 
*  Matt.  xvii.  27. 

S  Ps.  Ixii.  n. 


judge  you  at  the  last  day?  Nay,  but  the  word," 
says  He,  "  which  I  have  spoken  unto  you,  that 
shall  judge  you  in  the  last  day."  ^  And  Paul, 
speaking  of  Antichrist  to  the  Thessalonians,  says  : 
"  Whom  the  Lord  Jesus  wiH  slay  by  the  breath 
of  His  mouth."  ^  And  Isaiah  says  :  "  By  the 
breath  of  His  lips  He  shall  slay  the  wicked."^ 
This,  therefore,  is  the  two-edged  sword  issuing 
out  of  His  mouth. 

15.  "And  His  voice  as  it  were  the  voice  of 
many  waters."]  The  many  waters  are  under- 
stood to  be  many  peoples,  or  the  gift  of  baptism 
that  He  sent  forth  by  the  apostles,  saying:  "Go 
ye,  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  name 
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost."  9 

16.  "And  He  had  in  His  right  hand  seven 
stars."]  He  said  that  in  His  right  hand  He 
had  seven  stars,  because  the  Holy  Spirit  of  seven- 
fold agency  was  given  into  His  power  by  the 
Father.  As  Peter  exclaimed  to  the  Jews  :  "  Be- 
ing at  the  right  hand  of  God  exalted,  He  hath 
shed  forth  this  Spirit  received  from  the  Father, 
which  ye  both  see  and  hear."  '°  Moreover,  John 
the  Baptist  had  also  anticipated  this,  by  saying 
to  his  disciples  :  "For  God  giveth  not  the  Spirit 
by  measure  unto  Him.  The  Father,"  says  he, 
"  loveth  the  Son,  and  hath  given  all  things  into 
His  hands."  "  Those  seven  stars  are  the  seven 
churches,  which  he  names  in  his  addresses  by 
name,  and  calls  them  to  whom  he  wrote  epistles. 
Not  that  they  are  themselves  the  only,  or  even 
the  principal  churches ;  but  what  he  says  to  one, 
he  says  to  all.  For  they  are  in  no  respect  dif- 
ent,  that  on  that  ground  any  one  should  prefer 
them  to  the  larger  number  of  similar  small  ones. 
\\\  the  whole  world  Paul  taught  that  all  the 
churches  are  arranged  by  sevens,  that  they  are 
called  seven,  and  that  the  Catholic  Church  is 
one.  And  first  of  all,  indeed,  that  he  himself 
also  might  maintain  the  type  of  seven  churches, 
he  did  not  exceed  that  number.  But  he  wrote 
to  the  Romans,  to  the  Corinthians,  to  the  Gala- 
tians,  to  the  Ephesians,  to  the  Thessalonians,  to 
the  Philippians,  to  the  Colossians ;  afterwards  he 
wrote  to  individual  persons,  so  as  not  to  exceed 
the  number  of  seven  churches.  And  abridging 
in  a  short  space  his  announcement,  he  thus  says 
to  Timothy  :  "That  thou  mayest  know  how  thou 
oughtest  to  behave  thyself  in  the  Church  of  the 
living  God."  '^  We  read  also  that  this  typical 
number  is  announced  by  the  Holy  Si)irit  by 
the  mouth  of  Isaiah:  "Of  seven  women  which 
took  hold   of  one   man."  '3     The    one    man    is 


*  John  xii.  48. 

7  2  Thess.  ii.  8. 

*  Isa.  xi.  4. 

9  Matt,  xxviii.  19. 
■°  Acts  ii.  33. 
"  John  iii.  34.  35- 
'-  I   I'im.  iii.  15. 
'i  Isa.  iv.  I. 


[Compare  Wordsworth  on  the  Apocalypse.] 


346 


COMMENTARY    ON    THE    APOCALYPSE. 


Christ,  not  born  of  seed  ;  but  the  seven  women 
are  seven  churches,  receiving  His  bread,  and 
clothed  with  his  apparel,  who  ask  that  their  re- 
proach should  be  taken  away,  only  that  His 
name  should  be  called  upon  them.  The  bread 
is  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  nourishes  to  eternal 
life,  promised  to  them,  that  is,  by  faith.  And 
His  garments  wherewith  they  desire  to  be  clothed 
are  the  glory  of  immortality,  of  which  Paul  the 
apostle  says  :  "  For  this  corruptible  must  put  on 
incorruption,  and  this  mortal  must  put  on  im- 
mortality." '  Moreover,  they  ask  that  their  re- 
proach may  be  taken  away — that  is,  that  they 
may  be  cleansed  from  their  sins  :  for  the  reproach 
is  the  original  sin  which  is  taken  away  in  baptism, 
and  they  begin  to  be  called  Christian  men,  which 
is,  "  Let  thy  name  be  called  upon  us."  There- 
fore in  these  seven  churches,  of  one  Catholic 
Church  are  believers,  because  it  is  one  in  seven 
by  the  quality  of  faith  and  election.  Whether 
writing  to  them  who  labour  in  the  world,  and 
live  ^  of  the  frugality  of  their  labours,  and  are 
patient,  and  when  they  see  certain  men  in  the 
Church  wasters,  and  pernicious,  they  hear  them, 
lest  there  should  become  dissension,  he  yet  ad- 
monishes them  by  love,  that  in  what  respects 
their  faith  is  deficient  they  should  repent;  or  to 
those  who  dwell  in  cruel  places  among  perse- 
cutors, that  they  should  continue  faithful ;  or  to 
those  who,  under  the  pretext  of  mercy,  do  un- 
lawful sins  in  the  Church,  and  make  them  mani- 
fest to  be  done  by  others  ;  or  to  those  that  are 
at  ease  in  the  Church ;  or  to  those  who  are  neg- 
ligent, and  Christians  only  in  name  ;  or  to  those 
who  are  meekly  instructed,  that  they  may  bravely 
persevere  in  faith  ;  or  to  those  who  study  the 
Scriptures,  and  labour  to  know  the  mysteries  of 
their  announcement,  and  are  unwilling  to  do 
God's  work  that  is  mercy  and  love  :  to  all  he 
urges  penitence,  to  all  he  declares  judgment. 

FROM    THE    SECOND    CHAPTER. 

2.  "  I  know  thy  works,  and  thy  labour,  and  thy 
patience."]  In  the  first  epistle  He  speaks  thus  : 
I  know  that  thou  sufferest  and  workest,  I  see 
that  thou  art  patient ;  think  not  that  I  am  stay- 
ing long  from  thee. 

"  And  that  thou  canst  not  bear  them  that  are 
evil,  and  who  say  that  they  are  Jews  and  are  not, 
and  thou  has  found  them  liars,  and  thou  hast 
patience  for  My  name's  sake."  ]  All  these  things 
tend  to  praise,  and  that  no  small  praise  ;  and  it 
behoves  such  men,  and  such  a  class,  and  such 
elected  persons,  by  all  means  to  be  admonished, 
that  they  may  not  be  defrauded  of  such  privi- 
leges granted  to  them  of  (}od.  These  few  things 
He  said  that  He  had  against  them. 


'  I  Cor.  XV.  53. 

'  Operantur,  conjectured  to  be  ' 


4,  5.  "And  thou  hast  left  thy  first  love:  re- 
member whence  thou  hast  fallen."]  He  who 
falls,  falls  from  a  height :  therefore  He  said 
tvJience :  because,  even  to  the  very  last,  works 
of  love  must  be  practised  ;  and  this  is  the  princi- 
pal commandment.  Finally,  unless  this  is  done, 
He  threatened  to  remove  their  candlestick  out 
of  its  place,  that  is,  to  disperse  the  congregation. 

6.  "  This  thou  hast  also,  that  thou  hatest  the 
deeds  of  the  Nicolaitanes."  ]  But  because  thou 
thyself  hatedst  those  who  hold  the  doctrines  of 
the  Nicolaitanes,  thou  e.Kpectest  praise.  More- 
over, to  hate  the  works  of  the  Nicolaitanes,  which 
He  Himself  also  hated,  this  tends  to  praise.  But 
the  works  of  the  Nicolaitanes  were  in  that  time 
false  and  troublesome  men,  who,  as  ministers 
under  the  name  of  Nicolaus,  had  made  for  them- 
selves a  heresy,  to  the  effect  that  what  had  been 
offered  to  idols  might  be  exorcised  and  eaten, 
and  that  whoever  should  have  committed  forni- 
cation might  receive  peace  on  the  eighth  day. 
Therefore  He  extols  those  to  whom  He  is  writing ; 
and  to  these  men,  being  such  and  so  great.  He 
promised  the  tree  0/  life,  which  is  in  the  paradise 
of  His  God. 

The  following  epistle  unfolds  the  mode  of  life 
and  habit  of  another  order  which  follows.  He 
proceeds  to  say  :  — 

9.  "  I  know  thy  tribulation  and  thy  poverty, 
but  thou  art  rich."]  For  He  knows  that  with 
such  men  there  are  riches  hidden  with  Hun,  and 
that  they  deny  the  blasphemy  of  the  Jews,  who 
say  that  they  are  Jews  and  are  not ;  but  they  are 
the  synagogue  of  Satan,  since  they  are  gathered 
together  by  Antichrist ;  and  to  them  He  says  :  — 

10.  "Be  thou  faithful  unto  death."]  That 
they  should  continue  to  be  faithful  even  unto 
death. 

II."  He  that  shall  overcome,  shall  not  be 
hurt  by  the  second  death."]  That  is,  he  shall 
not  be  chastised  in  hell. 

The  third  order  of  the  saints  shows  that  they 
are  men  who  are  strong  in  faith,  and  who  are 
not  afraid  of  persecution ;  but  because  even 
among  them  there  are  some  who  are  inclined  to 
unlawful  associations.  He  says  :  — 

14-16.  "Thou  hast  there  some  who  hold  the 
doctrine  of  Balaam,  who  taught  in  the  case  of 
Balak  that  he  should  put  a  stuml)ling- block  be- 
fore the  children  of  Israel,  to  eat  and  to  commit 
fornication.  So  also  hast  thou  them  who  hold 
the  doctrine  of  the  Nicolaitanes  ;  but  I  will  fight 
with  them  with  the  sword  of  my  mouth."] 
That  is,  I  will  say  what  I  shall  command,  and  I 
will  tell  you  what  you  shall  do.  For  Balaam,^ 
with  his  doctrine,  taught  Balak  to  cast  a  stum- 
bling-block before  the  eyes  of  the  children  of 
Israel,  to  eat  what  was  sacrificed  to  idols,  and  to 


s  Num.  xxiii.     [Wordsworth,  ed,  1852,  pp.  78-92.] 


COMMENTARY    ON   THE   APOCALYPSE. 


347 


commit  fornication,  —  a  thing  which  is  known  to 
have  happened  of  old.  For  he  gave  this  advice 
to  the  king  of  the  Moabites,  and  they  caused 
stumbhng  to  the  people.  Thus,  says  He,  ye 
have  among  you  those  who  hold  such  doctrine  ; 
and  under  the  pretext  of  mercy,  you  would  cor- 
rupt others. 

17.  "To  him  that  overcometh  I  will  give  the 
hidden  manna,  and  I  will  give  him  a  white 
stone."]  The  hidden  manna  is  immortality; 
the  white  gem  is  adoption  to  be  the  son  of  God  ; 
the  new  name  written  on  the  stone  is  "  Chris- 
tian." 

The  fourth  class  intimates  the  nobility  of  the 
faithful,  who  labour  daily,  and  do  greater  works. 
But  even  among  them  also  He  shows  that  there 
are  men  of  an  easy  disposition  to  grant  unlaw- 
ful peace,  and  to  listen  to  new  forms  of  prophe- 
sying ;  and  He  reproves  and  warns  the  others 
to  whom  this  is  not  pleasing,  who  know  the 
wickedness  opposed  to  them  :  for  which  evils 
He  purposes  to  bring  upon  the  head  of  the 
faithful  both  sorrows  and  dangers  ;  and  therefore 
He  says  :  — 

24.  "  I  will  not  put  upon  you  any  other  bur- 
den."] That  is,  I  have  not  given  you  laws, 
observances,  and  duties,  which  is  another  bur- 
den. 

25,  26.  "But  that  which  ye  have,  hold  fast 
until  I  come  ;  and  he  that  overcometh,  to  him 
will  I  give  power  over  all  peoples."]  That  is, 
him  I  will  appoint  as  judge  among  the  rest  of 
the  saints. 

28.  "  And  I  will  give  him  the  morning  star."] 
To  wit,  the  first  resurrection.  He  promised  the 
morning  star,  which  drives  away  the  night,  and 
announces  the  light,  that  is,  the  beginning  of 
day. 

FROM   THE   THIRD    CHAPTER. 

The  fifth  class,  company,  or  association  of 
saints,  sets  forth  men  who  are  careless,  and  who 
are  carrying  on  in  the  world  other  transactions 
than  those  which  they  ought  —  Christians  only 
in  name.  And  therefore  He  exhorts  them  tiiat 
by  any  means  they  should  be  turned  away  from 
negligence,  and  be  saved  ;  and  to  this  effect  He 
says  :  — 

2.  "  Be  watchful,  and  strengthen  the  other 
things  which  were  ready  to  die  ;  for  I  have  not 
found  thy  works  perfect  before  God."]  For  it 
is  not  enough  for  a  tree  to  live  and  to  have  no 
fruit,  even  as  it  is  not  enough  to  be  called  a 
Christian  and  to  confess  Christ,  but  not  to  have 
Himself  in  our  work,  that  is,  not  to  do  His 
precepts. 

The  sixth  class  is  the  mode  of  life  of  the  best 
election.  The  habit  of  saints  is  set  forth  ;  of 
those,  to  wit,  who  are  lowly  in  the  world,  and 
unskilled  in  the  Scriptures,  and  who  hold    the 


faith  immoveably,  and  are  not  at  all  broken 
down  by  any  chance,  or  withdrawn  from  the  faith 
by  any  fear.     Therefore  He  says  to  them  :  — 

8.  "  I  have  set  before  thee  an  open  door,  be- 
cause thou  hast  kept  the  word  of  my  patience."] 
In  such  little  strength. 

10.  "And  I  will  keep  thee  from  the  hour  of 
temptation."  ]  That  they  may  know  His  glory 
to  be  of  this  kind,  that  they  are  not  indeed  per- 
mitted to  be  given  over  to  temptation. 

12.  "He  that  overcometh  shall  be  made  a 
pillar  in  the  temple  of  God."]  For  even  as  a 
pillar  is  an  ornament  of  the  building,  so  he  who 
perseveres  shall  obtain  a  nobility  in  the  Church. 

Moreover,  the  seventh  association  of  the 
Church  declares  that  they  are  rich  men  placed 
in  positions  of  dignity,  but  believing  that  they 
are  rich,  among  whom  indeed  the  Scriptures  are 
discussed  in  their  bedchamber,  while  the  faith- 
ful are  outside ;  and  they  are  understood  by 
none,  although  they  boast  themselves,  and  say 
that  they  know  all  things,  —  endowed  with  the 
confidence  of  learning,  but  ceasing  from  its 
labour.     And  thus  He  says  :  — 

15.  "That  they  are  neither  cold  nor  hot."] 
That  is,  neither  unbelieving  nor  believing,  for 
they  are  all  things  to  all  men.  And  because  he 
who  is  neither  cold  nor  hot,  but  lukewarm,  gives 
nausea.  He  says  :  — 

16.  "  I  will  vomit  thee  out  of  My  mouth."] 
Although  nausea  is  hateful,  still  it  hurts  no  one  ; 
so  also  is  it  with  men  of  this  kind  when  they 
have  been  cast  forth.  But  because  there  is  time 
of  repentance.  He  says  :  — 

18.  "I  persuade  thee  to  buy  of  Me  gold  tried 
in  the  fire."]  That  is,  that  in  whatever  manner 
you  can,  you  should  suffer  for  the  Lord's  name 
tribulations  and  passions. 

"  And  anoint  thine  eyes  with  eye-salve."] 
That  what  you  gladly  know  by  the  Scripture, 
you  should  strive  also  to  do  the  work  of  the 
same.  And  because,  if  in  these  ways  men  re- 
turn out  of  great  destruction  to  great  repentance, 
they  are  not  only  useful  to  themselves,  but  they 
are  able  also  to  be  of  advantage  to  many,  He 
promised  them  no  small  reward,  —  to  sit, 
namely,  on  the  throne  of  judgment. 

FROM    THE    FOURTH    CHAPTER. 

"After  this,  I  beheld,  and,  lo,  a  door  was 
opened  in  heaven."]  The  new  testament  is 
announced  as  an  open  door  in  heaven. 

"  And  the  first  voice  which  I  heard  ivas,  as  it 
were,  of  a  trumpet  talking  with  me,  saying.  Come 
up  hither."]  Since  the  door  is  shown  to  be 
opened,  it  is  manifest  that  previously  it  had  been 
closed  to  men.  And  it  was  sufficiently  and  fully 
laid  open  when  Christ  ascended  with  His  body 
to  the  Father  into  heaven.     Moreover,  the  first 


148 


COMMENTARY   ON   THE    APOCALYPSE. 


voice  which  he  had  heard  when  he  says  that  it 
spoke  with  him,  without  contradiction  condemns 
those  who  say  that  one  spoke  in  the  prophets, 
another  in  the  Gospel ;  since  it  is  rather  He 
Himself  who  comes,  that  is  the  same  who  spoke 
in  the  prophets.  For  John  was  of  the  circum- 
cision, and  all  that  people  which  had  heard  the 
announcement  of  the  Old  lestament  was  edi- 
fied with  his  word. 

"That  very  same  voice,"  said  he,  "that  I  had 
heard,  that  said  unto  me,  Come  up  hither."] 
That  is  the  Spirit,  whom  a  little  before  he  con- 
fesses that  he  had  seen  walking  as  the  Son  of 
man  in  the  midst  of  the  golden  candlesticks. 
And  he  now  gathers  from  Him  what  had  been 
foretold  in  similitudes  by  the  law,  and  associates 
with  this  scripture  all  the  former  prophets,  and 
opens  up  the  Scriptures.  And  because  our  Lord 
invited  in  His  own  name  all  believers  into  heaven, 
He  forthwith  poured  out  the  Holy  Spirit,  who 
should  bring  them  to  heaven.     He  says  :  — 

2.  "  hnmediately  I  was  in  the  Spirit."]  And 
since  the  mind  of  the  faithful  is  opened  by  the 
Holy  Spirit,  and  that  is  manifested  to  them 
which  was  also  foretold  to  the  fathers,  he  dis- 
tinctly says  :  — 

"And,  behold,  a  throne  was  set  in  heaven."] 
The  throne  set :  what  is  it  but  the  throne  of 
judgment  and  of  the  King? 

3.  "  And  He  that  sate  upon  the  throne  was,  to 
look  upon,  like  a  jasper  and  a  sardine  stone."] 
Upon  the  throne  he  says  that  he  saw  the  like- 
ness of  a  jasi)er  and  a  sardine  stone.  The  jasper 
is  of  the  colour  of  water,  the  sardine  of  fire. 
These  two  are  thence  manifested  to  be  placed 
as  judgments  upon  God's  tribunal  until  the  con- 
summation of  the  world,  of  which  judgments  one 
is  already  completed  in  the  deluge  of  water,  and 
the  other  shall  be  completed  by  fire. 

"And  there  was  a  rainbow  about  the  throne."] 
Moreover,  the  rainbow  round  about  the  throne 
has  the  same  colours.  The  rainbow  is  called  a 
bow  from  what  the  Lord  spake  to  Noah  and  to 
his  sons,"  that  they  should  not  fear  any  further 
deluge  in  the  generation  of  God,  but  fire.  For 
thus  He  says  :  I  will  place  my  l)ow  in  the  clouds, 
that  ye  may  now  no  longer  fear  water,  but  fire. 

6.  "And  before  the  throne  there  was,  as  it 
were,  a  sea  of  glass  like  to  crystal."]  That  is 
the  gift  of  baptism  which  He  sheds  forth  through 
His  Son  in  time  of  repentance,  before  He 
executes  judgment.  It  is  therefore  before  the 
throne,  that  is,  the  judgment.  And  when  he 
says  a  sea  of  glass  like  to  crystal,  he  shows  that 
it  is  pure  water,  smooth,  not  agitated  by  the 
wind,  not  flowing  down  as  on  a  slope,  but  given 
to  be  immoveable  as  the  house  of  God. 

"  And  round  about  the  throne  were  four  living 

'  Gen.  ix.     [Wordsworth,  Lect.  iv.] 


creatures."]     The  four  living  creatures  are  the 
four  Gospels. 

7-10.  "The  first  living  creature  was  like  to 
a  lion,  and  the  second  was  like  to  a  calf,  and  the 
third  had  a  face  like  to  a  man,  and  the  fourth 
was  like  to  a  flying  eagle ;  and  they  had  six 
wings,  and  round  about  and  within  they  were 
full  of  eyes  ;  and  they  had  no  rest,  saying,  Holy, 
holy,  holy.  Lord  Omnipotent.  And  the  four  and 
twenty  elders,  falling  down  before  the  throne, 
adored  God."]  The  four  and  twenty  elders  are 
the  twenty- four  books  of  the  prophets  and  of  the 
law,  which  give  testimonies  of  the  judgment. 
Moreover,  also,  they  are  the  twenty-four  fathers  — 
twelve  apostles  and  twelve  patriarchs.  And  in 
that  the  living  creatures  are  different  in  appear- 
ance, this  is  the  reason  :  the  living  creature  like 
to  a  lion  designates  Mark,  in  whom  is  heard  the 
voice  of  the  lion  roaring  in  the  desert.  And  in 
the  figure  of  a  man,  Matthew  strives  to  declare 
to  us  the  genealogy  of  Mary,  from  whom  Christ 
took  flesh.  Therefore,  in  enumerating  from 
Abraham  to  David,  and  thence  to  Joseph,  he 
spoke  of  Him  as  if  of  a  man  :  therefore  his 
announcement  sets  forth  the  image  of  a  man. 
Luke,  in  narrating  the  priesthood  of  Zacharias 
as  he  oiTers  a  sacrifice  for  the  people,  and  the 
angel  that  appears  to  him  with  respect  of  the 
priesthood,  and  the  victim  in  the  same  descrip- 
tion bore  the  likeness  of  a  calf.  John  the  evan- 
gelist, like  to  an  eagle  hastening  on  uplifted 
wings  to  greater  heights,  argues  about  the  Word 
of  God.  Mark,  therefore,  as  an  evangelist  thus 
beginning,  "  The  beginning  of  the  Gospel  of 
Jesus  Christ,  as  it  is  written  in  Isaiah  the  proph- 
et;"  ^  "  The  voice  of  one  cr}'ing  in  the  wilder- 
ness," 3 —  has  the  effigy  of  a  lion.  And  Matthew, 
"  The  book  of  the  generation  of  Jesus  Christ, 
the  son  of  David,  the  son  of  Abraham  :  "  *  this 
is  the  form  of  a  man.  But  Luke  said,  "There 
was  a  priest,  by  name  Zachariah,  of  the  course 
of  Abia,  and  his  wife  was  of  the  daughters  of 
Aaron  :  "  s  this  is  the  likeness  of  a  calf.  But 
John,  when  he  begins,  "  In  the  beginning  was 
"the  ^Vord,  and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the 
Word  was  God,"  ^  sets  forth  the  likeness  of  a 
flying  eagle.  Moreover,  not  only  do  the  evan- 
gelists express  their  four  similitudes  in  their  re- 
spective openings  of  the  Gospels,  but  also  the 
Word  itself  of  God  the  Father  Omnipotent, 
which  is  His  Son  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  bears 
the  same  likeness  in  the  time  of  His  advent. 
When  He  preaches  to  us.  He  is,  as  it  were,  a 
lion  .and  a  lion's  whelp.  And  when  for  man's 
salvation  He  was  made  man  to  overcome  death, 
and   to   set   all  men  free,  and  that  He  offered 


2  Mark  i.  3.     [On  the  2oa,  see  p.  341,  supra.] 

3  Isa.  xl.  3. 
■*  Matt.  i.  I. 
5  Luke  i.  5. 
*  John  i.  I, 


COMMENTARY   ON   THE   APOCALYPSE. 


;49 


Himself  a  victim  to  the  Father  on  our  behalf, 
He  was  called  a  calf.  And  that  He  overcame 
death  and  ascended  into  the  heavens,  extending 
His  wings  and  protecting  His  people.  He  was 
named  a  flying  eagle.  Therefore  these  an- 
nouncements, although  they  are  four,  yet  are 
one,  because  it  proceeded  from  one  mouth. 
Even  as  the  river  in  paradise,  although  it  is  one, 
was  divided  into  four  heads.  Moreover,  that  for 
the  announcement  of  the  New  Testament  those 
living  creatures  had  eyes  within  and  without, 
shows  the  spiritual  providence  which  both  looks 
into  the  secrets  of  the  heart,  and  beholds  the 
things  which  are  coming  after  that  are  within 
and  without. 

8.  "  Six  wings."]  These  are  the  testimonies 
of  the  books  of  the  Old  Testament.  Thus, 
twenty  and  four  make  as  many  as  there  are  el- 
ders sitting  upon  the  thrones.  But  as  an  animal 
cannot  fly  unless  it  have  wings,  so,  too,  the  an- 
nouncement of  the  New  Testament  gains  no  faith 
unless  it  have  the  fore-announced  testimonies  of 
the  Old  Testament,  by  which  it  is  lifted  from  the 
earth,  and  flies.  For  in  every  case,  what  has 
been  told  before,  and  is  afterwards  found  to 
have  happened,  that  begets  an  undoubting  faith. 
Again,  also,  if  wings  be  not  attached  to  the  liv- 
ing creatures,  they  have  nothing  whence  they 
may  draw  their  life.  For  unless  what  the  proph- 
ets foretold  had  been  consummated  in  Christ, 
their  preaching  was  vain.  For  the  Catholic 
Church  holds  those  things  which  were  both 
before  predicted  and  afterwards  accomplished. 
And  it  flies,  because  the  living  animal  is  reason- 
ably lifted  up  from  the  earth.  But  to  heretics 
who  do  not  avail  themselves  of  the  prophetic 
testimony,  to  them  also  there  are  present  living 
creatures  ;  but  they  do  not  fly,  because  they  are 
of  the  earth.  And  to  the  Jews  who  do  not  re- 
ceive the  announcement  of  the  New  Testament 
there  are  present  wings ;  but  they  do  not  fly, 
that  is,  they  bring  a  vain  prophesying  to  men, 
not  adjusting  facts  to  their  words.  And  the 
books  of  the  Old  Testament  that  are  received 
are  twenty- four,  which  you  will  find  in  the  epito- 
mes of  Theodore.  But,  moreover  (as  we  have 
said),  four  and  twenty  elders,  patriarchs  and 
apostles,  are  to  judge  His  people.  For  to  the 
apostles,  when  they  asked,  saying,  "  We  have 
forsaken  all  that  we  had,  and  followed  Thee  : 
what  shall  we  have?"  our  Lord  replied,  "When 
the  Son  of  man  shall  sit  upon  the  throne  of  His 
glory,  ye  also  shall  sit  upon  twelve  thrones,  judg- 1 
ing  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel."  '  But  of  the 
fathers  also  who  should  judge,  says  the  patriarch 
Jacob,  "  Dan  also  himself  shall  judge  his  people 
among  his  brethren,  even  as  one  of  the  tribes  in 
Israel."  ^ 


'  Matt.  xix.  27,  28. 
*  Gen.  xlix.  16. 


5.  "And  from  the  throne  proceeded  lightnings, 
and  voices,  and  thunders,  and  seven  torches  of 
fire  burning."]  And  the  lightnings,  and  voices, 
and  thunders  proceeding  from  the  throne  of 
God,  and  the  seven  torches  of  fire  burning, 
signify  announcements,  and  promises  of  adoption, 
and  threatenings.  For  lightnings  signify  the 
Lord's  advent,  and  the  voices  the  announce- 
ments of  the  New  Testament,  and  the  thunders, 
that  the  words  are  from  heaven.  The  burning 
torches  of  fire  signify  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
that  it  is  given  by  the  wood  of  the  passion.  And 
when  these  things  were  doing,  he  says  that  all 
the  elders  fell  down  and  adored  the  Lord  ;  while 
the  living  creatures  —  that  is,  of  course,  the 
actions  recorded  in  the  Gospels  and  the  teach- 
ing of  the  Lord  —  gave  Him  glory  and  honour.^ 
In  that  they  had  fulfilled  the  word  that  had  been 
previously  foretold  by  them,  they  worthily  and 
with  reason  exult,  feeling  that  they  have  minis- 
tered the  mysteries  and  the  word  of  the  Lord. 
Finally,  also,  because  He  had  come  who  should 
remove  death,  and  who  alone  was  worthy  to  take 
the  crown  of  immortality,  all  for  the  glory  of 
His  most  excellent  doing  had  crowns. 

10.  "And  they  cast  their  crowns  under  His 
feet."]  That  is,  on  account  of  the  eminent  glory 
of  Christ's  victory,  they  cast  all  their  victories 
under  His  feet.  This  is  what  in  the  Ciospel  the 
Holy  Spirit  consummated  by  showing.  For 
when  about  finally  to  suffer,  ourTorcl  had  come 
to  Jerusalem,  and  the  people  had  gone  forth  to 
meet  Him,  some  strewed  the  road  with  palm 
branches  cut  down,  others  threw  down  their  gar- 
ments, doubtless  these  were  setting  forth  two 
peoples  —  the  one  of  the  patriarchs,  the  other  of 
the  prophets  ;  that  is  to  say,  of  the  great  men 
who  had  any  kind  of  palms  of  their  victories 
against  sin,  and  cast  them  under  the  feet  of  Christ, 
the  victor  of  all.  And  the  palm  and  the  crown 
signify  the  same  things,  and  these  are  not  given 
save  to  the  victor. 

FROM    THE    FIFTH    CHAPTER. 

1,  "  And  I  saw  in  the  right  hand  of  Him  that 
sate  upon  the  throne,  a  book  written  within  and 
without,  sealed  with  seven  seals."]  This  book 
signifies  the  Old  Testament,  which  has  been 
given  into  the  hands  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
who  received  from  the  Father  judgment. 

2,  3.  "And  I  saw  an  angel  full  of  strength 
proclaiming  with  a  loud  voice.  Who  is  worthy  to 
open  the  book,  and  to  loose  the  seals  thereof? 
And  no  one  was  found  worthy,  neither  in  the 
earth  nor  under  the  earth,  to  open  the  l)ook."] 
Now  to  open  the  book  is  to  overcome  death  for 
man. 

3  The  living  creatures  are  held  to  be  the  Gospels,  or  the  acts  and 
teaching  of  our  Lord  narrated  in  them.     [Wordsworth,  Lect.  iv.] 


350 


COMMENTARY    ON    THE    APOCALYPSE. 


4.  "  There  was  none  found  worthy  to  do  this."] 
Neither  among  the  angels  of  heaven,  nor  among 
men  in  earth,  nor  among  the  souls  of  the  saints 
in  rest,  save  Christ  the  Son  of  God  alone,  whom 
he  says  that  he  saw  as  a  Lamb  standing  as  it 
were  slain,  having  seven  horns.  What  had  not 
been  then  announced,  and  what  the  law  had 
contemplated  for  Him  by  its  various  oblations 
and  sacrifices,  it  behoved  Himself  to  fulfil.  And 
because  He  Himself  was  the  testator,  who  had 
overcome  death,  it  was  just  that  Himself  should 
be  appointed  the  Lord's  heir,  that  He  should 
possess  the  substance  of  the  dying  man,  that  is, 
the  human  members. 

5.  "  Lo,  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  the  root 
of  David,  hath  prevailed."]  We  read  in  Genesis 
that  this  lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  hath  con- 
quered, when  the  patriarch  Jacob  says,  "  Judah, 
thy  brethren  shall  praise  thee ;  thou  hast  lain 
down  and  slept,  and  hast  risen  up  again  as  a 
lion,  and  as  a  lion's  whelp."  '  For  He  is  called 
a  lion  for  the  overcoming  of  death ;  but  for  the 
suffering  for  men  He  was  led  as  a  lamb  to  the 
slaughter.  But  because  He  overcame  death, 
and  anticipated  the  duty  of  the  executioner. 
He  was  called  as  it  were  slain.  He  therefore 
opens  and  seals  again  the  testament,  which  He 
Himself  had  sealed.  The  legislator  Moses  inti- 
mating this,  that  it  behoved  Him  to  be  sealed 
and  concealed,  even  to  the  advent  of  His  pas- 
sion, veiled  his  face,  and  so  spoke  to  the  people  ; 
showing  that  the  words  of  his  announcement 
were  veiled  even  to  the  advent  of  His  time.  For 
he  himself,  when  he  had  read  to  the  people,  hav- 
ing taken  the  wool  purpled  with  the  blood  of  the 
calf,  with  water  sprinkled  the  whole  people,  say- 
ing, "  This  is  the  blood  of  His  testament  who 
hath  purified  you."  ^  It  should  therefore  be 
observed  that  the  Man  is  accurately  announced, 
and  that  all  things  combine  into  one.  For  it  is 
not  sufficient  that  that  law  is  spoken  of,  but  it 
is  named  as  a  testament.  For  no  law  is  called 
a  testament,  nor  is  any  thing  else  called  a  testa- 
ment, save  what  persons  make  who  are  about  to 
die.  And  whatever  is  within  the  testament  is 
sealed,  even  to  the  day  of  the  testator's  death. 
Therefore  it  is  with  reason  that  it  is  only  sealed 
by  the  Lamb  slain,  who,  as  it  were  a  lion,  has 
broken  death  in  pieces,  and  has  fulfilled  what 
had  been  foretold  ;  and  has  delivered  man,  that 
is,  the  flesh,  from  death,  and  has  received  as  a 
possession  the  substance  of  the  dying  person, 
that  is,  of  the  human  members  ;  that  as  by  one 
body  all  men  had  fallen  under  the  obligation  of 
its  death,  also  by  one  body  all  believers  should 
be  bom  again  unto  life,  and  rise  again.  Reason- 
ably, therefore.  His  face  is  opened  and  unveiled 
to  Moses  ;  and  therefore  He  is  called  Apocalypse, 

'  Gen.  xlix.  8,  9. 
*  Ex.  xxiv.  7,  8. 


Revelation.  For  now  His  book  is  unsealed  — 
now  the  offered  victims  are  perceived  —  now  the 
fabrication  of  the  priestly  chrism ;  moreover 
the  testimonies  are  openly  understood. 

8,  9.  "Twenty-four  elders  and  four  living 
creatures,  having  harps  and  phials,  and  singing 
a  new  song."  ]  The  proclamation  of  the  Old 
Testament  associated  with  the  New,  points  out 
the  Christian  people  singing  a  new  song,  that  is, 
bearing  their  confession  publicly.  It  is  a  new 
thing  that  the  Son  of  God  should  become  man. 
It  is  a  new  thing  to  ascend  into  the  heavens  with 
a  body.  It  is  a  new  thing  to  give  remission  of 
sins  to  men.  It  is  a  new  thing  for  men  to  be 
sealed  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  a  new  thing 
to  receive  the  priesthood  of  sacred  observance, 
and  to  look  for  a  kingdom  of  unbounded  promise. 
The  harp,  and  the  chord  stretched  on  its  wooden 
frame,  signifies  the  flesh  of  Christ  linked  with 
the  wood  of  the  passion.  The  phial  signifies 
the  Confession, 3  and  the  race  of  the  new  Priest- 
hood. But  it  is  the  praise  of  many  angels,  yea, 
of  all,  the  salvation  of  all,  and  the  testimony  of 
the  universal  creation,  bringing  to  our  Lord 
thanksgiving  for  the  deliverance  of  men  from 
the  destruction  of  death.  The  unsealing  of  the 
seals,  as  we  have  said,  is  the  opening  of  the  Old 
Testament,  and  the  foretelling  of  the  preachers  of 
things  to  come  in  the  last  times,  which,  although 
the  prophetic  Scripture  speaks  by  single  seals, 
yet  by  all  the  seals  opened  at  once,  prophecy 
takes  its  rank. 


FROM   THE   SIXTH   CHAPTER. 

I,  2.  "And  when  the  Lamb  had  opened  one 
of  the  seven  seals,  I  saw,  and  heard  one  of  the 
four  living  creatures  saying.  Come  and  see.  And, 
lo,  a  white  horse,  and  He  who  sate  upon  him 
had  a  bow."  ]  The  first  seal  being  opened,  he 
says  that  he  saw  a  white  horse,  and  a  crowned 
horseman  having  a  bow.  For  this  was  at  first 
done  by  Himself  For  after  the  Lord  ascended 
into  heaven  and  opened  all  things,  He  sent  the 
Holy  Spirit,  whose  words  the  preachers  sent 
forth  as  arrows  reaching  to  the  human  heart,  that 
they  might  overcome  unbelief.  And  the  crown 
on  the  head  is  promised  to  the  preachers  by  the 
Holy  Spirit.  The  other  three  horses  very  plainly 
signify  the  wars,  famines,  and  pestilences  an- 
nounced by  our  Lord  in  the  Gospel.  And  thus 
he  says  that  one  of  the  four  living  creatures  said 
(because  all  four  are  one),  "Come  and  see." 
"  Come  "  is  said  to  him  that  is  invited  to  foith  ; 
"see"  is  said  to  him  who  saw  not.  Therefore 
the  white  horse  is  the  word  of  preaching  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  sent  into  the  world.  For  the 
Lord   says,    "  This    Gospel   shall    be   preached 


3  [The  Creed  and  the  evangelical  priests.  Vol.  ii.  note  4,  p.  173-] 


COMMENTARY    ON   THE   APOCALYPSE. 


i5i 


throughout  the  whole  world  for  a  testimony  to 
all  nations,  and  then  shall  come  the  end." ' 

3,  4.  "  And  when  He  had  opened  the  second 
seal,  I  heard  the  second  living  creature  saying, 
Come  and  see.  And  there  went  out  another 
horse  that  was  red,  and  to  him  that  sate  upon 
him  was  given  a  great  sword."]  The  red  horse, 
and  he  that  sate  upon  him,  having  a  sword,  sig- 
nify the  coming  wars,  as  we  read  in  the  Gospel : 
"  For  nation  shall  rise  against  nation,  and  king- 
dom against  kingdom  ;  and  there  shall  be  great 
earthquakes  in  divers  places."  ^  This  is  the 
ruddy  horse. 

5.  "  And  when  He  had  opened  the  third  seal, 
I  heard  the  third  living  creature  saying,  Come 
and  see.  And,  lo,  a  black  horse  ;  and  he  who 
sate  upon  it  had  a  balance  in  his  hand."]  The 
black  horse  signifies  famine,  for  the  Lord  says, 
"  There  shall  be  famines  in  divers  places  ;  "  but 
the  word  is  specially  extended  to  the  times  of 
Antichrist,  when  there  shall  be  a  great  famine, 
and  when  all  shall  be  injured.  Moreover,  the 
balance  in  the  hand  is  the  examining  scales, 
wherein  He  might  show  forth  the  merits  of 
every  individual.     He  then  says  :  — 

6.  "  Hurt  not  the  wine  and  the  oil."]  That 
is,  strike  not  the  spiritual  man  with  thy  inflic- 
tions.    This  is  the  black  horse. 

7.  8.  "  And  when  He  had  opened  the  fourth 
seal,  I  heard  the  fourth  living  creature  saying, 
Come  and  see.  And,  lo,  a  pale  horse  ;  and  he 
who  sate  upon  him  was  named  Death."]  For 
the  pale  horse  and  he  who  sate  upon  him  bore 
the  name  of  Death.  These  same  things  also  the 
Lord  had  promised  among  the  rest  of  the  com- 
ing destructions  —  great  pestilences  and  deaths  ; 
since,  moreover,  he  says  :  — 

"  And  hell  followed  him."]  That  is,  it  was 
waiting  for  the  devouring  of  many  unrighteous 
souls.     This  is  the  pale  horse. 

9.  "  And  when  He  had  opened  the  fifth  seal, 
I  saw  under  the  altar  the  souls  of  them  that 
were  slain."]  He  relates  that  he  saw  under  the 
altar  of  God,  that  is,  under  the  earth,  the  souls 
of  them  that  were  slain.  For  both  heaven  and 
earth  are  called  God's  altar,  as  saith  the  law, 
commanding  in  the  symbolical  form  of  the  truth 
two  altars  to  be  made, — a  golden  one  within, 
and  a  brazen  one  without.  But  we  perceive 
that  the  golden  altar  is  thus  called  heaven,  by 
the  testimony  that  our  Lord  bears  to  it ;  for  He 
says,  "  When  thou  bringest  thy  gift  to  the  altar  " 
(assuredly  our  gifts  arc  the  prayers  which  we 
offer),  "  and  there  rememberest  that  thy  brother 
hath  ought  against  thee,  leave  there  thy  gift 
before  the  altar."  ^  Assuredly  prayers  ascend 
to  heaven.     Therefore  heaven  is  understood  to 


"  Matt.  xxiv.  14. 
^  Luke  xxi.  10,  n. 
3  Matt.  V.  23,  24. 


be  the  golden  altar  which  was  within  ;  for  the 
priests  also  were  accustomed  to  enter  once  in 
the  year  —  as  they  who  had  the  anointing  —  to 
the  golden  altar,  the  Holy  Spirit  signifying  that 
Christ  should  do  this  once  for  all.  As  the 
golden  altar  is  acknowledged  to  be  heaven,  so 
also  by  the  brazen  altar  is  understood  the  earth, 
under  which  is  the  Hades,  —  a  region  withdrawn 
from  punishments  and  fires,  and  a  place  of  re- 
pose for  the  saints,  wherein  indeed  the  righteous 
are  seen  and  heard  by  the  wicked,  but  they 
cannot  be  carried  across  to  them.  He  who 
sees  all  things  would  have  us  to  know  that  these 
saints,  therefore  —  that  is,  the  souls  of  the  slain 

—  are  asking  for  vengeance  for  their  blood,  that 
is,  of  their  body,  from  those  that  dwell  upon  the 
earth  ;  but  because  in  the  last  time,  moreover, 
the  reward  of  the  saints  will  be  perpetual,  and 
the  condemnation  of  the  wicked  shall  come,  it 
was  told  them  to  wait.  And  for  a  solace  to  their 
body,  there  were  given  unto  each  of  them  white 
robes.  They  received,  says  he,  white  robes,  that 
is,  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 

12.  "And  I  saw,  when  he  had  opened  the 
sixth  seal,  there  was  a  great  earthquake."]  In 
the  sixth  seal,  then,  was  a  great  earthquake  : 
this  is  that  very  last  persecution. 

"  And  the  sun  became  black  as  sackcloth  of 
hair."]  The  sun  becomes  as  sackcloth  ;  that  is, 
the  brightness  of  doctrine  will  be  obscured  by 
unbelievers. 

"  And  the  entire  moon  became  as  blood."] 
By  the  moon  of  blood  is  set  forth  the  Church 
of  the  saints  as  pouring  out  her  blood  for  Christ. 

13.  "And  the  stars  fell  to  the  earth."]  The 
falling  of  the  stars  are  the  faithful  who  are  trou- 
bled for  Christ's  sake. 

"  Even  as  a  fig-tree  casteth  her  untimely  figs."] 
The  fig-tree,  when  shaken,  loses  its  untimely  figs 

—  when  men  are  separated  from  the  Church  by 
persecution. 

14.  "And  the  heaven  withdrew  as  a  scroll 
that  is  rolled  up."]  For  the  heaven  to  be  rolled 
away,  that  is,  that  the  Church  shall  be  taken 
away. 

"  And  every  mountain  and  the  islands  were 
moved  from  their  places."]  Mountains  and 
islands  removed  from  their  places  intimate  that 
in  the  last  persecution  all  men  departed  from 
their  places  ;  that  is,  that  the  good  will  be  re- 
moved, seeking  to  avoid  the  persecution. 

FROM    THE    SEVEXTH    CHAPTER. 

2.  "And  I  saw  another  angel  ascending  from 
the  east,  having  the  seal  of  the  living  God."] 
He  speaks  of  Elias  the  prophet,  who  is  the  pre- 
cursor of  the  times  of  Antichrist,  for  the  resto- 
ration and  establishment  of  the  churches  from 
the  great  and  intolerable  persecution.     We  read 


35- 


COMMENTARY    ON    THE    APOCALYPSE. 


that  these  things  are  predicted  in  the  opening 
of  the  Old  and  New  Testament ;  for  He  says  by 
Malachi :  "  Lo,  I  will  send  to  you  Elias  the  Tish- 
bite,  to  turn  the  hearts  of  the  fathers  to  the 
children,  according  to  the  time  of  calling,  to 
recall  the  Jews  to  the  faith  of  the  people  that 
succeed  them."  '  And  to  that  end  He  shows, 
as  we  have  said,  that  the  number  of  those  that 
shall  believe,  of  the  Jews  and  of  the  nations,  is  a 
great  multitude  which  no  man  was  able  to  num- 
ber. Moreover,  we  read  in  the  Gospel  that  the 
prayers  of  the  Church  are  sent  from  heaven  by 
an  angel,  and  that  they  are  received  against 
wrath,  and  that  the  kingdom  of  Antichrist  is 
cast  out  and  extinguished  by  holy  angels  ;  for 
He  says  :  "  Fray  that  ye  enter  not  into  tempta- 
tion :  for  there  shall  be  a  great  affliction,  such 
as  has  not  been  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  ; 
and  except  the  Lord  had  shortened  those  days, 
no  flesh  should  be  saved."  ^  Therefore  He  shall 
send  these  seven  great  archangels  to  smite  the 
kingdom  of  Antichrist ;  for  He  Himself  also 
thus  said  :  "  Then  the  Son  of  man  shall  send 
His  messengers  ;  and  they  shall  gather  together 
His  elect  from  the  four  corners  of  the  wind,  from 
the  one  end  of  heaven  even  to  the  other  end 
thereof."  ^  For,  moreover,  He  previously  says 
by  the  prophet :  "  Then  shall  there  be  peace  for 
our  land,  when  there  shall  arise  in  it  seven  shep- 
herds and  eight  attacks  of  men  ;  and  they  shall 
encircle  Assur,"  that  is.  Antichrist,  "  in  the  trench 
of  Nimrod,"  ■♦  that  is,  in  the  nation  of  the  devil, 
by  the  spirit  of  the  Church.  Similarly  when  the 
keepers  of  the  house  shall  be  moved.  More- 
over, the  Lord  Himself,  in  the  parable  to  the 
apostles,  when  the  labourers  had  come  to  Him 
and  said,  '•  Lord,  did  not  we  sow  good  seed  in 
Thy  field  ?  whence,  then,  hath  it  tares  ?  answered 
them,  An  enemy  hath  done  this.  And  they  said 
to  Him,  Lord,  wilt  Thou,  then,  that  we  go  and 
root  them  up  ?  And  He  said.  Nay,  but  let  both 
grow  together  until  the  harvest ;  and  in  the  time 
of  the  harvest  I  will  say  to  the  reapers,  that  they 
gather  the  tares  and  make  bundles  of  them,  and 
burn  them  with  fire  everlasting,  but  that  they 
gather  the  wheat  into  my  barns."  5  The  Apoca- 
lypse here  shows,  therefore,  that  these  reapers, 
and  shepherds,  and  labourers,  are  the  angels. 
And  the  trumpet  is  the  word  of  power.  And 
although  the  same  thing  recurs  in  the  phials,  still 
it  is  not  said  as  if  it  occurred  twice,  but  because 
what  is  decreed  by  the  Lord  to  happen  shall  be 
once  for  all ;  for  this  cause  it  is  said  twice.  What, 
therefore,  He  said  too  little  in  the  trumpets,  is 
here  found  in  the  phials.  We  must  not  regard 
the  order  of  what  is  said,  because  frequently  the 


I  Mai.  iv.  5,  6. 

*  Mark  xiii.  18-20. 

3  Mark  xiii.  27. 

■♦  Mic.  V,  5,  6. 

5  Matt.  xiii.  27-30. 


Holy  Spirit,  when  He  has  traversed  even  to  the 
end  of  the  last  times,  returns  again  to  the  same 
times,  and  fills  up  what  He  had  /je/ore  failed  to 
say,^  Nor  must  we  look  for  order  in  the  Apoca- 
lypse ;  but  we  must  follow  the  meaning  of  those 
things  which  are  prophesied.  Therefore  in  the 
trumpets  and  phials  is  signified  either  the  des- 
olation of  the  plagues  that  are  sent  upon  the 
earth,  or  the  madness  of  Antichrist  himself,  or 
the  cutting  off  of  the  peoples,  or  the  diversity 
of  the  plagues,  or  the  hope  in  the  kingdom  of 
the  saints,  or  the  ruin  of  states,  or  the  great  over- 
throw of  Babylon,  that  is,  the  Roman  state, 

9.  "After  this  I  beheld,  and,  lo,  a  great  mul- 
titude, which  no  man  was  able  to  number,  of 
every  nation,  tribe,  and  people,  and  tongue, 
clothed  with  white  robes."  ]  What  the  great 
multitude  out  of  every  tribe  implies,  is  to  show 
the  number  of  the  elect  out  of  all  believers,  who, 
being  cleansed  by  baptism  in  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb,  have  made  their  robes  white,  keeping 
the  grace  which  they  have  received. 


FROM    THE    EIGHTH    CHAPTER. 

I.  "And  when  He  had  opened  the  seventh 
seal,  there  was  silence  in  heaven  for  about  half 
an  hour."  ]  Whereby  is  signified  the  beginning 
of  everlasting  rest ;  but  it  is  described  as  partial, 
because  the  silence  being  interrupted,  he  repeats 
it  in  order.  For  if  the  silence  had  condnued, 
here  would  be  an  end  of  his  narrative. 

13.  "And  I  saw  an  angel  flying  through  the 
midst  of  heaven."]  By  the  angel  flying  through 
the  midst  of  heaven  is  signified  the  Holy  Spirit 
bearing  witness  in  two  of  the  prophets  that  a 
great  wrath  of  plagues  was  imminent.  If  by  any 
means,  even  in  the  last  times,  any  one  should  be 
willing  to  be  converted,  any  one  might  even  still 
be  saved. 

FROM    THE    NINTH    CHAPTER. 

13,  14.  "And  I  heard  a  voice  from  the  four 
horns  of  the  golden  altar  which  is  in  the  presence 
of  God,  saying  to  the  sixth  angel  which  had  the 
trumpet.  Loose  the  four  angels."]  That  is,  the 
four  corners  of  the  earth  which  hold  the  four 
winds. 

"Which  are  bound  in  the  great  river  Eu- 
phrates."] By  the  corners  of  the  earth,  or  the 
four  winds  across  the  river  Euphrates,  are  meant 
four  nations,  l)ecause  to  every  nation  is  sent  an 
angel ;  as  said  the  law,  "  He  determined  them 
by  the  number  of  the  angels  of  God,"  ?  until  the 
number  of  the  saints  should  be  filled  up.  They 
do  not  overpass  their  bounds,  because  at  the  last 
they  shall  come  with  Antichrist. 


6  TThe  rule  of  Mede's  "  Synchronisms."] 
'  iJeut.  xxxii.  8. 


COMMENTARY   ON   THE   APOCALYPSE. 


>53 


FROM    THE   TENTH    CHAPTER. 

I,  2.  "I  saw  another  mighty  angel  coming 
down  from  heaven,  clothed  with  a  cloud ;  and  a 
rainbow  was  upon  his  head,  and  his  face  was  as 
it  were  the  sun,  and  his  feet  as  pillars  of  fire  : 
and  he  had  in  his  hand  an  open  book :  and  he 
set  his  right  foot  upon  the  sea,  and  his  left  foot 
upon  the  earth."]  He  signifies  that  that  mighty 
angel  who,  he  says,  descended  from  heaven, 
clothed  with  a  cloud,  is  our  Lord,  as  we  have 
above  narrated. 

"  His  face  was  as  it  were  the  sun."]  That  is, 
with  respect  to  the  resurrection. 

"  Upon  his  head  was  a  rainbow."]  He  points 
to  t|je  judgment  which  is  executed  by  Him,  or 
shall  be. 

"  An  open  book."  ]  A  revelation  of  works  in 
the  future  judgment,  or  the  Apocalypse  which 
John  received. 

"  His  feet,"]  as  we  have  said  above,  are  the 
apostles.  For  that  both  things  in  sea  and  land 
are  trodden  under  foot  by  Him,  signifies  that  all 
things  are  placed  under  His  feet.  Moreover,  he 
calls  Him  an  angel,  that  is,  a  messenger,  to  wit, 
of  the  Father ;  for  He  is  called  the  Messenger 
of  great  counsel.  He  says  also  that  He  cried 
with  a  loud  voice.  The  great  voice  is  to  tell  the 
words  of  the  Omnipotent  God  of  heaven  to 
men,  and  to  bear  witness  that  after  penitence  is 
closed  there  will  be  no  hope  subsequently. 

3.  "  Seven  thunders  uttered  their  voices."  ] 
The  seven  thunders  uttering  their  voices  signify 
the  Holy  Spirit  of  sevenfold  power,  who  through 
the  prophets  announced  all  things  to  come,  and 
by  His  voice  John  gave  his  testimony  in  the 
world  ;  but  because  he  says  that  he  was  about 
to  write  the  things  which  the  thunders  had 
uttered,  that  is,  whatever  things  had  been  ob- 
scure in  the  announcements  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment ;  he  is  forbidden  to  write  them,  but  he  was 
charged  to  leave  them  sealed,  because  he  is  an 
apostle,  nor  was  it  fitting  that  the  grace  of  the 
subsequent  stage  should  be  given  in  the  first. 
"The  time,"  says  he,  "is  at  hand."  '  For  the 
apostles,  by  powers,  by  signs,  by  portents,  and 
by  mighty  works,  have  overcome  unbelief.  After 
them  there  is  now  given  to  the  same  completed 
Churches  the  comfort  of  having  the  prophetic 
Scriptures  subsequently  interpreted,  for  I  said 
that  after  //le  apostles  there  would  be  interpret- 
ing prophets. 

For  the  apostle  says  :  "  And  he  placed  in  the 
Church  indeed,  first,  apostles  ;  secondly,  proph- 
ets ;  thirdly,  teachers,"^  and  the  rest.  And  in 
another  place  he  says  :  "  Let  the  prophets  speak 
two  or  three,  and  let  the  others  judge."  ^  And 
he  says  :  "  Every  woman  that  prayeth  or  prophe- 


'  Rev.  i.  3j  xxii.  10. 
^  I  Cor.  xu.  28. 
3  I  Cor.  xiv.  29. 


sieth  with  her  head  uncovered,  dishonoureth  her 
head."  ■♦  And  when  he  says,  "  Let  the  prophets 
speak  two  or  three,  and  let  the  others  judge," 
he  is  not  speaking  in  respect  of  the  Catholic 
prophecy  of  things  unheard  and  unknown,  but 
of  things  both  announced  and  known.  But  let 
them  judge  whether  or  not  the  interpretation  is 
consistent  with  the  tesdmonies  of  the  prophetic 
utterance.5  It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  to  John, 
armed  as  he  was  with  superior  virtue,  this  was 
not  necessary,  although  the  body  of  Christ, 
which  is  the  .Church,  adorned  with  His  mem- 
bers, ought  to  respond  to  its  position. 

10.  "I  took  the  book  from  the  hand  of  the 
angel,  and  ate  it  up."]  To  take  the  book  and 
eat  it  up,  is,  when  exhibition  of  a  thing  is  made 
to  one,  to  commit  it  to  memory. 

"  And  it  was  in  my  mouth  as  sweet  as 
honey."]  To  be  sweet  in  the  mouth  is  the  re- 
ward of  the  preaching  of  the  speaker,  and  is 
most  pleasant  to  the  hearers  ;  but  it  is  most  bit- 
ter both  to  those  that  announce  it,  and  to  those 
that  persevere  in  its  commandments  through 
suffering. 

II."  And  He  says  unto  me.  Thou  must  again 
prophesy  to  the  peoples,  and  to  the  tongues,  and 
to  the  nations,  and  to  many  kings."]  He  says 
this,  because  when  John  said  these  things  he 
was  in  the  island  of  Patmos,  condemned  to  the 
labour  of  the  mines  by  Caesar  Domitian.  There, 
therefore,  he  saw  the  Apocalypse ;  and  when 
grown  old,  he  thought  that  he  should  at  length 
receive  his  quittance  by  suffering,  Domitian  being 
killed,  all  his  judgments  were  discharged.  And 
John  being  dismissed  from  the  mines,  thus  sub- 
sequently delivered  the  same  Apocalypse  which 
he  had  received  from  God.  This,  therefore,  is 
what  He  says  :  Thou  must  again  prophesy  to  all 
nations,  because  thou  seest  the  crowds  of  Anti- 
christ rise  up  ;  and  against  them  other  crowds 
shall  stand,  and  they  shall  fall  by  the  sword  on 
the  one  side  and  on  the  other. 

FROM    THE    ELEVENTH    CHAPTER. 

I.  "And  there  was  shown  unto  me  a  reed 
like  unto  a  rod  :  and  the  angel  stood,  saying, 
Rise,  and  measure  the  temple  of  God,  and  the 
altar,  and  them  that  worship  therein."]  A  reed 
was  shown  like  to  a  rod.  This  itself  is  the 
Apocalypse  which  he  subsequently  exhibited  to 
the  churches  ;  for  the  Gospel  of  the  complete 
faith  he  subsequently  wrote  for  the  sake  of  our 
salvation.  For  when  Valentinus,  and  Cerinthus, 
and  Ebion,  and  others  of  the  school  of  Satan, 
were  scattered  abroad  throughout  the  world, 
there  assembled  together  to  him  from  the  neigh- 
bouring provinces  all  the  bishops,  and  compelled 


■•  1  Cor.  xi.  5. 

5   [Some  excuse  for  Tertullian's  l.ipse  is  found  in  the  prevailing 
uncertainty  about  the  withdrawal  of  prophetic  gifts.J 


354 


COMMENTARY    ON    THE    APOCALYPSE. 


him  himself  also  to  draw  up  his  testimony. 
Moreover,  we  say  that  the  measure  of  God's 
temple  is  the  command  of  God  to  confess  the 
Father  Almighty,  and  that  His  Son  Christ  was 
begotten  by  the  Father  before  the  beginning  of 
the  world,  and  was  made  man  in  very  soul  and 
flesh,  both  of  them  having  overcome  misery 
and  death  ;  and  that,  when  received  with  His 
body  into  heaven  by  the  Father,  He  shed  forth 
the  Holy  Spirit,  the  gift  and  pledge  of  immor- 
tality, that  He  was  announced  by  the  pro])hets, 
He  was  described  by  the  law,  He  was  God's 
hand,  and  the  Word  of  the  Father  from  God, 
Lord  over  all,  and  founder  of  the  world  :  this  is 
the  reed  and  the  measure  of  faith  ;  and  no  one 
worships  the  holy  altar  save  he  who  confesses 
this  faith. 

2.  "  The  court  which  is  within  the  temple 
leave  out."]  The  space  which  is  called  the 
court  is  the  empty  altar  within  the  walls  :  these 
being  such  as  were  not  necessary,  he  com- 
manded to  be  ejected  from  the  Church. 

"It  is  given  to  be  trodden  ciown  by  the  Gen- 
tiles."] That  is,  to  the  men  of  this  world,  that 
it  may  be  trodden  under  foot  by  the  nations,  or 
with  the  nations.  Then  he  repeats  about  the 
destruction  and  slaughter  of  the  last  time,  and 
says  :  — 

3.  "They  shall  tread  the  holy  city  down  for 
forty  and  two  months  ;  and  I  will  give  to  my 
two  witnesses,  and  they  shall  predict  a  thousand 
two  hundred  and  threescore  days  clothed  in  sack- 
cloth."] That  is,  three  years  and  six  months  : 
these  make  forty-two  months.  Therefore  their 
preaching  is  three  years  and  six  months,  and  the 
kingdom  of  Antichrist  as  much  again. 

5.  "If  any  man  will  hurt  them,  fire  proceedeth 
out  of  their  mouth,  and  devoureth  their  ene- 
mies."] That  fire  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth 
of  those  prophets  against  the  adversaries,  be- 
speaks the  power  of  the  world.  For  all  afflic- 
tions, however  many  there  are,  shall  be  sent  by 
their  messengers  in  their  word.  Many  think 
that  there  is  Elisha,  or  Moses,  with  Elijah  ;  but 
both  of  these  died ;  while  the  death  of  Elijah  is 
not  heard  of,  with  whom  all  our  ancients  have 
beheved  that  it  was  Jeremiah.  For  even  the 
very  word  spoken  to  him  testifies  to  him,  saying, 
"  Before  I  formed  thee  in  the  belly  I  knew  thee  ; 
and  before  thou  camest  forth  out  of  the  womb 
I  sanctified  thee,  and  I  ordained  thee  a  prophet 
unto  the  nations."  '  But  he  was  not  a  pro])het 
unto  the  nations  ;  and  thus  the  truthful  word  of 
God  makes  it  necessary,  which  it  has  promised 
to  set  forth,  that  he  should  be  a  prophet  to  the 
nations. 

4.  "  These  are  the  two  candlesticks  standing 
before   the    Lord   of  the  earth."]     These   two 


Jer 


candlesticks  and  two  olive  trees  He  has  to  this 
end  spoken  of,  and  admonished  you  that  if,  when 
you  have  read  of  them  elsewhere,  you  have  not 
understood,  you  may  understand  here.  For  in 
Zechariah,  one  of  the  twelve  prophets,  it  is  thus 
written  :  "  These  are  the  two  olive  trees  and  two 
candlesticks  which  stand  in  the  presence  of  the 
Lord  of  the  earth  ;  "  ^  that  is,  they  are  in  para- 
dise. Also,  in  another  sense,  standing  in  the 
presence  of  the  lord  of  the  earth,  that  is,  in 
the  presence  of  Antichrist.  Therefore  they  must 
be  slain  by  Antichrist. 

7.  "And  the  beast  which  ascendeth  from  the 
abyss."]  After  many  plagues  completed  in  the 
world,  in  the  end  he  says  that  a  beast  ascended 
from  the  abyss.  But  that  he  shall  ascend  ft-om 
the  abyss  is  proved  by  many  testimonies ;  for 
he  says  in  the  thirty-first  chapter  of  Ezekiel : 
"  Behold,  Assur  was  a  cypress  in  Mount  Leba- 
non." Assur,  deeply  rooted,  was  a  lofty  and 
branching  cypress  —  that  is,  a  numerous  people 
—  in  Mount  Lebanon,  in  the  kingdom  of  king- 
doms, that  is,  of  the  Romans.  Moreover,  that 
he  says  he  was  beautiful  in  offshoots,  he  says  he 
was  strong  in  armies.  The  water,  he  says,  shall 
nourish  him,  that  is,  the  many  thousands  of  men 
which  were  subjected  to  him  ;  and  the  abyss 
increased  hmi,  that  is,  belched  him  forth.  For 
even  Isaiah  speaks  almost  in  the  same  words ; 
moreover,  that  he  was  in  the  kingdom  of  the 
Romans,  and  that  he  was  among  the  Csesars, 
The  Apostle  Paul  also  bears  witness,  for  he  says 
to  the  Thessalonians  :  "  Let  him  who  now  re- 
straineth  restrain,  until  he  be  taken  out  of  the 
way ;  and  then  shall  appear  that  Wicked  One, 
even  he  whose  coming  is  after  the  working  of 
Satan,  with  signs  and  lying  wonders."  ^  And 
that  they  might  know  that  he  should  come  who 
then  was  the  prince,  he  added  :  "  He  already 
endeavours  after  the  secret  of  mischief"  "*  —  that 
is,  the  mischief  which  he  is  about  to  do  he  strives 
to  do  secretly  ;  but  he  is  not  raised  up  by  his 
own  power,  nor  by  that  of  his  father,  but  by 
command  of  God,  of  which  thing  Paul  says  in 
the  same  passage :  "  For  this  cause,  because 
they  have  not  received  the  love  of  God,  He  will 
send  upon  them  a  spirit  of  error,  that  they  all 
may  be  persuaded  of  a  lie,  who  have  not  been 
persuaded  of  the  truth."  s  And  Isaiah  saith : 
"  While  they  waited  for  the  light,  darkness  arose 
upon  them."  ^  Therefore  the  Apocalypse  sets 
forth  that  these  prophets  are  killed  by  the  same, 
and  on  the  fourth  day  rise  again,  that  none 
might  be  found  ecjual  to  God. 

8.  "And  their  dead  bodies  shall  lie  in  the 
streets  of  the  great  city,  which  spiritually  is  called 


2  Zech.  iv.  14. 

3  2  Thess.  ii.  7,  8 
•♦  2  Thess.  ii.  10. 
s  2  Thess.  li.  11. 
^  Isa.  lix.  9. 


COMMENTARY    ON   THE   APOCALYPSE. 


355 


Sodom  and  Egypt."]  But  He  calls  Jerusalem 
Sodom  and  Egypt,  since  it  had  become  the 
heaping  up  of  the  persecuting  people.  Therefore 
it  behoves  us  diligently,  and  with  the  utmost 
care,  to  follow  the  prophetic  announcement,  and 
to  understand  what  the  Spirit  from  the  Eather 
both  announces  and  anticipates,  and  how,  when 
He  has  gone  forward  to  the  last  times,  He  again 
repeats  the  former  ones.  And  now,  what  He 
will  do  once  for  all,  He  sometimes  sets  forth  as 
if  it  were  done  ;  and  unless  you  understand  this 
as  sometimes  done,  and  sometimes  as  about  to 
be  done,  you  will  fall  into  a  great  confusion. 
Therefore  the  interpretation  of  the  following 
sayings  has  shown  therein,  that  not  the  order 
of  the  reading,  but  the  order  of  the  discourse, 
must  be  understood. 

19.  "And  the  temple  of  God  was  opened 
which  is  in  heaven."]  The  temple  opened  is  a 
manifestation  of  our  Lord.  For  the  temple  of 
God  is  the  Son,  as  He  Himself  says  :  "  Destroy 
this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I  will  raise  it  up." 
And  when  the  Jews  said,  "  Forty  and  six  years 
was  this  temple  in  building,"  the  evangelist  says, 
"  He  spake  of  the  temple  of  His  body."  ' 

"  And  there  was  seen  in  His  temple  the  ark 
of  the  Lord's  testament."]  The  preaching  of 
the  Gospel  and  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  all 
the  gifts  whatever  that  came  with  Him,  he  says, 
appeared  therein. 

FROM    THE   TWELFTH    CHAPTER. 

I.  "  And  there  was  seen  a  great  sign  in  heaven. 
A  woman  clothed  with  the  sun,  and  the  moon 
under  her  feet,  and  on  her  head  a  crown  of 
twelve  stars.  And  being  with  child,  she  cried 
out  travailing,  and  bearing  torments  that  she 
might  bring  forth."]  The  woman  clothed  with 
the  sun,  and  having  the  moon  under  her  feet, 
and  wearing  a  crown  of  twelve  stars  upon  her 
head,  and  travailing  in  her  pains,  is  the  ancient 
Church  of  fathers,  and  prophets,  and  samts,  and 
apostles,-  which  had  the  groans  and  torments  of 
its  longing  until  it  saw  that  Christ,  the  fruit  of  its 
people  according  to  the  flesh  long  promised  to 
it,  had  taken  flesh  out  of  the  selfsame  people. 
Moreover,  being  clothed  with  the  sun  intimates 
the  hope  of  resurrection  and  the  glory  of  the 
promise.  And  the  moon  intimates  the  fall  of 
the  bodies  of  the  saints  under  the  obligation  of 
death,  which  never  can  fail.  For  even  as  life  is 
diminished,  so  also  it  is  increased.  Nor  is  the 
hope  of  those  that  sleep  extinguished  absolutely, 
as  some  think,  but  they  have  in  their  darkness 
a  light  such  as  the  moon.  And  the  crown  of 
twelve  stars  signifies  the  choir  of  fathers,  accord- 

'  John  ii.  ig,  20,  21. 

2  [No  hint  here  that  this  was  a  manifestation  of  the  Blessed  Vir- 
gin, the  modern  fiction  of  Rome.     See  vol.  vi  p.  355,  this  series.  ] 


ing  to  the  fleshly  birth,  of  whom  Christ  was  to 
take  flesh. 

3.  "And  there  appeared  another  sign  in 
heaven ;  and  behold  a  red  dragon,  having  seven 
heads."]  Now,  that  he  says  that  this  dragon 
was  of  a  red  colour  —  that  is,  of  a  purple  colour 
—  the  result  of  his  work  gave  him  such  a  colour. 
For  from  the  beginning  (as  the  Lord  says)  he 
was  a  murderer  ;  and  he  has  oppressed  the  whole 
of  the  human  race,  not  so  much  by  the  obliga- 
tion of  death,  as,  moreover,  by  the  various  forms 
of  destruction  and  fatal  mischiefs.  His  seven 
heads  were  the  seven  kings  of  the  Romans,  of 
whom  also  is  Antichrist,  as  we  have  said  above. 

"And  ten  horns."]  He  says  that  the  ten 
kings  in  the  latest  times  are  the  same  as  these, 
as  we  shall  more  fully  set  forth  there. 

4.  "  And  his  tail  drew  the  third  part  of  the 
stars  of  heaven,  and  cast  them  upon  the  earth."] 
Now,  that  he  says  that  the  dragon's  tail  drew  the 
third  part  of  the  stars  of  heaven,  this  may  be 
taken  in  two  ways.  For  many  think  that  he  may 
be  able  to  seduce  the  third  part  of  the  men  who 
believe. 3  But  it  should  more  truly  be  under- 
stood, that  of  the  angels  that  were  subject  to 
him,  since  he  was  still  a  prince  when  he  de- 
scended from  his  estate,  he  seduced  the  third 
part ;  therefore  what  we  said  above,  the  Apoca- 
lypse says. 

"  And  the  dragon  stood  before  the  woman 
who  was  beginning  to  bring  forth,  that,  when  she 
had  brought  forth,  he  might  devour  her  child."] 
The  red  dragon  standing  and  desiring  to  devour 
her  child  when  she  had  brought  him  forth,  is  the 
devil,  —  to  wit,  the  traitor  angel,  who  thought 
that  the  perishing  of  all  men  would  be  alike  by 
death  ;  but  He,  who  was  not  born  of  seed,  owed 
nothing  to  death  :  wherefore  he  could  not  de- 
vour Him  —  that  is,  detain  Him  in  death  —  for 
on  the  third  day  He  rose  again.  Finally,  also, 
and  before  He  suffered,  he  approached  to  tempt 
Him  as  man ;  but  when  he  found  that  He  was 
not  what  he  thought  Him  to  be,  he  departed 
from  Him,  even  till  the  time.  Whence  it  is  here 
said  :  — 

5.  "And  she  brought  forth  a  son.  who  begins 
to  rule  all  nations  with  a  rod  of  iron."]  The  rod 
of  iron  is  the  sword  of  persecution. 

"  I  sawthat  all  men  withdrew  from  his  abodes."] 
That  is,  the  good  will  be  removed,  flying  from 
persecution. •♦ 

"  And  her  son  was  caught  up  to  God,  and  to 
His  throne."]  We  read  also  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  that  He  was  caught  up  to  God's  throne, 
just  as  speaking  with  the  disciples  He  was  caught 
up  to  heaven. 

6.  "  But  the  woman  fled  into  the  wilderness, 
and  there  were  given  to  her  two  great  eagle's 

3  [A  noteworthy  testimony  to  primitive  interpretation  ] 

*  [Compare  Terlulhan,  De  Fuga,  vol  iv.  p.  117,  this  series.] 


OD" 


COMMENTARY    ON    THE    APOCALYPSE. 


wings."]  The  aid  of  the  great  eagle's  wings  — 
to  wit,  the  gift  of  prophets  —  was  given  to  that 
CathoHc  Church,  whence  in  the  last  times  a 
hundred  and  forty-four  thousands  of  men  should 
believe  on  the  preaching  of  Elias  ;  but,  more- 
over, he  here  says  that  the  rest  of  the  people 
should  be  found  alive  on  the  coming  of  the  Lord. 
And  the  Lord  says  in  the  Gospel :  "  Then  let 
them  which  are  in  Judea  flee  to  the  mountains  ; " ' 
that  is,  as  many  as  should  be  gathered  together 
in  Tudea,  let  them  go  to  that  place  which  they 
have  ready,  and  let  them  be  supported  there  for 
three  years  and  six  months  from  the  presence  of 
the  devil. 

14.  "Two  great  wings"]  are  the  two  prophets 
—  Elias,  and  the  prophet  who  shall  be  with  him. 

15.  "And  the  serpent  cast  out  of  his  mouth 
after  the  woman  water  as  a  flood,  that  he  might 
carry  her  away  with  the  flood."]  He  signifies 
by  the  water  which  the  serpent  cast  out  of  his 
mouth,  the  people  who  at  his  command  would 
persecute  her. 

16.  "And  the  earth  helped  the  woman,  and 
opened  her  mouth,  and  swallowed  up  the  flood 
Avhich  the  dragon  cast  out  of  his  mouth."]  That 
the  earth  opened  her  mouth  and  swallowed  up 
the  waters,  sets  forth  the  vengeance  for  the  pres- 
ent troubles.  Although,  therefore,  it  may  signify 
this  woman  bringing  forth,  it  shows  her  after- 
wards flying  when  her  offspring  is  brought  forth, 
because  both  things  did  not  happen  at  one  time  ; 
for  we  know  that  Christ  was  born,  but  that  the 
time  should  arrive  that  she  should  flee  from  the 
face  of  the  serpent :  (we  do  not  know)  that  this 
has  happened  as  yet.     Then  he  says  :  — 

7-9.  "  There  was  a  battle  in  heaven  :  Michael 
and  his  angels  fought  with  the  dragon  ;  and  the 
dragon  warred,  and  his  angels,  and  they  prevailed 
not ;  nor  was  their  place  found  any  more  in 
heaven.  And  that  great  dragon  was  cast  forth, 
that  old  serpent :  he  was  cast  forth  into  the 
earth."]  This  is  the  beginning  of  Antichrist ; 
yet  previously  Elias  must  prophesy,  and  there 
must  be  times  of  peace.  And  afterwards,  when 
the  three  years  and  six  months  are  completed  in 
the  preaching  of  Elias,  he  also  must  be  cast  down 
from  heaven,  where  up  till  that  time  he  had  had 
the  power  of  ascending ;  and  all  the  apostate 
angels,  as  well  as  Antichrist,  must  be  roused  up 
from  hell.  Paul  the  apostle  says  :  "  Except  there 
come  a  falling  away  first,  and  the  man  of  sin 
shall  appear,  the  son  of  perdition  ;  and  the  ad- 
versary who  exalted  himself  above  all  which  is 
called  God,  or  which  is  worshipped."  ^ 

FROM    THE   THIRTEENTH    CHAPTER.^ 

I.  "And  I  saw  a  beast  rising  up  from  the  sea. 


'  Luke  xxi.  21. 

2  2  Thess.  ii.  3,  4. 

3  [The  Edinburgh  edition  seems  to  follow  the  confusion  of  Mss. 
introducing  here  the  seventeenth  chapter,  out  of  place.] 


like  unto  a  leopard."]  This  signifies  the  king- 
dom of  that  time  of  Antichrist,  and  the  people 
mingled  with  the  variety  of  nations. 

2.  "  His  feet  were  as  the  feet  of  a  bear."]  A 
strong  and  most  unclean  beast,  the  feet  are  to  be 
understood  as  his  leaders. 

"  And  his  mouth  as  the  mouth  of  a  lion."] 
That  is,  his  mouth  armed  for  blood  is  his  bid- 
ding, and  a  tongue  which  will  proceed  to  noth- 
ing else  than  to  the  shedding  of  blood. 

******** 

18.  "  His  number  is  the  name  of  a  man,  and 
his  number  is  Six  hundred  threescore  and  six."] 
As  they  have  it  reckoned  from  the  Greek  char- 
acters, they  thus  find  it  among  many  to  be 
reirai',  for  reirav  has  this  number,  which  the 
Gentiles  call  Sol  and  Phoebus  ;  and  it  is  reck- 
oned in  Greek  thus  :  r  three  hundred,  €  five,  t 
ten,  T  three  hundred,  a  one,  r  fifty,  —  which  taken 
together  become  six  hundred  and  sixty-six.  For 
as  far  as  belongs  to  the  Greek  letters,  they  fill 
up  this  number  and  name  ;  which  name  if  you 
wish  to  turn  into  Latin,  it  is  understood  by  the 
antiphrase  DICLUX,  which  letters  are  reckoned 
in  this  manner :  since  D  figures  five  hundred,  I 
one,  C  a  hundred,  L  fifty,  V  five,  X  ten,  —  which 
by  the  reckoning  up  of  the  letters  makes  simi- 
larly six  hundred  and  sixty- six,  that  is,  what  in 
Greek  gives  retrar,  to  wit,  what  in  Latin  is  called 
DICLUX  ;  by  which  name,  expressed  by  anti- 
phrases,  we  understand  Antichrist,  who,  although 
he  be  cut  off  from  the  supernal  light,  and  de- 
prived thereof,  yet  transforms  himself  into  an 
angel  of  light,  daring  to  call  himself  light.-* 
Moreover,  we  find  in  a  certain  Greek  codex 
ai'xe/xo?,  which  letters  being  reckoned  up,  you 
will  find  to  give  the  number  as  above  :  a  one,  v 
fifty,  T  three  hundred,  €  five,  /a  forty,  o  seventy, 
s  two  hundred, — which  together  makes  six  hun- 
dred and  sixty-six,  according  to  the  Greeks. 
Moreover,  there  is  another  name  in  Gothic  of 
him,  which  will  be  evident  of  itself,  that  is,  ytv- 
(TripiKo%,  which  in  the  same  way  you  will  reckon 
in  Greek  letters  :  y  three,  «  five,  v  fifty,  a  two 
hundred,  •>/  eight,  p  a  hundred,  t  ten,  k  twenty,  o 
seventy,  ?  also  two  hundred,  which,  as  has  been 
said  above,  make  six  hundred  and  sixty-six. 

II.  "And  I  saw  another  beast  coming  up  out 
of  the  earth."]  He  is  speaking  of  the  great 
and  false  prophet  who  is  to  do  signs,  and  por- 
tents, and  falsehoods  before  him  in  the  presence 
of  men. 

"And  he  had  two  horns  like  a  lamb  —  that  is, 
the  appearance  within  of  a  man  —  and  he  spoke 
like  a  dragon."]  But  the  devil  speaks  full  of 
malice  ;  for  he  shall  do  these  things  in  the  pres- 
ence of  men,  so  that  even  the  dead  appear  to 
rise  arain. 


•*  [But  see  Irenaeus,  vol.  i.  p.  559- J 


COMMENTARY    ON    THE    APOCALYPSE. 


357 


13.  "And  he  shall  make  fire  come  down  from 
heaven  in  the  sight  of  men."]  Yes  (as  I  also 
have  said),  in  the  sight  of  men.  Magicians  do 
these  things,  by  the  aid  of  the  apostate  angels, 
even  to  this  day.  He  shall  cause  also  that  a 
golden  image  of  Antichrist  shall  be  placed  in 
the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  and  that  the  apostate 
angel  should  enter,  and  thence  utter  voices  and 
oracles.  Moreover,  he  himself  shall  contrive 
that  his  servants  and  children  should  receive  as 
a  mark  on  their  foreheads,  or  on  their  right 
hands,  the  number  of  his  name,  lest  any  one 
should  buy  or  sell  them.  Daniel  had  previously 
predicted  his  contempt  and  provocation  of  God. 
"And  he  shall  place,"  says  he,  "his  temple 
within  Samaria,  upon  the  illustrious  and  holy 
mountain  that  is  at  Jerusalem,  an  image  such  as 
Nebuchadnezzar  had  made."  '  Thence  here  he 
places,  and  by  and  by  here  he  renews,  that  of 
which  the  Lord,  admonishing  His  churches  con- 
cerning the  last  times  and  their  dangers,  says  : 
"  But  when  ye  shall  see  the  contempt  which  is 
spoken  of  by  Daniel  the  prophet  standing  in  the 
holy  place,  let  him  who  readeth  understand."  - 
It  is  called  a  contempt  when  God  is  provoked, 
because  idols  are  worshipped  instead  of  God,  or 
when  the  dogma  of  heretics  is  introduced  in  the 
churches.  But  it  is  a  turning  away  because  sted- 
fast  men,  seduced  by  false  signs  and  portents, 
are  turned  away  from  their  salvation. 

FROM  THE  FOURTEENTH  CHAPTER. 

6.  "  And  I  saw  an  angel  flying  through  the 
midst  of  heaven."]  The  angel  flying  through 
the  midst  of  heaven,  whom  he  says  that  he  saw, 
we  have  already  treated  of  above,  as  being  the 
same  Elias  who  anticipates  the  kingdom  of  Anti- 
christ in  his  prophecy. 

8.  "  And  another  angel  following  him."]  The 
other  angel  following,  he  speaks  of  as  the  same 
prophet  who  is  the  associate  of  his  prophesying. 
But  that  he  says,  — 

15.  "Thrust  in  thy  sharp  sickle,  and  gather 
in  the  grapes  of  the  vine,"]  he  signifies  it  of  the 
nations  that  should  perish  on  the  advent  of  the 
Lord.  And  indeed  in  many  forms  he  shows 
this  same  thing,  as  if  to  the  dry  harvest,  and 
the  seed  for  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  and  the 
consummation  of  the  world,  and  the  kingdom 
of  Christ,  and  the  future  appearance  of  the 
kingdom  of  the  blessed. 

19,  20.  "And  the  angel  thrust  in  the  sickle, 
and  reaped  the  vine  of  the  earth,  and  cast  it 
into  the  wine-press  of  the  wrath  of  God.  And 
the  wine-press  of  His  fury  was  trodden  down 
without  the  city."]  In  that  he  says  that  it  was 
cast  into  the  wine-press  of  the  wrath   of  God, 


■  Dan.  XI.  45. 

2  Matt.  xxiv.  15;  Dan.  ix.  27. 


and  trodden  down  without  the  city,  the  treading 
of  the  wine-press  is  the  retribution  on  the  sinner. 

"  And  blood  went  out  from  the  wine-press, 
even  unto  the  horse-bridles."]  The  vengeance 
of  shed  blood,  as  was  before  predicted,  "  In 
blood  thou  hast  sinned,  and  blood  shall  follow 
thee."  3 

"  For  a  thousand  and  six  hundred  furlongs."] 
That  is,  through  all  the  four  parts  of  the  world  : 
for  there  is  a  quadrate  put  together  by  fours,  as 
in  four  faces  and  four  appearances,  and  wheels 
by  fours  ;  for  forty  times  four  is  one  thousand 
six  hundred.  Repeating  the  same  persecution, 
the  Apocalypse  says  :  — 

FROM    THE    FIFTEENTH    CHAPTER. 

1.  "And  I  saw  another  great  and  wonderful 
sign,  seven  angels  having  the  seven  last  plagues  ; 
for  in  them  is  completed  the  indignation  of 
God."]  For  the  wrath  of  God  always  strikes 
the  obstinate  people  with  seven  plagues,  that  is, 
perfectly,  as  it  is  said  in  Leviticus  ;  and  these 
shall  be  in  the  last  time,  when  the  Church  shall 
have  gone  out  of  the  midst.  ♦ 

2.  "  Standing  upon  the  sea  of  glass,  having 
harps."]  That  is,  that  they  stood  stedfastly  in 
the  faith  upon  their  baptism,  and  having  their 
confession  in  their  mouth,  that  they  shall  exult 
in  the  kingdom  before  God.  But  let  us  return 
to  what  is  set  before  us. 

FROM   THE    SEVENTEENTH    CHAPTER. 

1-6.  "  There  came  one  of  the  seven  angels, 
which  have  the  seven  bowls,  and  spake  with  me, 
saying,  Come,  I  will  show  thee  the  judgment  of 
that  great  whore  who  sitteth  upon  many  waters. 
And  I  saw  the  woman  drunk  with  the  blood  of 
the  saints,  and  with  the  blood  of  the  martyrs."] 
The  decrees  of  that  senate  are  always  accom- 
plished against  all,  contrary  to  the  preaching  of 
the  true  faith  ;  and  now  already  mercy  being 
cast  aside,  itself  here  gave  the  decree  among  all 
nations. 

3.  "  And  I  saw  the  woman  herself  sitting 
upon  the  scarlet-coloured  beast,  full  of  names  of 
blasphemy."]  But  to  sit  upon  the  scarlet  beast, 
the  author  of  murders,  is  the  image  of  the  devil. 
Where  also  ts  treated  of  his  captivity,  concern- 
ing which  we  have  fully  considered.  I  remem- 
ber, indeed,  that  this  is  called  Babylon  also  in 
the  Apocalypse,  on  account  of  confusion ;  and 
in  Isaiah  also  ;  and  Ezekiel  called  it  Sodom.  In 
fine,  if  you  compare  what  is  said  against  Sodom, 
and  what  Isaiah  says  against  Babylon,  and  what 
the  Apocalypse  says,  you  will  find  that  they  are 
all  one.'* 

9.  "  The  seven  heads  are  the  seven  hills,  on 


3  Ezek.  XXXV.  6. 

<   [Apparently  in  condict  will)  what  our  author  says  suprn,  pp. 
352  and  355.J 


OD 


^8 


COMMENTARY   ON   THE   APOCALYPSE. 


which  the  woman  sitteth."]     That  is,  the  city 
of  Rome. 

10.  "And  there  are  seven  kings:  five  have 
fallen,  and  one  is,  and  the  other  is  not  yet  come  ; 
and  when  he  is  come,  he  will  be  for  a  short 
time."]  The  time  must  be  understood  in  which 
the  written  Apocalypse  was  published,  since  then 
reigned  Cafsar  Domitian ;  but  before  him  had 
been  Titus  his  brother,  and  Vespasian,  Otho,  Vi- 
tellius,  and  Galba.  These  are  the  five  who  have 
fallen.  One  remains,  under  whom  the  Apocalypse 
was  written  —  Domitian,  to  wit.  "  The  other 
has  not  yet  come,"  speaks  of  Nerva ;  "  and  when 
he  is  come,  he  will  be  for  a  short  time,"  for  he 
did  not  complete  the  period  of  two  years. 

11.  ''And  the  beast  which  thou  sawest  is  of 
the  seven."]  Since  before  those  kings  Nero 
reigned. 

"  And  he  is  the  eighth."]  He  says  only 
when  this  beast  shall  come,  reckon  it  the  eighth 
place,  since  in  that  is  the  completion.  He 
added  :  — 

"And  shall  go  into  perdition."]  For  that 
ten  kings  received  royal  power  when  he  shall 
move  from  the  east,  he  says.  He  shall  be  sent 
from  the  city  of  Rome  with  his  armies.  And 
Daniel  sets  forth  the  ten  horns  and  the  ten  dia- 
dems. And  that  these  are  eradicated  from  the 
former  ones,  —  that  is,  that  three  of  the  prin- 
cipal leaders  are  killed  by  Antichrist ;  that  the 
other  seven  give  him  honour  and  wisdom  and 
power,  of  whom  he  says  :  — 

i6.  "These  shall  hate  the  whore,  to  wit,  the 
city,  and  shall  burn  her  flesh  with  fire."]  Now 
that  one  of  the  heads  was,  as  it  were,  slain  to 
death,  and  that  the  stroke  of  his  death  was 
directed,  he  speaks  of  Nero.  For  it  is  plain 
that  when  the  cavalry  sent  by  the  senate  was 
pursuing  him,  he  himself  cut  his  throat.  Him 
therefore,  when  raised  up,  God  will  send  as  a 
worthy  king,  but  worthy  in  such  a  way  as  the 
Jews  merited.  And  since  he  is  to  have  another 
name.  He  shall  also  appoint  another  name,  that 
so  the  Jews  may  receive  him  as  if  he  were  the 
Christ.  Says  Daniel :  "  He  shall  not  know  the 
lust  of  women,  although  before  he  was  most 
impure,  and  he  shall  know  no  God  of  his  fathers  : 
for  he  will  not  be  able  to  seduce  the  people  of 
the  circumcision,  unless  he  is  a  judge  of  the 
law."  '  Finally,  also,  he  will  recall  the  saints, 
not  to  the  worship  of  idols,  but  to  undertake 
circumcision,  and,  if  he  is  able,  to  seduce  any  ; 
for  he  shall  se  conduct  himself  as  to  be  called 
Christ  by  them.  But  that  he  rises  again  from 
hell,  we  have  said  above  in  the  word  of  Isaiah  : 
"  Water  shall  nourish  him,  and  hell  hath  in- 
creased him  ;  "  who,  however,  must  come  with 
name  unchanged,  and  doings  unchanged,  as  says 
the  Spirit. 

'  Dan.  xi.  37. 


FROM   THE    NINETEENTH    CHAPTER. 

II."  And  I  saw  heaven  opened,  and  behold 
a  white  horse  ;  and  he  that  sate  upon  him  was 
called  Faithful  and  True."]  The  horse,  and  He 
that  sits  upon  him,  sets  forth  our  Lord  coming 
to  His  kingdom  with  the  heavenly  army.  Be- 
cause from  the  sea  of  the  north,  which  is  the 
Arabian  Sea,  even  to  the  sea  of  Phoenice,  and 
even  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  they  will  command 
these  greater  parts  in  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  all  the  souls  of  the  nations  will  be  as- 
sembled to  judgment. 

FROM    THE   TWENTIETH    CHAPTER. 

1-3.  "  And  I  saw  an  angel  come  down  from 
heaven,  having  the  key  of  the  abyss,  and  a 
chain  in  his  hand.  And  he  held  the  dragon, 
that  old  serpent,  which  is  called  the  Devil  and 
Satan,  and  bound  him  for  a  thousand  years,  and 
cast  him  into  the  abyss,  and  shut  him  up,  and  set 
a  seal  upon  him,  that  he  should  deceive  the  na- 
tions no  more,  till  the  thousand  years  should  be 
finished  :  after  this  he  must  be  loosed  a  little 
season."]  Those  years  wherein  Satan  is  bound 
are  in  the  first  advent  of  Christ,  even  to  the  end 
of  the  age  ;  and  they  are  called  a  thousand,  ac- 
cording to  that  mode  of  speaking,  wherein  a 
part  is  signified  by  the  whole,  just  as  is  that 
passage,  "  the  word  which  He  commanded  for 
a  thousand  generations,"  ^  although  they  are  not 
a  thousand.  Moreover  that  he  says,  "  and  he 
cast  him  into  the  abyss,"  he  says  this,  because 
the  devil,  excluded  from  the  hearts  of  believers, 
began  to  take  possession  of  the  wicked,  in  whose 
hearts,  blinded  day  by  day,  he  is  shut  up  as  if  in 
a  profound  abyss.  And  he  shut  him  up,  says 
he,  and  put  a  seal  upon  him,  that  he  should  not 
deceive  the  nations  until  the  thousand  years 
should  be  finished.  "  He  shut  the  door  upon 
him,"  it  is  said,  that  is,  he  forbade  and  restrained 
his  seducing  those  who  belong  to  Christ.  More- 
over, he  put  a  seal  upon  him,  because  it  is  hid- 
den who  belong  to  the  side  of  the  devil,  and 
who  to  that  of  Christ.  For  we  know  not  of 
those  who  seem  to  stand  whether  they  shall  not 
fall,  and  of  those  who  are  down  it  is  uncertain 
whether  they  may  rise.  Moreover,  that  he  says 
that  he  is  bound  and  shut  up,  that  he  may 
not  seduce  the  nations,  the  nations  signify  the 
Church,  seeing  that  of  them  it  itself  is  formed, 
and  which  being  seduced,  he  previously  held 
until,  he  says,  the  thousand  years  should  be 
completed,  that  is,  what  is  left  of  the  sixth  day, 
to  wit,  of  the  sixth  age,  which  subsists  for  a 
thousand  years  ;  after  this  he  must  be  loosed 
for  a  little  season.  The  little  season  signifies 
three  years  and  six  months,  in  which  with  all  his 
power  the  devil  will  avenge  himself  under  Anti- 

2  Ps.  cv.  8. 


COMMENTARY   ON   THE   APOCALYPSE. 


359 


Christ  against  the  Church.  Finally,  he  says, 
after  that  the  devil  shall  be  loosed,  and  will  se- 
duce the  nattons  in  the  whole  world,  and  will 
entice  war  against  the  Church,  the  number  of 
whose  foes  shall  be  as  the  sand  of  the  sea.' 

4,  5.  "And  I  saw  thrones,  and  them  that  sate 
upon  them,  and  judgment  was  given  unto  them  ; 
and  /  saia  the  souls  of  them  that  were  slain  on 
account  of  the  testimony  of  Jesus,  and  for  the 
word  of  God,  and  which  had  not  worshipped 
the  beast  nor  his  image,  nor  have  received  his 
writing  on  their  forehead  or  in  their  hand  ;  and 
they  reigned  with  Christ  for  a  thousand  years  : 
the  rest  of  them  lived  not  again  until  the  thou- 
sand years  were  finished.  This  is  the  first  resur- 
rection."] There  are  two  resurrections.  But  the 
first  resurrection  is  now  of  the  souls  that  are  by 
the  faith,  which  does  not  permit  men  to  pass 
over  to  the  second  death.  Of  this  resurrection 
the  apostle  says  :  "  If  ye  have  risen  with  Christ, 
seek  those  things  which  are  above."  - 

6.  "  Blessed  and  holy  is  he  who  has  part  in 
this  resurrection :  on  them  the  second  death 
shall  have  no  power,  but  they  shall  be  priests  of 
God  and  Christ,  and  they  shall  reign  with  Him 
a  thousand  years."]  I  do  not  think  the  reign 
of  a  thousand  years  is  eternal ;  or  if  it  is  thus  to 
be  thought  of,  they  cease  to  reign  when  the 
thousand  years  are  finished.  But  I  will  put  for- 
ward what  my  capacity  enables  me  to  judge. 
The  tenfold  number  signifies  the  decalogue,  and 
the  hundredfold  sets  forth  the  crown  of  virgin- 
ity :  for  he  who  shall  have  kept  the  undertaking 
of  virginity  completely,  and  shall  have  faithfully 
fulfilled  the  precepts  of  the  decalogue,  and 
shall  have  destroyed  the  untrained  nature  or  im- 
pure thoughts  within  the  retirement  of  the  heart, 
that  they  may  not  rule  over  him,  this  is  the  true 
priest  of  Christ,  and  accomplishing  the  millenary 
number  thoroughly,  is  thought  to  reign  with 
Christ ;  and  truly  in  his  case  the  devil  is  bound. 
But  he  who  is  entangled  in  the  vices  and  the 
dogmas  of  heretics,  in  his  case  the  devil  is 
loosed.  But  that  it  says  that  when  the  thousand 
years  are  finished  he  is  loosed,  so  the  number  of 
the  perfect  saints  being  completed,  in  whom 
there  is  the  glory  of  virginity  in  body  and  mind, 
by  the  approaching  advent  of  the  kingdom  of 
the  hateful  one,  many,  seduced  by  that  love  of 
earthly  things,  shall  be  overthrown,  and  together 
with  him  shall  enter  the  lake  of  fire. 

8-10.  "And  they  went  up  upon  the  breadth 
of  the  earth,  and  compassed  the  camj)  of  the 
saints  about,  and  the  beloved  city  ;  and  fire  came 
down  from  God  out  of  heaven,  and  devoured 
them.  And  the  devil  who  seduced  them  was 
cast  into  the  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone,  where 
both  the  beast  and  the  false  prophet  shall   be 

'  [Compare  vol.  v.  pp.  207,  215,  caps.  15  and  54.] 
^  Col.  ill.  I. 


tormented  day  and  night  for  ever  and  ever."] 
This  belongs  to  the  last  judgment.  And  after 
a  little  time  the  earth  was  made  holy,  as  being 
at  least  that  wherein  lately  had  reposed  the 
bodies  of  the  virgins,  when  they  shall  enter  upon 
an  eternal  kingdom  with  an  immortal  King,  as 
they  who  are  not  only  virgins  in  body,  but, 
moreover,  with  equal  inviolability  have  protected 
themselves,  both  in  tongue  and  thought,  from 
wickedness  ;  and  these,  it  shows,  shall  dwell  in 
rejoicing  for  ever  with  the  Lamb. 

FROM     THE     TWENTY-FIRST     AND     TWENTY-SECOND 
CHAPTERS. 

16.  "And  the  city  is  placed  in  a  square."] 
The  city  which  he  says  is  squared,  he  says  also 
is  resplendent  with  gold  and  precious  stones, 
and  has  a  sacred  street,  and  a  river  through  the 
midst  of  it,  and  the  tree  of  life  on  either  side, 
bearing  twelve  manner  of  fruits  throughout  the 
twelve  months  ;  and  that  the  liglit  of  the  sun  is 
not  there,  because  the  Lamb  is  the  light  of  it ; 
and  that  its  gates  were  of  single  pearls ;  and 
that  there  were  three  gates  on  each  of  the  four 
sides,  and  that  they  could  not  be  shut.  I  say, 
in  respect  of  the  square  city,  he  shows  forth 
the  united  multitude  of  the  saints,  in  whom  the 
faith  could  by  no  means  waver.  As  Noah  is 
commanded  to  make  the  ark  of  squared  beams,^ 
that  it  might  resist  the  force  of  the  deluge,  by 
the  precious  stones  he  sets  forth  the  holy  men 
who  cannot  waver  in  persecution,  who  could 
not  be  moved  either  by  the  tempest  of  perse- 
cutors, or  be  dissolved  from  the  true  faith  by  the 
force  of  the  rain,  because  they  are  associated  of 
pure  gold,  of  whom  the  city  of  the  great  King 
is  adorned.  Moreover,  the  streets  set  forth  their 
hearts  purified  from  all  uncleanness,  transparent 
with  glowing  light,  that  the  Lord  may  justly  walk 
up  and  down  in  them.  The  river  of  life  sets 
forth  that  the  grace  of  spiritual  doctrine  flowed 
through  the  minds  of  the  faithful  and  that  mani- 
fold flourishing  forms  of  odours  germinated  there- 
in. The  tree  of  life  on  either  bank  sets  forth 
the  Advent  of  Christ,  according  to  the  flesh, 
who  satisfied  the  peoples  wasted  with  famine, 
that  received  life  from  One  by  the  wood  of  the 
Cross,  with  the  announcement  of  God's  word. 
And  in  that  he  says  that  the  sun  is  not  necessary 
in  the  city,  he  shows,  evidently,  that  the  Creator 
as  the  immaculate  light  shines  in  the  midst  of  it, 
whose  l)rightness  no  mind  has  been  able  to  con- 
ceive, nor  tongue  to  tell. 

In  that  he  says  there  are  three  gates  placed 
on  each  of  the  four  sides,  of  single  pearls,  I  think 
that  these  are  the  four  virtues,'  to  wit,  prudence, 
fortitude,  justice,  temperance,  which  are  asso- 
ciated with  one  another.     And,  being  involved 


i  Gen.  vi.  14,  LXX. 

*  [Called  \\\K. philosopliical  virtues.     Vol.  ii.  note  7,  p.  502.] 


;6o 


COMMENTARY    ON   THE   APOCALYPSE. 


together,  they  make  the  number  tweh-e.  But 
the  t\veh-e  gates  we  beheve  to  be  the  number 
of  the  apostles,  who,  shining  in  the  four  virtues 
as  precious  stones,  manifesting  the  hght  of  their 
doctrine  among  the  saints,  cause  it  to  enter  the 
celestial  city,  that  by  intercourse  with  them  the 
choir  of  angels  may  be  gladdened.  And  that 
the  gates  cannot  be  shut,  it  is  evidently  shown 
that  the  doctrine  of  the  apostles  can  be  sepa- 
rated from  rectitude  by  no  tempest  of  contradic- 
tion. Even  though  the  floods  of  the  nations 
and  the  vain  superstitions  of  heretics  should  re- 
volt against  their  true  faith,  they  are  overcome, 
and  shall  be  dissolved  as  the  foam,  because  Christ 


is  the  Rock  '  by  which,  and  on  which,  the  Church 
is  founded. 2  And  thus  it  is  overcome  by  no 
traces  of  maddened  men.  Therefore  they  are 
not  to  be  heard  who  assure  themselves  that  there 
is  to  be  an  earthly  reign  of  a  thousand  years  ;  who 
think,  that  is  to  say,  with  the  heretic  Cerinthus.^ 
For  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  now  eternal  in  the 
saints,  although  the  glory  of  the  saints  shall  be 
manifested  after  the  resurrection. 

'  [  From  a  Western  theologian  of  the  date  of  our  author.  This  is 
emphatic] 

2  [Compare  vol.  v.  p.  561,  Elucidation  VII.] 

3  [Here  is  evidence  that  Cerinthus  (see  vol.  i.  351,  352)  and 
other  heretics  had  di.sgusted  the  Church  even  with  the  less  carnal 
views  of  the  Millenium  entertained  by  the  better  "  Chiliasts,"  such  as 
Commodian.     See  vol.  iv.  pp.  212  and  218. J 


GENERAL   NOTES   BY  THE   AMERICAN    EDITOR. 


1.  The  whole  subject  of  the  Apocalypse  is  so  treated,'  in  the 
Speakt-y's  ConiiiieHtary,  as  to  elucidate  many  questions  suggested 
by  the  primitive  commentators  of  this  series,  and  to  furnish  the  latest 
judgments  of  critics  on  the  subject.  It  is  so  immense  a  matter,  how- 
ever, as  to  render  annotations  on  patristic  specialties  impossible  in 
a  work  like  this.  Every  reader  must  feel  how  apposite  is  the  senten- 
tious saying  of  Augustine:  "  Apocalypsis  Joannis  tot  habet  sacra- 
menta  quot  verba." 

2.  The  ie7<en  spirits,  p.  344,  ver.  4.  That  is,  the  one  Spirit  in 
His  seven-fold  gifts.  lie  now  fulfils  the  promise  of  Christ,  "  He  shall 
show  you  things  to  come."  Without  this  complement  the  Church 
would  Lack  assurance  that  her  great  Head  upon  the  throne  has  ordered 
and  limited  the  whole  course  of  this  world  for  her  conflicts  and  her 
final  triumph  by  the  Spirit's  power.  St.  John's  rapture  was  the 
Spirit's  work:  "  I  was  in  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  day."  ^  The  whole 
Apocalypse  is  an  Easier  sermon  (on  the  te.\t,  i.  18)  and  an  Easter 
song  (vers.  9-14,  and  passim).  It  supplements  the  appearances  of 
the  risen  Redeemer  for  iiientificaiion,  by  a  manifestation,  which  is 
the  Church's  assurance  of  W\i< glori/ii  aiiou ,  and  of  His  perpetual  work 
in  her  and  for  her,  as  well  as  of  His  presence  with  her,  by  the  Spirit. 

3.  Seven  gi'ldett  candlesticks,  p.  344,  ver  12.  The  symbol  of 
the  seven-fold  Spirit  in  the  Church.  On  the  Arch  of  Titus  this  sym- 
bol had  just  been  set  up  as  proof  of  its  removal  from  the  Mosaic 
Church.  It  is  now  found  to  be  transferred  to  the  "  seven  churches," 
a  symbol  of  the  Catholic  Church  ^  or  "  the  communion  of  saints.". 
The  threatening  of  removal  from  particular  churches  derives  force 
from  the  (then)  recent  removal  out  of  Jerusalem. 

4.  All  the  saints  shall  assemble,  p.  345,  ver.  15.  Our  author 
clings  to  the  purer  Chiliasm  of  Commodian,  to  which  Augustine  had 
now  given  the  death-blow  by  his  famous  retractation.'* 

5.  New  forms  0/  prophesying,  p.  347,  ver.  17.  A  retrospective 
glance  at  .Montanism,  and  a  caveat  against  the  mistakes  of  Tertullian. 

6.  /  ivill  vomit  thee,  p.  347,  ver.  17.  Bishop  Wordsworth  sug- 
gests, that,  if  the  canon  of  Scripture  compiled  by  the  church  of  Lao- 
dicea  lacks  the  Apocalypse,  its  terrible  reproof  of  that  church  may 
have  influenced  its  unwillingness  to  accept  it.  Accordingly  she  was 
vomited,  and  perished  in  the  Saracen  invasion. 

7.  That  is  the  Spirit,  p.  348,  ver.  i.  Christ's  divine  nature  as 
distinguished  from  his  flesh. 5  "  In  a  word,"  says  Professor  Milligan,* 
"  -i/f  1/u.a  is  a  short  expression  for  our  Lord's  resurrection  state." 
A  truth,  but  based  on  the  distinction  between  the  flesh  of  Christ  and 
His  spiriiual  nature  as  the  Word.  See  Tertullian, ^  vol.  iii.  p.  609, 
note  5,  and  p  610,  note  5:  also  2  Cor.  iii.  17-18 

8.  The  genealogy  0/  Mary ,  p.  ■■nZ,vcri,.  T-io.  It  is  remarkable 
that  St.  Matthew  should  be  credited  with  this,  and  not  St.  Luke, 
who  in  the  sixteenth  century*  began  to  be  regarded  as  giving  the 
ancestry  of  Mary.  See  Africanus  9  on  the  subject,  and  my  elucida- 
tion,'°  in  which  I  followed  Wordsworth.  Though  I  had  already  pre- 
pared the  pages  of  Victorinus  for  the  press,  I  failed  to  note  at  that 
time  this  modification  of  the  general  truth,  that  antiquity  regards 
both  genealogies  as  those  of  Joseph. 

9.  Dan  himself,  p.  349,  ver.  8.  Here  is  a  touch  of  Chiliasm 
again,  i.e.,  of  the  better  sort.  Even  Dan  is  promised  a  restoration; 
and  the  use  of  Gen.  xlix  16  for  that  intent  is  noteworthy,  as  compared 
with  Rev.  vii.  5-8,  where  Dan  is  omitted.  But  Hippolytus  takes  a 
very  different  view  of  the  same  text." 

'   By  William  Lee,  D.D.,  archdeacon  of  Dublin. 
2  The  Lord's  d.iy  is  here  the  Paschal  feast,  "  the  Great  Sunday," 
probably.     See  Eichhorn  in  Rosenmiiller,  Scholia,  torn.  v.  p.  626. 

5  P.  345,  sec.  16. 

*  Civ.  Dei,  XX.  cap.  7,  p.  667,  ed.  Migne. 
i  See  vol.  iii.  note  5,  pp.  624,  630. 

6  Ut  supra,  p   249,  note  15. 

7  .See  Kaye's  Tertullian,  p.  530,  for  a  brief  comment  on  this  and 
its  supposed  scriptural  base. 

*  Virtually  in  the  fifteenth,  as  Annius  published  his  theory  in 
1502,  and  wrote,  no  doubt,  before  that  century  began.     Vol.  vi.  p.  139. 

1  Vol.  vi    p.  126,  this  series. 
'°  Vol.  vi.  p.  139. 
■'  Vol.  V.  p   207,  this  series. 


10.  Hades,  p  351.  "A  region  withdrawn  from  punishment  and 
fires,"  says  our  author.  He  identifies  it  with  paradise,  and  shows 
that  in  his  day  the  Latin  churches  knew  of  no  purgatorial  fires. 
He  knows  of  nothing  but  a  place  for  those  "  who  die  in  the  Lord," 
and  a  place  for  the  wicked.  It  is  perpetually  overlooked,  that,  in  the 
fiction  of  "  purgatory,"  it  is  only  the  righteous  who  are  entitled  to  it; 
none  but  those  dying  in  full  communion  with  the  Church  having  any 
portion  in  it,  or  any  title  to  Masses  for  their  repose.  Of  all  this  our 
author  had  no  conception. '- 

11.  To  take  the  book  and  eat  it  iip,  p.  353,  ver.  10.  We  must 
not  fail  to  note  with  this  the  passage  Jer.  xv.  16,  where  the  Revised 
Version  pedantically  sacrifices  the  Septuagint  reading,  6  .\6-yo?  aov, 
(which  is  followed  by  the  Vulgate),  distinguishing  "  sermones  tui  "  from 
"  Verbum  tuum."  The  Seventy  have  testified  to  this  distinction  in 
their  day,  and  their  copies  of  the  Hebrew  must  have  supported  it. 
So  understood,  what  riches  in  the  text  of  Jeremiah! 

12.  Thessalonians,  p.  354,  ver.  7.  On  which  much  that  is  sug- 
gestive is  said  by  St.  Augustine,  though  he  confesses,  concerning 
what  St.  Paul  had  said  to  the  Thessalonians,  ''  Ego  prorsus  quid 
dixerit  me  fateor  ignorare."  See  De  Civ.  Dei,  lib.  xx.  cap.  19,  p. 
685,  ed   Migne. 

13.  The  ivoman,  p.  355,  ver.  i.  Compare  vol.  vi.  p.  337,  note  4, 
and  Elucidation  II.  p.  355.  It  is  quite  important  to  observe  the  voice 
of  antiquity  on  a  matter  which,  in  our  own  times,  has  been  made  a 
stumbling-block  to  souls  by  a  wanton,  personal  r.ct  of  the  Bishop 
of  Rome  and  his  dogma  of  "  Immaculate  Conception." 

14.  The  hope  of  those  that  sleep,  p.  355,  ver.  i.  To  make  our 
author  consistent  with  himself  (see  note  10,  supra) ,  we  should  read 
thus:  "  But  they  have  in  their  darkness  a  light  (some  think)  such  as 
the  moon."  Here,  however,  it  seems  to  me,  he  is  giving  his  mind 
to  "  the  Church  of  fathers  and  prophets  "  exclusively,  in  which  its 
"  saints  and  apostles  "  were  for  a  time  waiting  and  looking  for  the  Man- 
child.  Even  that  Church  of  the  Hebrews  had,  in  Hades,  light  "  like 
that  of  the  moon,"  where  they  reposed  in  Abraham's  bosom;  but 
Christ  removed  them  into  a  fairer  region,  i.e..  Paradise,  when  He 
illuminated  Hades,  and  then  became  "  the  first-fruits  of  them  that 
slept."     .Such  seems  to  be  the  sense. 

15.  /«  a  certain  Greek  codex,  p.  357,  ver.  18.  Can  ai/Tejiio? 
here  be  a  reference  to  Anthemius,  of  the  kindred  of  Julian  {d.  a.d. 
472)?  His  history,  mixed  up  with  that  of  Ricimer,  connects  with 
Genseric,  who  died  a.u.  477. 

16.  Sea  of  the  north,  p.  358,  ver.  11.  The  Mediterranean,  near 
Mount  Carmel,  is  "the  .sea  of  Phoenice,"  I  suppose;  but  how  the 
Arabian  Gulf  can  be  called  the  sea  of  the  north,  I  do  not  com- 
prehend. As  Routh  says,  the  manuscripts  must  have  been  much 
corrupted. 

17.  Two  resurrections,  p.  359,  ver.  5.  Here  our  author,  who  is 
supposed  to  be  the  contemporary  of  .St.  Augustine,  accepts  his  final 
judgment  '3  But  Victorinus  was  a  Chiliast  of  the  better  sort,  accord- 
ing to  St.  Jerome.  This  confirms  the  corruption  of  the  Mss.  In- 
deed, if  the  Victorinus  mentioned  by  Jerome  be  the  same  as  our 
author,  the  mention  of  Genseric  proves  the  subsequent  interpolation 
of  his  works. 

18.  It  is  evident  that  the  fragment  which  is  here  preserved,  if,  in- 
deed, it  be  the  work  of  Caius  Marius  Victorinus,  surnamed  Afer,  is 
full  of  the  corrections  of  some  pious  disciple  of  .St.  Augustine  who 
lived  much  later.  The  reader  must  consult  Lardner,'"*  and  compare 
Routh,  whose  notes  on  this  treatise  are  indeed  few.  He  does  not 
think  the  reference  to  abbots  "5  of  any  consequence  in  determining  its 
age,  because  he  finds  albatorum  elsewhere  sustained  as  the  true 
reading,  i.e.,  those  "  made  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  But 
the  great  probability  that  there  were  two  authors  of  the  name  living 
in  different  ages  seems  more  than  suspected  by  the  learned.  Dupin, 
who  calls  him  Marius  without  the  Caius  (changed  to  Fabius  by  the 
English  translator),  leaves  one  yet  more  in  a  mist  as  to  the  identity 
of  our  author  with  the  one  he  writes  about. 


"  Compare  vol.  iii.  p.  428,  Elucidation  VIII. 

'3  See  p.  360,  note  2. 

'*  Credit.,  vol.  iv.  p.  254. 

'5   P.  344,  note  6,  supra. 


DIONYSIUS. 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE 

TO 

DIONYSIUS.  BISHOP  OF  ROME. 


[a.d.  259-269.]  Dionysius  is  no  exception  to  the  rule  that  Latin  Christianity  had  no  place 
in  Rome  till  after  the  Nicene  Council.  He  was  a  Greek  by  birth,  and  reflects  the  spirit  and 
orthodoxy  of  the  Greek  Fathers ;  and  what  we  have  from  him  is  written  in  the  Greek  language. 
We  find  it  in  Athanasius,  where,  remarks  VVaterland,'  its  genuineness  cannot  be  suspected,  because 
"  Athanasius  did  not  entirely  approve  of  it,  and  would  certainly  never  have  forged  an  interpreta- 
tion different  from  his  own."  He  concurred  with  the  Easterns  in  the  discipline  of  Paul  of 
Samosata.  Waterland  says  of  the  following  fragment :  "  It  is  of  admirable  use  for  showing  the 
doctrine  of  the  Trinity  as  professed  by  the  Church  of  Christ  at  that  time." 

The  purely  receptive  character  of  the  Roman  See  during  the  Ante-Nicene  period  must  be 
sufficiently  apparent  to  the  possessors  of  the  volumes  of  this  series.  Until  after  the  Council  of 
Nice,  as  a  Roman  pontiff  has  testified,  she  was  unfelt  in  the  churches  as  a  teaching  church.^ 
Irenseus  has  justly  stated  her  case  :  as  the  focus  of  the  empire,  she  was  the  natural  centre  of 
exchange  and  social  commerce  among  all  nations.  Thither  all  Christians  converged,  and  there  at 
all  times  might  be  found  representatives  of  all  the  churches,  —  those  of  Gaul  and  Britain  ;  those  of 
Asia  Minor  and  Syria ;  those  of  Alexandria  and  Egypt ;  those  of  North  Africa,  where  Latin  Chris- 
tianity had  begun  to  exist,  and  where  it  had  reached  a  vigorous  maturity  at  the  Nicene  period. 
Hence,  from  all  these  churches  came  into  Rome  a  Catholic  testimony,  which  was  thus  preserved 
at  the  metropolis  by  the  pressure  from  without. 

This  is  the  fact  which  gives  importance  to  the  earliest  dogmatic  testimony  proceeding  from 
the  See  of  Rome.^  Dionysius  has  the  great  distinction  of  sustaining  the  orthodoxy  which  Hip- 
polytus  and  other  comprovincial  bishops  had  established  against  the  heresy  of  two  of  his  prede- 
cessors ;  and  this  little  essay,  embedded  in  the  works  of  Athanasius,  comes  forth  as  a  genuine 
"bee"  out  of  his  precious  amber,  sweet  with  the  honey  of  truth,  and  pungent  with  the  sting  of  an 
acute  and  piercing  testimony  against  error. 

For  the  necessary  preface  to  this  essay  or  synodical  letter,  the  reader  must  turn  to  the  history 
of  Dionysius  of  Alexandria,  surnamed  the  Great,  and  to  the  letters  he  wrote  to  his  namesake  of 
Rome.'*  For  a  complete  view  of  the  whole  matter,  and  for  the  originals  of  both  these  great  prel^ 
ates,  the  student  will  not  fail  to  consult  Routh.5  Athanasius,  the  touchstone  of  orthodoxy,  does 
not  altogether  commend  the  idioms  of  either ;  but  he  sustains  the  essential  orthodoxy  of  both 
with  that  vast  sweep  of  genius  which  could  insist  upon  Nicene  idioms  after  the  council,  but  sus- 
tain those  who,  in  defective  language,  fought  previously  for  essential  truth. 


•   Works,  vol.  ili.  p.  318. 

2  Vol.  iv.  p.  170,  this  series.     Compare  Irenseus,  vol.  i.  pp.  415-460,  this  series. 

3  Novatian  (vol.  v.  p.  607,  this  series)  must  not  be  overlooked,  but  he  is  valued  merely  as  a  personal  witness. 
<  See  pp.  78  and  92,  vol.  vi.,  this  series, 

5  Reliqii.  Sac,  vol.  iii.  pp.  221-250. 


364  INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE. 

For  a  just  view  of  Novatian  and  of  the  orthodoxy  of  Rome  in  the  times  of  Dionysius,  as  that 
unhappy  but  competent  witness  sets  it  forth,  the  reader  would  do  well  to  consult  Dr.  Waterland.' 
For  a  vindication  of  the  Alexandrian  Dionysius,  to  whom  his  contemporaries  gave  the  surname 
Magnus,  see  the  same  lucid  expounder  of  antiquity.^  For  a  sententious  statement  of  the  sub- 
ordination of  the  Son,  on  which  so  much  hinges  in  these  inquiries,  consult  the  same  theologian.' 

I  might  have  suffixed  this  essay  to  the  works  of  the  great  Dionysius  but  for  several  important 
considerations  :  ( i )  I  was  glad  to  give  due  prominence  to  this  exceptional  voice  from  old  Rome, 
and  to  place  Dionysius  with  due  dignity  before  the  reader;  (2)  as  the  Bishop  of  Rome  was  with- 
out a  hearing  at  Nicxa,  I  was  anxious  to  show  what  good  Sylvester  would  have  said  had  he  been 
able  to  attend  the  council ;  (3)  I  was  not  willing,  therefore,  to  hide  this  writer's  light  under  the 
bushel  of  the  pages  devoted  to  the  Alexandrian  school ;  (4)  I  was  anxious  to  close  this  impor- 
tant volume  by  a  just  exhibition  of  the  Ante-Nicene  doctrine,  previous  to  the  compilation  of  the 
Great  Symbol;  (5)  I  considered  it  judicious  to  elucidate  Dionysius  by  the  doctrines  of  Atha- 
nasius,  to  whom  we  owe  the  preservation  of  the  fragment  itself;  and  (6)  I  felt  that  here  was  the 
place  to  record  the  "Athanasian  Confession"  (so  called),  which,  apocryphal  though  it  be,  as  a 
"creed"  under  his  name  is  allowed  to  embody  the  principles  for  which  the  whole  life  of  Athana- 
sius  was  a  contest  unparalleled  in  the  history  of  Christianity. 

'   Works,  vol.  iii.  pp.  57,  119,  139,  214,  274,  454-459.  ^  lb.,  pp.  43,  iii,  274.  3   Works,  iii.  p.  23. 


AGAINST    THE    SABELLIANS/ 


1.  Now  truly  it  would  be  just  to  dispute  against 
those  who,  by  dividing  and  rending  the  mon- 
archy, which  is  the  most  august  announcement 
of  the  Church  of  God,  into,  as  it  were,  three 
powers,  and  distinct  substances  {hypostases),  and 
three  deities,  destroy  it.^  For  I  have  heard  that 
some  who  preach  and  teach  the  word  of  God 
among  you  are  teachers  of  this  opinion,  who  in- 
deed diametrically,  so  to  speak,  are  opposed  to 
the  opinion  of  Sabellius.  For  he  blasphemes  in 
saying  that  the  Son  Himself  is  the  Father,  and 
vice  versa  ;  but  these  in  a  certain  manner  an- 
nounce three  gods,  in  that  they  divide  the  holy 
unity  into  three  different  substances,  absolutely 
separated  from  one  another.  For  it  is  essential 
that  the  Divine  Word  should  be  united  to  the 
God  of  all,  and  that  the  Holy  Spirit  should  abide 
and  dwell  in  God  ;  and  thus  that  the  Divine 
Trinity  should  be  reduced  and  gathered  into  one, 
as  if  into  a  certain  head  —  that  is,  into  the  om- 
nipotent God  of  all.  For  the  doctrine  of  the 
foolish  Marcion,  which  cuts  and  divides  the 
monarchy  into  three  elements,  is  assuredly  of 
the  devil,  and  is  not  of  Christ's  true  disciples,  or 
of  those  to  whom  the  Saviour's  teaching  is  agree- 
able. For  these  indeed  rightly  know  that  the 
Trinity  is  declared  in  the  divine  Scripture,  but 
that  the  doctrine  that  there  are  three  gods  is 
neither  taught  in  the  Old  nor  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. 

2.  But  neither  are  they  less  to  be  blamed  who 
think  that  the  Son  was  a  creation,  and  decided 
that  the  Lord  was  made  just  as  one  of  those 
things  which  really  were  made  ;  whereas  the  di- 
vine declarations  testify  that  He  was  begotten, 
as  is  fitting  and  proper,  but  not  that  He  was 
created  or  made.  It  is  therefore  not  a  trifling, 
but  a  very  great  impiety,  to  say  that  the  Lord 
was  in  any  wise  made  with  hands.  For  if  the 
Son  was  made,  there  was  a  time  when  He  was 
not;  but  He  always  was,  if,  as  He  Himself  de- 
clares,^  He  is  undoubtedly  in  the  Father.  And 
if  Christ   is    the  Word,  the   Wisdom,  and   the 


'  A  fragment  of  an  epistle  or  treatise  of  Dlonysius,  bishop  of 
Rome.  [From  the  epistle  of  St.  Athanasius,  De  Decretis  Nicteria 
Syiiotii,  cap.  xxvi.  p  2)i,  ed.  Benedict  ] 

-  Athan.,  Ep.  de  drcrel.  Nic   Syu.,  4.  26. 

3  John  xiv.  II.     [See  vol.  v.  Elucidation  V.  p.  156.] 


Power,  —  for  the  divine  writings  tell  us  that 
Christ  is  these,  as  ye  yourselves  know,  —  assur- 
edly these  are  powers  of  God.  Wherefore,  if  the 
Son  was  made,  there  was  a  time  when  these  were 
not  in  existence  ;  ^  and  thus  there  was  a  time 
when  God  was  without  these  things,  which  is 
utterly  absurd.  But  why  should  I  discourse  at 
greater  length  to  you  about  these  matters,  since 
ye  are  men  filled  with  the  Spirit,  and  especially 
understanding  what  absurd  results  follow  from 
the  opinion  which  asserts  that  the.  Son  was  made  ? 
The  leaders  of  this  view  seem  to  me  to  have 
given  very  little  heed  to  these  things,  and  for 
that  reason  to  have  strayed  absolutely,  by  ex- 
plaining the  passage  otherwise  than  as  the  divine 
and  prophetic  Scripture  demands.  "  The  Lord 
created  me  the  beginning  of  His  ways."  s  For, 
as  ye  know,  there  is  more  than  one  signification 
of  the  word  "  created  ;  "  and  in  this  place  "cre- 
ated "  is  the  same  as  "  set  over  "  the  works  made 
by  Himself — made,  I  say,  by  the  Son  Himself. 
But  this  "  created  "  is  not  to  be  understood  in 
the  same  manner  as  "  made."  For  to  make  and 
to  create  are  different  from  one  another.  "  Is 
not  He  Himself  thy  Father,  that  hath  possessed 
thee  and  created  thee?"^  says  Moses  in  the 
great  song  of  Deuteronomy.  And  thus  miglit 
any  one  reasonably  convict  these  men.  Oh 
reckless  and  rash  men  !  was  then  "  the  first-born 
of  every  creature  "  ^  something  made?  —  "He 
who  was  begotten  from  the  womb  before  the 
morningstar  ?  "  **  —  He  who  in  the  person  of  Wis- 
dom says,  "  Before  all  the  hills  He  begot  me?"^ 
Finally,  any  one  may  read  in  many  parts  of  the 
divine  utterances  that  the  Son  is  said  to  have 
been  begotten,  but  never  that  He  was  made. 
From  which  considerations,  they  who  dare  to 
say  that  His  divine  and  inexplicable  generation 
was  a  creation,  are  openly  convicted  of  thinking 
that  which  is  false  concerning  the  generation  of 
the  Lord. 

3.  That  admirable  and  divine  unity,  therefore. 


^  [He  quotes  the  formula,  afterwards  notorious,  r)v  ore  ovk  y]v.\ 
5  Prov.  viii.  22. 
*  Deut.  xxxii.  6. 

7  Col.  i.  15.     [See  vol.  v.  Elucidation  XI.  p.  159.] 

8  Ps.  ex.  3,  LXX. 

9  Prov.  viii.  25. 

365 


l66 


ELUCIDATIONS. 


must  neither  be  separated  into  three  divinities, 
nor  must  the  dignity  and  eminent  greatness  of 
the  Lord  be  diminished  by  having  applied  to  it 
the  name  of  creation,  but  we  must  beheve  on 
God  the  Father  Omnipotent,  and  on  Christ  Jesus 
His  Son,  and  on  the  Holy  Spirit.  Moreover, 
that  the  Word  is  united  to  the  God  of  all,  be- 


cause He  says,  "  I  and  the  Father  are  one  ;  "  ' 
and,  "  I  am  in  the  Father,  and  the  Father  is  in 
Me."  ^  Thus  doubtless  will  be  maintained  in  its 
integrity  the  doctrine  of  the  divine  Trinity,  and 
the  sacred  announcement  of  the  monarchy. 


'  John  X.  30. 
2  John  xiv.  10. 


ELUCIDATIONS. 


The  Confession,  improperly  called  "  the  Creed  of  Athanasius,"  is  acknowledged  to  embody 
the  (Athanasian)  doctrine  of  the  Nicene  Council ;  and  I  append  it  here  as  an  index  to  the  state 
of  theology  at  the  period  which  is  the  limit  of  our  series.  Nothing  is  properly  a  "  creed  "  which 
has  never  been  accepted  as  such  by  the  whole  Church,  and  the  Greeks  knew  no  other  creed 
than  that  called  Nicene.  The  Anglo-American  Church  has  ceased  to  recite  this  Confession  in 
public  worship,  but  does  not  depart  from  it  as  doctrine.  The  "Reformed"  communion  in  Amer- 
ica '  retains  it  among  her  liturgical  forms,  and  I  suppose  the  same  is  true  of  the  Lutherans.  It 
is  a  Western  Confession,  and,  like  the  Te  Deum,  is  a  hymn  rather  than  a  symbol,  though  breathing 
the  spirit  of  the  Creed. 

Usher  adopts  a.d.  447  as  its  date,  and  Beveridge  assigns  it  to  the  fourth  century.  Dupin  gives 
it  a  later  origin  than  Usher,  and  a  considerable  number  of  eminent  authorities  agree  with  him  in 
the  date  a.d.  484. 

What  are  called  the  anathemas  are  the  enacting  clauses  (so  to  speak) ,  and,  like  the  same  in 
the  Nicene  Creed,  may  be  regarded  as  no  part  of  tlie  Confession  itself.  If  they  have  disappeared 
from  the  Great  Symbol  itself,  as  unsuitable  to  liturgical  recitation,  why  not  apply  the  same  rule 
here? 

CONFESSION   OF   OUR   CHRISTIAN   FAITH,   COMMONLY   CALLED   THE   CREED   OF 

ST.   ATHANASIUS. 

Quiciinqiie  zndt. 

IT    Whosoever  will  be  saved :  before  all  things  it  is  necessary  that  he  hold  the  Catholick  Faith. 

Which  Faith  except  everyone  do  keep  whole  and  undefiled :  without  doubt  he  shall  perish  ez'erlastingly. 

I. 

And  the  Catholick  Faith  is  this:  That  we  worship  one  God  in  Trinity,  and  Trinity  in  Unity; 

Neither  confounding  the  Persons:  nor  dividing  the  Substance. 

For  there  is  one  Person  of  the  Father,  another  of  the  Son :  and  another  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

But  the  God-head  of  the  Father,  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  all  one:  the  Glory  equal,  the  Majesty 
co-eternal. 

Such  as  the  Father  is,  such  is  the  Son:  and  such  is  the  Holy  Ghost. 

The  Father  un-create,  the  Son  un-create :  and  the  Holy  Ghost  un-create. 

The  Father  incomprehensible,  the  Son  incomprehensible  :  and  the  Holy  Ghost  incomprehensible. 

The  Father  eternal,  the  Son  eternal  :  and  the  Holy  Ghost  eternal. 

And  yet  they  are  not  three  eternals:  but  one  eternal. 

As  also  there  are  not  three  incomprehensibles,  nor  three  un-created :  but  one  un-created,  and  one  incompre- 
hensible. 

So  likewise  the  Father  is  Almighty,  the  Son  Almighty:  and  the  Holy  Ghost  Almighty. 


'  Commonly  called  "  the  Dutch  Church;  "  i.e.,  the  Church  of  Holland. 


ELUCIDATIONS.  367 


And  yet  they  are  not  three  Almighties:  but  one  Almighty. 
So  the  Father  is  God,  the  Son  is  God :  and  the  Holy  Ghost  is  God. 
And  yet  they  are  not  three  Gods :  but  one  God. 

So  likewise  the  Father  is  I>ord,  the  Son  is  Lord :  and  the  Ploly  Ghost  is  Lord. 
And  yet  not  three  Lords:  but  one  Lord., 

For  like  as  we  are  compelled  by  the  Christian  verity:   to  acknowledge  every  Person  by  Himself  to  be  God 
and  Lord ; 

So  we  are  forbidden  by  the  Catholick  Religion :  to  say,  there  be  three  Gods,  or  three  Lords. 
The  Father  is  made  of  none  :  neither  created,  nor  begotten. 
The  Son  is  of  the  Father  alone :  not  made,  nor  created,  but  begotten. 

The  Holy  Ghost  is  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son: '  neither  made,  nor  created,  nor  begotten,  but  proceeding. 
So  there  is  one  Father,  not  three  Fathers ;  one  Son,  not  three  Sons  :  one  Holy  Ghost,  not  three  Holy  Ghosts. 
And  in  this  Trinity  none  is  afore,  or  after  other:  none  is  greater,  or  less  than  another; 
But  the  whole  three  Persons  are  co-eternal  together:  and  co-equal. 

So  that  in  all  things,  as  is  aforesaid :  the  Unity  in  Trinity,  and  the  Trinity  in  Unity,  is  to  be  worshipped. 
T[  He  ihetr/ore  that  will  he  saved:  must  thus  think  of  the  Trinity. 

II. 

Furthermore,  it  is  necessary  to  everlasting  salvation:   that  he  also  believe  rightly  the  Incarnation  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

For  the  right  Faith  is,  that  we  believe  and  confess:  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  is  God  and 
Man  ; 

God,  of  the  Substance  of  the  Father,  begotten  before  the  worlds :  and  Man,  of  the  Substance  of  His  Mother, 
born  in  the  world  ; 

Perfect  God,  and  perfect  Man  :  of  a  reasonable  soul  and  human  flesh  subsisting  ; 

Equal  to  the  Father,  as  touching  His  God-head-  and  inferior  to  the  Father,  as  touching  His  Manhood. 

Who  although  He  be  God  and  Man  :  yet  He  is  not  two,  but  one  Christ; 

One  ;  not  by  conversion  of  the  God-head  into  flesh :  but  by  taking  of  the  Manhood  into  God ; 

One  altogether ;  not  by  confusion  of  Substance :  but  by  unity  of  Person. 

For  as  the  reasonable  soul  and  flesh  is  one  man  :  so  God  and  Man  is  one  Christ ; 

Who  suffered  for  our  Salvation  :  descended  into  hell,  rose  again  the  third  clay  from  the  dead. 

He  ascended  into  heaven.  He  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  God  Almighty :  from  whence  He  shall 
come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead. 

At  whose  coming  all  men  shall  rise  again  with  their  bodies :  and  shall  give  account  for  their  own  works. 

And  they  that  have  done  good  shall  go  into  life  everlasting  :  and  they  that  have  done  evil  into  everlasting 
fire. 

\   This  is  the  Catholick  Faith  :  which  except  a  7nan  believe  faithfully,  he  catinot  be  saved. 


II. 

It  is  with  regret  that  I  am  forced  to  take  exception  to  the  most  useful  Ecclesiastical  History 
of  the  learned  Professor  Schaff,  in  this  connection.     I  quote  from  that  work  ^  as  follows  :  — 

"  He,  Dionysius,  maintained  distinctly,  in  («)  controversy  with  Dionysius  of  Alexandria,  at 
once  the  unity  of  essence  and  the  real  personal  distinction,  etc.,  ,  .  .  and  avoided  tritheism. 
Sabellianism,  and  {b)  sithordinationism,  with  the  instinct  of  orthodoxy,  and  also  with  the  art  of 
anathematizing,  {c)  already  familiar  to  {d)  the  popes." 

Such  a  paragraph  must  convey  to  the  youthful  student  a  great  confusion  of  ideas ;  all  the 
greater,  because  the  same  valuable  work  elsewhere  invites  him  to  conclusions  quite  the  reverse. 
Thus,  {a)  there  was  no  controversy  whatever  between  the  two  Pionysii  ;  with  a  holy  jealousy  they 
entered  into  fraternal  explanations  of  the  same  truth,  held  by  each,  but  by  neither  very  techni- 
cally elucidated.  The  mere  reader  would  probably  infer  that  the  greater  of  the  two  was  guilty  of 
tritheism  or  Sabellianism,  although  that  is  not  the  meaning  of  these  unguarded  expressions.  But 
(^)  the  "subordinationism"  which  he  repudiated  was  the  doctrine  of  the  subjection  of  the  Son,  not 
of  the  subordination,  which  orthodoxy  has  always  maintained.     Again,  (<r)  I  see  no  such  "  anathe- 

'  The  words  italicized  have  never  been  accepted  by  the  whole  Church.  ^  Vol.  ii.  p.  570. 


368  ELUCIDATIONS. 


matizing  "  in  the  letter  of  Dionysius  as  is  here  charged ;  indeed,  it  contains  no  anathema  '  what- 
ever, much  less  the  artificial  cursing  of  the  Papacy  which  is  thus  assumed.  And  last,  {d)  what 
can  be  meant  by  the  expression,  "already  familiar  to  the  popes  ?  "  The  learned  pages  of  the  same 
author  sufficiently  prove  that  there  were  no  such  things^  as  "popes"  till  a  much  later  period  of 
history;  and,  as  to  the  "art  of  anathematizing,"  if  it  existed  at  all  in  those  days,  we  find  it  much 
more  freely  exemplified  by  the  Greek  Fathers  than  by  bishops  of  Rome.  I  say,  (/  it  existed  at  all, 
because  the  primitive  anathema  was  a  purely  scriptural  enforcement  of  St.  Paul's  great  canon 
(Gal.  i.  8,  9)  ;  while  the  "  art  of  anathematizing,"  so  justly  credited  to  "  the  popes,"  was  a  vindic- 
tive and  monstrous  assertion,  at  a  later  date,  of  prerogatives  which  they  impiously  arrogated  to 
themselves,  against  other  churches. 

'  "  Cul^and I  sunt"  is  quite  strong  enough  for  the  original,  Karanin^oiro.     Routh,  R.  S.,  iii.  p.  374. 
2  The  word  existed,  but  then,  and  long  afterwards,  was  universally  applied  to  all  bishops. 


THE  TEACHING  OF  THE  TWELVE  APOSTLES. 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE 

TO 

THE  TEACHING  OF  THE  TWELVE  APOSTLES. 


The  interest  so  generally  excited  in  the  learned  world  by  the  ("  Bryennios  ")  discovery  of  a 
very  primitive  document,  rendered  it  indispensable  that  this  republication  should  be  enriched  by 
it,  in  connection  with  the  Apostolic  Constitutions  (so  called),  which  had  been  reserved  for  the 
concluding  volume  of  the  series.  The  cridcs  were  greatly  divided  as  to  the  genuineness  of 
the  Bryennios  MS.  ;  and,  in  order  to  gain  time,  I  had  relegated  the  Constitutions,  with  this 
document  as  its  sequel  or  its  preface,  to  a  place  with  the  Apocrypha.  Dissatisfied  with  my  own 
impressions  and  conjectures,  I  soon  decided  that  the  task  of  editing  the  Teaching,  as  the 
Bryennios  document  is  entitled,  must  be  entrusted  to  an  "expert,"  and  that,  if  possible,  it  should 
be  taken  in  hand  with  the  Constitutions.  In  order  to  give  sufficient  time,  I  entrusted  the  task, 
a  year  ago,  to  the  well-qualified  head  and  hands  of  Professor  Riddle  of  Hartford,  who  most 
kindly  accepted  my  proposals,  and  who  now  enables  me  to  present  his  completed  work  to  the 
public  with  the  volume  to  which  it  properly  belongs.  It  will  be  hailed  by  literary  men  generally 
as  a  timely  reviewal  of  the  whole  subject,  nor  should  I  be  surprised  to  find  Dr.  Riddle's  estimate 
of  the  Teaching  accepted  as  the  most  important  contribution  yet  made  to  the  literature  of 
inquiry  touching  its  worth  and  character.  Appearing,  as  it  does  in  this  place,  in  close  relations 
with  the  Constitutions,  and  with  the  editorial  comparisons  so  felicitously  introduced  by  the 
learned  annotator,  the  student  will  find  himself  in  a  position  to  weigh  and  to  decide  for  himself 
all  the  questions  that  have  been  raised  in  previous  examinations  of  the  case.  Without  risking 
any  judgment  of  my  own  upon  the  decisions  which  have  been  reached  by  Dr.  Riddle  in  the 
exercise  of  his  great  critical  skill,  I  cannot  withhold  an  expression  of  gratitude  for  the  impartiality 
and  scientific  conscientiousness  with  which  he  has  handled  the  matter.  Uninfluenced  by  prepos- 
sessions, he  presents  the  case  with  judicial  calmness  and  with  due  consideration  of  what  others 
have  suggested.  I  am  gratified  to  find  that  impressions  of  my  own  are  strengthened  by  his 
conclusions.  In  an  early  notice  of  the  Bryennios  discovery,  contributed  to  a  leading  publication, 
I  stated  my  surmise  that  the  Teaching,  and  its  parallels  in  the  Constitutions  and  other  primitive 
writings,  would  prove  to  be  based  upon  some  original  document,  common  to  all.  Even  Lactantius, 
in  his  Institutes,  shapes  his  instructions  to  Constantine  by  the  Ducb  Vice,  which  seem  to  have  been 
formulated  in  the  earliest  ages  for  the  training  of  catechumens.  The  elementary  nature  and  the 
"  childishness  "  of  the  work  are  thus  accounted  for,  and  I  am  sure  that  the  "  mystagogic  "  teaching 
of  Cyril  receives  light  from  this  view  of  the  matter.  This  work  was  "  food  for  lambs  :  "  it  was 
not  meant  to  meet  the  wants  of  those  "  of  full  age."  It  may  prove,  as  Dr.  Riddle  hints,  that  the 
Teaching  as  we  have  it,  in  the  Bryennios  document,  is  tainted  by  the  views  of  some  nascent 
sect  or  heresy,  or  by  the  incompetency  of  some  obscure  local  church  as  yet  unvisited  by  learned 
teachers  and  evangelists.  It  seems  to  me  not  imj^robably  influenced  by  views  of  the  charismata, 
which  ripened  into  Montanism,  and  which  are  illustrated  by  the  warnings  and  admonitions  of 
Hernias.' 

'  The  reader  has  observed  that  all  my  notes,  except  the  "  General  Notes,"  are  bracketed  when  they  illustrate  any  other  text  except  that 
of  my  own  original  prefaces,  elucidations,  etc.  This  rule  will  apply  to  Professor  Riddle's  work,  as  well  as  to  that  of  the  Edinburgh  trans- 
lator's. 


372  INTRODUCTORY    NOTICE. 


IXTRODUCTORY  NOTICE  BY  PROFESSOR  M.  B.  RIDDLE.  D.D. 


SECTION    I.  — THE   DISCOVERY    OF   THE   CODEX,   AND   ITS    CONTENTS. 

In  1873  Philotheos  Bryennios,  then  Head  Master  of  the  higher  Greek  school  at  Constantino- 
ple, but  now  Metropolitan  of  Nicomedia,  discovered  a  remarkable  collection  of  manuscripts  in  the 
library  of  the  Jerusalem  Monastery  of  the  Most  Holy  Sepulchre  at  Constantinople.  This  col- 
lection is  bound  in  one  volume,  and  written  by  the  same  hand.  It  is  signed  "  Leon,  notary  and 
sinner,"  and  bears  the  Greek  date  of  6564  =  a.d.  1056.  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  the  age 
of  the  manuscripts.  The  documents  have  been  examined  by  Professor  Albert  L.  Long  of  Robert 
College,  Constantinople  ; '  and  some  of  the  pages,  reproduced  by  photography,  were  published  by 
the  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Baltimore,  April,  1885.  The  jealousy  of  its  guardians  does  not 
imply  any  lack  of  confidence  in  the  age  and  value  of  the  Codex.  The  contents  of  the  120  folios 
(240  pp.)  are  as  follows  :  — 
I.  Synopsis  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  by  St.  Chrysostom  (fol.  1-32). 
II.  The  Epistle  of  Barnabas  (fol.  33-5 i^'O- 

III.  The  two  Epistles  of  Clement  to  the  Corinthians  (fol.  ^ib-'^Ga). 

IV.  The  Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles  (fol.  76(?-So). 

V.  The  Epistle  of  Mary  of  Cassoboli  to  Ignatius  (fol.  81-82^). 
VI.  Twelve  Epistles  of  Ignatius  (fol.  d>2a-i2oa). 

The  last  part  of  fol.  1 20a  contains  the  signature  and  date  ;  then  follows  an  account  of  the 
genealogy  of  Joseph,  continued  on  the  other  page  of  the  leaf. 

Schaff  (p.  6)  gives  a  facsimile  of  fol.  120.:?. 

Of  these,  I.  supplies  some  unpublished  portions,  and  furnishes  matter  for  textual  criticism. 
II.  gives  the  second  Greek  copy  of  Barnabas,  also  furnishing  new  readings.  III.  is  very  valuable  ; 
the  text  of  both  Epistles  is  now  complete.  Two- fifths  of  that  of  the  second  was  previously 
unknown.^  The  value  for  purposes  of  textual  criticism  is  also  great.  IV.  is  the  Teaching,  the 
value  of  which  is  discussed  below.  V.  and  VI.  both  belong  to  the  Ignatian  literature,  and  furnish 
new  readings,  which  have  already  appeared  in  the  editions  of  Funk  {Opera  Pair.  Apost.,  ii.,  Tubin- 
gen, 1 881)  and  Lightfoot  {Epistles  of  St.  Ignatius,  London  and  Cambridge,  1885). 

SECTION   2.— PUBLICATION   OF   THE   DISCOVERED    WORKS:   THE   EFFECT. 

In  1875  Bryennios,  who  had  been  chosen  Metropolitan  of  Serrae  during  his  absence  at  the 
Old  Catholic  conference  in  Bonn,  published  at  Constantinople  the  two  Epistles  of  Clement,  with 
prolegomena  and  notes ;  giving  the  text  found  in  the  Jerusalem  Codex,  as  he  termed  it.  All 
patristic  scholars  welcomed  his  work,  which  bore  every  mark  of  care  and  learning ;  showing  the 
results  of  his  contact,  as  a  student,  with  German  methods.  Bishop  Lightfoot  and  many  others  at 
once  made  use  of  this  new  material.  The  remaining  contents  of  the  Codex  were  named  in  the 
volume  of  Bryennios,  and  some  interest  awakened  by  the  mention  of  the  Teaching.  The  learned 
Metropolitan  furnished  new  readings  from  other  parts  of  the  Codex  to  German  scholars.  At  the 
close  of  1883  he  published  in  Constantino])le  the  text  of  the  Teaching,  with  prolegomena  and 
notes.  A  copy  of  the  volume  was  received  in  Germany  in  January,  1884;  was  translated  into 
German,  and  published  Feb.  3,  1884  ;  translated  from  German  into  English,  and  published  in 

'  See  New- York  Itidepeiident,  July  31,  1884.  *  See  this  volume,  in/ra,  the  Second  Epistle  of  Clement,  so  called. 


INTRODUCTORY    NOTICE.  373 

America,  Feb.  28,  18S4;  Archdeacon  Farrar  published  (^Contemporary  Re^'ieiv)  a  version  from 
the  Greek  in  May,  1884.  Before  the  close  of  the  year  the  literature  on  the  subject,  exclusive  of 
newspaper  articles,  covered  fifty  titles  (given  by  Schaff)  in  Western  Europe  and  America.' 

SECTION   3.  — CONTENTS   OF   TEACHING,   AND    RELATION   TO   OTHER  WORKS. 

In  the  Babel  of  conflicting  opinions,  it  is  best  to  notice  first  the  obvious  internal  phenomena. 
The  first  part  of  the  Teaching  (now  distinguished  as  chaps,  i.-vi.)  sets  forth  the  duty  of  the 
Christian  ;  in  chaps,  vii.-x.,  xiv.,  we  find  a  directory  for  worship  ;  chaps,  xi.-xiii.,  xv.,  give  advice 
respecting  church  officers,  extraordinary  and  local,  and  the  reception  of  Christians  ;  the  closing 
chapter  (xvi.)  enjoins  watchfulness  in  view  of  the  coming  of  Christ,  which  is  then  described. 

The  amount  of  matter  is  not  so  great  as  that  of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount. 

The  peculiarities  of  language  are  marked,  but  can  only  be  indicated  here  in  footnotes.  They 
point  to  a  period  of  transition  from  New-Testament  usage  to  that  of  ecclesiastical  Greek.  The 
citations  from  the  Scriptures  resemble  those  of  the  Apostolic  Fathers.  The  Gospel  of  Matthew 
is  most  frequently  used,  especially  chaps,  v.-vii.  and  xxiv. ;  but  some  of  the  passages  fairly  imply 
a  knowledge  of  the  Gospel  of  Luke.  There  are  some  remarkable  correspondences  with  expres- 
sions and  thoughts  found  in  the  Gospel  of  John,  while  there  is  good  reason  for  inferring  the 
writer's  acquaintance  with  all  the  groups  of  Pauline  Epistles.  His  allusions  to  the  other  New- 
Testament  books  are  less  marked.  There  is  nothing  to  prove  that  he  did  not  know  all  of  our 
canonical  books.  If  an  early  date  is  accepted,  the  tone  of  the  whole  opposes  the  tendency- 
theory  of  the  Tubingen  school. 

The  most  striking  internal  phenomena  are,  however,  the  correspondences  of  this  document 
with  early  Christian  writings,  from  a.d.  125  to  the  fourth  century.  With  the  so-called  Epistle  to 
Barnabas,  chaps,  xviii.-xx.,  the  resemblances  are  so  marked  as  to  demand  a  critical  theory  which 
can  account  for  them.  A  few  passages  in  the  Shepherd  of  Hennas  show  some  resemblance  ;  but 
only  two  sentences,  in  Commandment  Second,  are  verbally  the  same.  There  is  a  still  greater 
agreement  with  the  so-called  Apostolical  Church  Order,  of  Egyptian  origin,  probably  as  old  as 
the  third  century.  It  is  now  known  in  the  Coptic  (Memphitic),  and  also  in  Arabic  and  Greek.^ 
The  first  thirteen  canons  correspond  quite  closely,  both  in  order  and  words,  with  chaps,  i.-iv. 
of  the   Teaching. 

Most  noteworthy,  however,  is  the  parallel  with  the  Apostolic  Constitutions,  vii.  1-32,  which 
contain  more  than  half  the  Teaching,  in  precisely  the  same  order,  with  very  close  verbal  resem- 
blances. The  parts  omitted  are  in  most  cases  such  as  had  lost  their  pertinence  in  the  fourth 
century,  while  they  seem  appropriate  to  a  much  earlier  period.  The  details  will  be  found  in  the 
footnotes  to  the  Teaching  in  this  volume.  These  phenomena  have  called  forth  voluminous  dis- 
cussions, and  are  the  most  important  facts  in  determining  the  authenticity  and  age  of  the 
Teaching. 

SECTION  4.  — AUTHENTICITY. 

By  this  is  meant,  in  this  case,  the  substantial  identity  of  the  recently  discovered  document 
with  the  work  known  and  referred  to  by  early  Christian  writers  under  the  same  (or  a  similar)  title. 
Of  apostolic  origin  no  one  should  presume  to  speak,  since  the  text  of  the  document  makes  no 
such  claim,  and  internal  evidence  is  obviously  against  such  a  suggestion.  On  the  other  hand, 
there  is  no  reason  for  doubting  the  age  of  the  Codex,  or  the  accuracy  of  the  edition  published  by 
Bryennios. 

Eusebius  {d.  340)  of  C?esarea,  in  the  famous  passage  of  his  history  (iii.  25)  which  treats 
of  the  canonical  books  of  the  New  Testament,  names  among  the  "spurious"  works  (ro6'ot)  "the 
so-called  Teachings  of  the  Apostles''''  (rajv  dTrocrroAojv  at  Acyo/Acvat  3i8axat).     The  plural  form  does 

'  See  Bibliography  at  the  close  of  vol.  viii.,  this  series. 

^  The  Church  Order  \<,  to  be  diblinguishcd  fioiii  the  Ethiojiic  collection  of  .Apostolic  canons;  see  Intioductory  Notice  to  AposioUc 
Constitutions. 


374  INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE. 

not  forbid  a  reference  to  the  work  under  discussion,  since  Athanasius  {d.  373)  has  a  notice  clearly 
pointing  to  the  same  writing,  in  which  he  uses  the  singular  {Feshil  Episile,  39).  Rufinus  {d. 
410)  speaks  of  a  brief  work  called  The  Two  Ways,  or  The  judgment  of  Peter ;  and  this  fact,  in 
view  of  the  contents  of  the  Teaching,  furnishes  one  of  the  most  important  data  for  the  critical 
discussion.  The  last  notice  of  the  leaching  was  made  by  Nicephorus  {d.  82S)  more  than 
two  hundred  years  before  Leon  made  this  copy.  Clement  of  Alexandria  {d.  circa  216)  and 
Irenseus  {fuart.  202)  use  expressions  that  may  indicate  an  acquaintance  with  this  writing.  The 
more  extended  correspondences  with  Barnabas  and  later  disciplinary  works  are  noticed  above 
(sec.  3).  The  existence  of  an  old  Latin  translation  of  the  Teaching,  of  the  tenth  century,  a 
fragment  of  which  has  been  preserved,  furnishes  general  evidence  to  the  authenticity  of  the  Greek 
copy,  but  by  its  variations  suggests  the  presence  of  many  textual  corruptions.  Its  closer  corre- 
spondence with  Barnabas  has  led  to  the  theory  that  the  translator  used  both  documents.  Others 
suppose  that  its  form  points  to  a  document  which  was  the  common  source  of  the  Greek  form  of 
the  Teaching  and  of  Barnabas. 

The  various  theories  based  on  the  above  facts  cannot  even  be  stated.  The  following  positions 
seem,  on  the  whole,  most  tenable  :  — 

1 .  The  Greek  Codex  presents  substantially  the  writing  referred  to  by  Eusebius  and  Athanasius. 

2.  Orting  to  an  absence  of  other  copies,  we  cannot  determine  the  purity  of  the  text ;  but  there 
is  every  probability  of  many  minor  corruptions. 

3.  This  probability  calls  for  care  that  we  do  not  infer  too  much  from  verbal  resemblances. 

4.  The  resemblances  to  book  vii.,  Apostolic  Constitutions,  are,  however,  of  such  a  character 
as  establish,  not  only  a  literary  connection  between  the  two  works,  but  also  the  priority  of  the 
Teaching. 

5.  In  the  case  of  Barnabas,  the  resemblances  can  be  accounted  for  {a')  by  accepting  the  priority 
of  the  Teaching,  or  i^h)  by  assuming  a  common  (earlier  and  unknown)  source,  or  (c)  by  accept- 
ing the  priority  of  Barnabas,  and  assuming  such  corruptions  in  the  Greek  copy  of  the  Teaching 
as  will  account  for  the  supposed  marks  of  its  priority.  Despite  the  general  adoption  of  {a^,  there 
remains  a  strong  probability  that  (/^)  is  the  correct  solution  of  the  problem. 

6.  The  Duce  Vice,  spoken  of  by  Rufinus,  may  be  the  common  source.  We  have  no  positive 
evidence,  but  the  "  two  ways  "  form  so  prominent  a  topic  in  most  of  these  documents  which 
indicate  literary  relationship,  as  to  encourage  this  theory.  If  there  was  a  common  source,  it 
probably  contained  only  matter  similar  to  chaps,  i.-v.,  which  was  variously  used  by  the  sub- 
sequent compilers.  Here  a  number  of  theories  have  been  suggested."  None  of  them,  however, 
necessarily  call  for  a  very  late  date  of  the  Teaching,  or  compel  us  to  deny  that  Eusebius  and 
Athanasius  referred  to  substantially  the  same  work  as  that  now  existing  in  the  Codex  at  Constanti- 
nople. Many  resemblances  have  been  noticed  in  other  works.  Probably  in  the  course  of  a  few 
years  all  the  data  will  have  been  collected,  and  a  well-defined  result  based  upon  them.  But,  even 
in  this  period  of  discussion,  there  is  remarkable  agreement  among  critics  in  regard  to  the  main 
question  of  authenticity. 

SECTION    5.  — TIME   AND   PLACE   OF   COMPOSITION. 

Granting  the  general  authenticity  of  the  Greek  work,  the  time  of  composition  must  be  at  least 
as  early  as  the  first  half  of  the  second  century.  If  the  Teaching  is  older  than  Barnabas,  then  it 
cannot  be  later  than  a.d.  120.  If  both  are  from  a  common  source,  the  interval  of  time  was  prob- 
ably not  very  great.^     The  document  itself  bears  many  marks  of  an  early  date  :  — 

(i)   Its  simplicity,  almost  amounting  to  childishness,  not  only  discountenances  all  idea  of 

'  Compare  the  detailed  discussions  of  Hamack,  Holtzmann,  Warfield,  and  most  recently  McGiffert,  Andover  Review,  vol.  v.  pp. 
430-442. 

^  For  the  various  dates,  see  p.  375. 


INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE.  375 

forgery,  but  points  to  the  sub-apostolic  age,  during  which  Christianity  manifested  this  character- 
istic.    The  fact  is  an  important  one  in  the  discussion  of  the  canon  of  the  New  Testament. 

(2)  The  undeveloped  Christian  thought,  as  well  as  the  indications  of  undeveloped  heresy,' 
confirms  this  position.  Christianity  was  at  first  a  life,  for  which  the  Apostles  furnished  a  basis  of 
revealed  thought.  But  the  Christians  of  the  sub-apostolic  age  had  not  consciously  assimilated 
the  thought  to  any  large  extent,  while  their  ethical  striving  was  stimulated  by  the  gross  sins  sur- 
rounding them.- 

(3)  The  Church  polity  indicated  in  the  Teaching  is  less  developed  than  that  of  the  genuine 
Ignatian  Epistles,  and  shows  the  existence  of  extraordinary  travelling  teachers  (  "  Apostles  "  and 
"  Prophets,"  chap.  xi.).  This  points  to  a  date  not  later  than  the  first  half  of  the  second  century, 
probably  as  early  as  the  first  quarter.^ 

Most  of  these  phenomena  would,  however,  consist  with  a  date  as  late  as  that  of  the  Ignatian 
Epistles  on  the  theory  that  the  Teaching  was  written  for  a  community  of  Christians  in  some 
obscure  locality.  But  this  theory  must  admit  that  there  existed  for  a  long  time  great  variety  of 
Church  polity  and  worship.'*  Of  this  there  is,  indeed,  considerable  evidence.  The  undeveloped 
form  of  the  doctrinal  elements  of  the  work  constitutes  the  most  serious  objection  to  the  theory  of 
a  late  origin.  On  the  other  hand,  it  seems  on  many  accounts  improbable  that  the  work,  in  its 
present  form,  was  written  earlier  than  the  beginning  of  the  second  century:  (i)  Such  a  docu- 
ment would  not  be  penned  during  the  lifetime  of  any  of  the  Apostles.  (2)  There  is  no  allusion 
in  chap.  xvi.  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  If  the  author  was  a  Jewish  Christian,  as  seems 
most  probable,  such  silence  implies  an  interval  of  at  least  one  generation.  (3)  The  position 
of  the  document  in  the  Codex  is  after  the  Clementine  Epistles,  and  before  the  Ignatian.  This 
probably  marks  the  chronological  position.  (4)  The  extreme  simplicity  scarcely  consists  with 
the  view  that  the  author  was  nearly  contemporary  with  the  Apostles. 

Bryennios  and  Harnack  assign,  as  the  date,  between  120  and  160;  Hilgenfeld,  160  and  190; 
English  and  American  scholars  vary  between  a.d.  80  and  1 20.  Until  the  priority  to  Barnabas  is 
more  positively  established,  the  two  may  be  regarded  as  of  the  same  age,  about  1 20,  although  a 
date  slightly  later  is  not  impossible.  All  attempts  to  discover  the  author  are,  with  our  present 
lack  of  data,  necessarily  futile.  Even  the  region  in  and  for  which  it  was  composed  cannot  be 
determined.  Jewish-Christian  tendencies  are  not  sufficiently  indicated  to  warrant  the  assump- 
tion of  a  polemical  aim. 5  The  document  has  been  assigned  to  Alexandria,  to  Antioch,  to 
Jerusalem ;  indeed,  many  other  places  have  been  named.  In  favour  of  the  Syrian  origin 
is  the  literary  connection  with  the  Apostolic  Constitutions,  while  the  correspondences  with  the 
Epistle  to  Barnabas  suggest  Egypt  as  the  locality.  If  the  Teaching  and  Barnabas  have  a  com- 
mon basis,  e.g.,  the  Diice  Via;,  the  last  may  be  assigned  to  Egypt,  and  the  Teaching,  in  its 
present  form,  to  Syria.  The  Palestinian  origin  is  urged  by  those  who  lay  stress  upon  the  absence 
of  Pauline  doctrine  in  the  Teaching.  [If  meant  for  catechumens  only,  this  fact  is  sufficiently 
accounted  for.] 

The  question  is  still  an  open  one. 

As  regards  the  doctrine,  polity,  usages,  and  ethics  expressed  and  implied  in  the  Teaching,  the 
reader  can  judge  for  himself.  The  writer  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  work  represents,  on  many 
of  these  points,  only  a  very  small  fraction  of  the  Christians  during  the  second  century,  and  that, 
while  it  casts  some  light  upon  usages  of  that  period,  it  cannot  be  regarded  as  an  authoritative 
witness  concerning  the  universal  faith  and  practice  of  believers  at  the  date  usually  assigned  to  it. 
The  few  notices  of  it,  and  its  early  disappearance,  confirm  this  position.  The  theory  of  a  com- 
posite origin  also  accords  with  this  estimate  of  the  document  as  a  whole. 

'  [Note  this  mark  of  a  possibly  corrupted  source.] 

2  (See  Apostolic  Fathers, /<zjiv";«.] 

3  [Compare  Rev.  ii.  2  and  9.] 

*  [In  obscure  regions  such  an  admission  is  clearly  consistent  with  apostolic  experience.     Compare  i  Cor.  iv.  16,  17,  xi.  34;  Gal.  iv.  9.] 
5  [Compare  i  John  iv.  i ;  Titus  i.  10.] 


376  INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE. 

The  version  of  the  Teaching  here  given  is  that  of  Professor  Isaac  H.  Hall  and  Mr.  John  T. 
Napier,  which  first  appeared  in  the  Sunday-School  Twies  (Philadelphia),  April  12,  1884.  It 
is  now  republished  by  permission  of  the  editor  of  that  periodical  and  of  the  joint  authors.  A 
few  slight  changes  have  been  made,  some  of  them  in  accordance  with  suggestions  from  Pro- 
fessor Hall,  others  to  indicate  correspondences  with  book  vii.  of  Apostolic  Constitutions. 

The  division  of  verses  agrees  with  that  of  Harnack  as  given  by  Schaff.  The  headings  to  the 
chapters  have  been  inserted  by  the  editor.  The  Scripture  references  have  been  selected  and 
verified.  The  notes  have  been  kept  within  narrow  limits.  They  serve  to  indicate  the  relation 
of  the  matter  to  that  in  other  early  writings,  mainly  the  Apostolic  Constitutions,  and  to  give  vari- 
ous readings  and  renderings.  Occasionally  explanations  and  comments  have  been  inserted.  In 
dealing  with  this,  as  with  most  other  books,  the  best  method  of  study  is  historico-exegetical. 
To  read  the  book  intelligently  is  better  than  to  read  about  it.  The  editor  has  sought  to  furnish 
some  help  in  this  method. 


THE   TEACHING   OF   THE   TWELVE   APOSTLES. 

THE  LORD'S  TEACHING  THROUGH  THE  TWELVE  APOSTLES  TO  THE  NATIONS.' 


CHAP.     I.  —  THE     TWO    WAYS  ;     THE     FIRST     COM- 
MANDMENT. 

1  There  are  two  ways,^  one  of  life  and  one 
of  death ;  ^  but  a  great  difference  between  the 

2  two  ways.  The  way  of  hfe,  then,  is  this  :  First, 
thou  shalt  love  God  •♦  who  made  thee ;  second, 
thy  neighbour  as  thyself;  5  and  all  things  whatso- 
ever thou  wouldst  should  not  occur  to  thee,  thou 

3  also  to  another  do  not  do.*"  And  of  these  say- 
ings 7  the  teaching  is  this  :  Bless  them  that  curse 
you,  and  pray  for  your  enemies,  and  fast  for  them 
that  persecute  you.*^  For  what  thank  is  there, 
if  ye  love  them  that  love  you  ?  Do  not  also  the 
Gentiles  do  the  same? 9  But  do  ye  love  them 
that  hate  you  ;  and  ye  shall  not  have  an  enemy. '° 

4  Abstain  thou  from  fleshly  and  woddly  lusts."  If 
one  give  thee  a  blow  upon  thy  right  cheek,  turn 
to  him  the  other  also  ;  '^  and  thou  shalt  be  per- 
fect. If  one  impress  thee  for  one  mile,  go  with 
him  two. '3  If  one  take  away  thy  cloak,  give  him 
also  thy  coat.'-*  If  one  take  from  thee  thine  own, 
ask  it  not  back,'5  for  indeed  thou  art  not  able. 

5  Give  to  every  one  that  asketh  thee,  and  ask 
it  not  back  ;  '^  for  the  Father  willeth  that  to  all 

'  The  longer  title  is  supposed  to  be  the  original  one:  the  shorter, 
a  popular  abridgment.  The  latter  has  no  real  connection  with  Acts 
ii.  42.  Many  hold  that  the  term  "  nations  "  (or  "  Gentiles  ")  points 
to  a  Jewish  Christian  as  the  author  (so  Bryennios),  though  this  is 
denied  by  others  (so  Urown).  A  similar  diversity  of  opinion  exists 
as  to  the  class  of  readers;  but,  if  the  early  date  is  accepted,  the  more 
probable  theory  is,  that  the  first  part  at  least  of  the  manual  was  for 
the  instruction  of  catechumens  of  Gentile  birth  (so  Bryennios,  Schaff). 
Others  extend  it  to  Gentile  Christians. 

2  This  phrase  connects  the  book  with  the  Duar  Vite  ;  see  Intro- 
ductory Notice.  Barnabas  has  "  light "  and  "  darkness  "  for  "  life  " 
and  "  death." 

3  Deut.  XXX.  IS,  19;  Jer.  xxi.  8;  Matt.  vii.  13,  14. 

■<  Cojnp.  Deut.  vi.  5,  which  is  fully  cited  in  Apostolic  Constitu- 
tions, vii.  2,  though  the  verb  here  is  more  exactly  cited  from  LXX. 

5  Lev.  xix.  18;  Matt.  xxii.  37,  39.     Comp.  Mark  xii.  30,  31. 

6  Comp.  Tobit  iv.  15;  and  Matt.  vii.  12;   Luke  vi.  31. 

7  These  Old-Testament  commands  are  tlius  taught  by  the  Lord. 

8  Malt.  V.  44.  But  the  last  clause  is  added,  and  is  of  unknown 
origin :  not  foimd  in  Apostolic  Constitutions. 

9  Matt.  V.  46,  47:   Luke  vi.  32.     The  two  passages  are  combined. 
•°  So  Apostolic  Constitutions.     Comp.  i  Pet.  iii'.  13. 

"  I  Pet.  ii.  II.  The  Codex  has  <7u>naTiKu)^,  "  bodily;  "but editors 
correct  to  koktijlikuiv. 

^-  Matt.  v.  39;   Luke  vi.  29. 

'^  Matt.  V.  41. 

'^  Matt.  v.  40;   Luke  vi.  29. 

"  _I-Vke  vi.  30.  The  last  clause  is  a  peculiar  addition;  "  art  not 
able,"  since  thou  art  a  Christian;  otherwise  it  is  a  commonplace  ob- 
servation. 

">  Luke  yi.  30.  The  rest  of  the  sentence  is  explained  by  the  paral- 
lel passage  in  Apostolic  Constitutions,  which  cites  Matt.  v.  45. 


should  be  given  of  our  own  blessings  (free  gifts)  .'7 
Happy  is  he  that  giveth  according  to  the  com- 
mandment ;  for  he  is  guikless.  Woe  to  him  that 
receiveth  ;  for  if  one  having  need  receiveth,  he  is 
guiltless  ;  but  he  that  receiveth  not  having  need, 
shall  pay  the  penalty,  why  he  received  and  for 
what,  and,  coming  into  straits  (confinement),'^ 
he  shall  be  examined  concerning  the  things 
which  he  hath  done,  and  he  shall  not  escape 
thence  until  he  pay  back  the  last  farthing. "?  But 
also  now  concerning  this,  it  hath  been  said.  Let 
thine  alms  sweat -°  in  thy  hands,  until  thou  know 
to  whom  thou  shouldst  give. 


CU.AP.  II. 


•  THE    second    COMM.^NDMENT  :    GROSS 
SIN    FORBIDDEN. 


And  the  second  commandment  of  the  Teach-  i 
ing ;  Thou  shalt  not  commit  murder,  thou  shalt  2 
not  commit  adultery,^^  thou  shalt  not  commit 
pasderasty,^^  thou  shalt  not  commit  fornication, 
thou  shalt  not  steal,^-*  thou  shalt  not  practise 
magic,  thou  shalt  not  practise  witchcraft,  thou 
shalt  not  murder  a  child   by  abortion   nor  kill 
that  which  is  begotten. ^5     Thou  shalt  not  covet 
the  things  of  thy  neighbour,^^  thou  shalt  not  for-  3 
swear  thyself,^^  thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness,-* 
thou  shalt  not  speak   evil,  thou   shalt  bear  no 
grudge.^9    Thou  shalt  not  be  double-minded  nor  4 
double-tongued ;  for  to  be  double-tongued  is  a 


'^  Bryennios  finds  a  parallel  (or  citation)  in  Hennas,  Command- 
ment Second,  p.  20,  vol.  ii.  Ante-Niccne  Fathers.  The  remainder 
of  this  chapter  has  no  parallel  in  Apostolic  Constitutions. 

•^  Or.  kv  <!vvo\r\.     Probably  =  imprisonment;  see  next  clause. 

'9  Matt.  V.  26. 

^°  Codex:  iSpioToTo),  which  in  this  connection  is  unintelligible. 
Bryennios  corrects  into  iipuxraro),  rendered  as  above.  There  are 
various  other  conjectural  emendations.  The  verse  probably  forbids 
indiscriminate  charity,  pointing  to  an  early  abuse  of  Christian  liber- 
ality. 

2'  The  chapter,  except  this  opening  sentence  and  part  of  verse  7, 
is  found  in  Apostolic  Constitutions,  vii.  2-5;  but  the  precepts  are 
separated  and  enlarged  upon. 

^^  Ex.  XX.  13,  14. 

^3  Or,  "  corrupt  boys,"  as  in  the  version  o(  Apostolic  Constitutions. 

'*  Ex.  XX.  15. 

25  Comp.  Ex.  xxi.  22,  23.  The  Codex  reads  yevv-qSivra,  which 
Schaff  renders  "  the  new-born  child."  Bryennios  substitutes  yivvr\- 
div,  which  is  accepted  by  most  editors,  and  rendered  as  above. 

2*  Ex.  XX.  17. 

2'  Matt.  V.  34. 

=«  Ex.  XX.  16. 

29  Rendered  "nor  shall  thou  be  mindful  of  injuries"  in  version 
of  Apostolic  Constitutions. 


37^ 


THE   TEACHING    OF   THE   TWELVE   APOSTLES. 


5  snare  of  death.'     Thy  speech  shall  not  be  false, 

6  nor  empty,  but  fulfilled  by  deed.^'  Thou  shalt 
not  be  covetous,  nor  rapacious,  nor  a  hypocrite, 
nor  evil  disposed,  nor  haughty.     Thou  shalt  not 

7  take  evil  counsel  against  thy  neighbour.^  Thou 
shalt  not  hate  any  man ;  but  some  thou  shalt 
reprove,-'  and  concerning  some  thou  shalt  pray, 
and  some  thou  shalt  love  more  than  thy  own 
life.5 

CHAP.    III.^ OTHER    SINS    FORBIDDEN. 

1  My  child, 7  flee  from  every  evil  thing,  and  from 

2  every  likeness  of  it.  Be  not  prone  to  anger,  for 
anger  leadeth  the  way  to  murder ;  neither  jeal- 
ous, nor  quarrelsome,  nor  of  hot  temper;    for 

3  out  of  all  these  murders  are  engendered.  My 
child,  be  not  a  lustful  one  ;  for  lust  leadeth  the 
way  to  fornication ;  neither  a  filthy  talker,  nor 
of  lofty  eye  ;  for  out  of  all  these  adulteries  are 

4  engendered.  My  child,  be  not  an  observer  of 
omens,  since  it  leadeth  the  way  to  idolatry ; 
neither  an  enchanter,  nor  an  astrologer,  nor  a 
purifier,  nor  be  willing  to  look  at  these  things  ; 

5  for  out  of  all  these  idolatry  is  engendered.  My 
child,  be  not  a  liar,  since  a  lie  leadeth  the  way 
to  theft ;  neither  money-loving,  nor  vainglorious, 

6  for  out  of  all  these  thefts  are  engendered.  My 
child,  be  not  a  murmurer,  since  it  leadeth  the 
way  to  blasphemy  ;  neither  self-willed  nor  evil- 
minded,  for  out  of  all  these  blasphemies  are  en- 

7  gendered.     But  be  thou  meek,  since  the  meek 
S  shall  inherit  the  earth. ^     Be  long-suffering  and 

pitiful  and  guileless  and  gentle  and  good  and 
always  treml^ling  at  the  words  which  thou  hast 

9  heard. 9  Thou  shalt  not  exalt  thyself,'"  nor  give 
over-confidence  to  thy  soul.  Thy  soul  shall  not 
be  joined  with  lofty  ones,  but  with  just  and  lowly 

10  ones  shall  it  have  its  intercourse.  The  workings 
that  befall  thee  receive  as  good,  knowing  that 
apart  from  God  nothing  cometh  to  pass." 

CHAP.    IV. '^ VARIOUS    PRECEPTS. 

I  My  child,  him  that  speaketh  to  thee  the  word 
of  God   remember  night   and    day ;    and    thou 

*  So  Barnabas,  xix. 

2  Verse  5,  except  the  first  clause,  occurs  only  here. 

3  Latter  half  of  verse  6  in  Barnabas,  xix. 

*  Lev.  xix.  17;   Apostolic  Constitutions. 

5  Or,  "  soul."  The  last  part  of  the  clause  is  found  in  Barnabas; 
but  "  and  concerning  some  .  .  .  pray,  and  some"  has  no  parallel. 
An  interesting  verse  in  its  literary  history. 

*  About  one-half  of  the  matter  of  this  chapter  is  to  be  foimd,  in 
well-nigh  the  same  order,  scattered  through  Apostolic  Constitutions, 
vii.  6-8.  The  precepts  are  aimed  at  minor  sins,  and  require  no  par- 
ticular comment.  This  chapter  has  the  largest  number  of  Greek 
words  not  found  in  the  New  I'estament. 

'  The  address  "  my  child"  does  not  occur  in  the  parallel  passages. 

8  Matt.  v.  5. 

9  Isa.  Ixvi.  2,  5;  Apostolic  Constitutions,  vii.  8. 
'°  Comp   Luke  xviii.  14. 

"  Ecclus.  ii.  4.  So  Brj-ennios.  Comp.  last  part  of  Apostolic 
Constitutions,  vii.  8. 

'^  This  chapter,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  clauses  and  words,  is 
found  in  Apostolic  Constitutions,  vii.  9-17.  There  are  verbal  varia- 
tions, but  the  order  is  exact.  In  Barnabas  not  so  much  of  the  matter 
is  found.  There  is,  however,  even  greater  verbal  agreement  in  many 
cases,  though  the  order  is  quite  different.  Two  important  clauses 
(verses  8,  14)  find  an  exact  parallel  only  in  Barnabas.  One  phrase 
is  peculiar  to  the  Teaching ;  see  ver.  14. 


shalt  honour  him  as  the  Lord  ;  '^  for  /«  the  place 
whence  lordly  rule  is  uttered,'-*  there  is  the  Lord. 
And  thou  shalt  seek  out  day  by  day  the  faces  of  2 
the  saints,  in  order  that  thou  mayest  rest  upon  '5 
their  words.     Thou  shalt  not  long  for  '^  division,  3 
but  shalt  bring   those  who   contend   to   peace. 
Thou   shalt  judge   righteously,    thou   shalt   not 
respect  persons  in  reproving  for  transgressions. 
Thou  shalt  not  be  undecided  whether  it  shall  be  4 
or  no. '7     Be  not  a  stretcher  forth  of  the  hands  5 
to  receive  and  a  drawer  of  them  back  to  give.'^ 
If  thou  hast  aught,  through  thy  hands  thou  shalt  6 
give  ransom  for  thy  sins."^     Thou  shalt  not  hesi-  7 
tate  to  give,  nor  murmur  when  thou  givest ;  for 
thou  shalt  know  who  is  the  good  repayer  of  the 
hire.     Thou  shalt  not  turn  away  from  him  that  8 
is  in  want,  but  thou  shalt  share  all  things  with 
thy  brother,  and  shalt  not  say  that  they  are  thine 
own  ;    for  if  ye  are  partakers  in  that  which  is 
immortal,  how  much  more  in  things  which  are 
mortal  ?  -°    Thou  shalt  not  remove  thy  hand  from  9 
thy  son   or  from   thy  daughter,  but   from   their 
youth  shalt  teach  them  the  fear  of  God.^'     Thou  10 
shalt  not  enjoin  aught  in  thy  bitterness  upon  thy  - 
bondman  or  niaidser\'ant,  who  hope  in  the  same 
God,  lest  ever  they  shall  fear  not  God  who  is 
over  both  ;^^  for  he  cometh  not  to  call  according 
to  the  outward  appearance,  but  unto  them  whom 
the  Spirit  hath  prepared.     And  ye  bondmen  shall  n 
be  subject  to  your^^  masters  as  to  a  type  of  God, 
in  modesty  and  fear.^-*     Thou  shalt  hate  all  hy-  12 
pocrisy  and  everything  which  is  not  pleasing  to 
the  Lord.     Do  thou  in  no  wise  forsake  the  com- 
mandments of  the  Lord ;   but  thou  shalt  keep 
what  thou  hast  received,  neither  adding  thereto 
nor  taking  away  therefrom. ^'^     In  the  church  ^^ 
thou  shalt  acknowledge  thy  transgressions,  and 
thou    shalt    not    come    near    for    thy    prayer  ^7 
with  an  evil  conscience.^^     This  is  the  way  of 
life.^9 


13 


'3  Comp.  Heb.  xiii.  7.  In  Apostolic  Constitutions  there  is  a 
transposition  of  words. 

■■»  Schaff:  "  The  Lordship  is  spoken  of."  Apostolic  Constitutions, 
"  where  the  doctrine  concerning  God  is,"  etc. 

'5  Or,  "acquiesce  in"  {Apostolic  Constitutions). 

'^  Some  read  n-oi^crei?,  "  make,"  as  in  Apostolic  Constitutions 
and  Barnabas,  instead  of  Trofl^crei?,  Codex. 

'7  Comp.  Ecclus.  i.  28.  The  verse  occurs  in  Barnabas;  and  m 
Apostolic  Constitutions  "  in  thy  prayer"  is  inserted,  which  is  proba- 
bly the  .sense  here. 

'^  Ecclus.  iv.  31.  The  Greek  word  (rva-iroiv  occurs  here  and  in 
Barnabas,  but  not  in  Apostolic  Constitutions. 

'9  Apostolic  Constitutions  adds,  in  exphtnation,  Prov.  xvi.  6. 

20  Comp.  Acts  iv.  32;  Rom.  xv.  27.  The  latter  half  of  the  verse 
is  in  Barnabas  (not  in  Apostolic  Constitutions),  but  with  the  sub- 
stitution of  "  incorruptible  "  and  "  corruptible." 

-'  Comp.  Eph.  vi.  4. 

22  Comp.  Eph.  vi.  9;  Col.  iv.  i. 

23  Codex  reads  "  our  ;  "  editors  correct  to  "  your." 

24  Comp.  Eph.  vi.  5;  Col.  iii.  22. 

25  Lieut,  xii.  32. 

26  "  In  the  congregation;  "  i.e.,  assembly  of  believers.  This  phrase 
is  omitted  in  both  Barnabas  and  Apostolic  Constitutions.  Comp. 
Jas.  V.  16. 

27  Or,  "  to  \}!\y  place  0/  prayer  "  (Schaff). 

28  .So  Barnabas;  but  Apostolic  Constitutions,  "  in  the  day  of  thy 
bittterness." 

29  So  Apostolic  Constitutions  j  but  Barnabas,  "  the  way  of  light." 
See  note  on  chap.  i.  i. 


THE    TEACHING    OF    THE    TWELVE    ArOSTLES. 


79 


CHAP.    V. 


•THE    WAY    OF    DEATH. 


1  And  the  way  of  death  ^  is  this  :  First  of  all  it  is 
evil  and  full  of  curse  :  ^- murders/  adulteries, 
lusts,  fornications,  thefts,  idolatries,  magic  arts, 
witchcrafts,  rapines,  false  witnessings,  h\'pocrisies, 
double-heartedness,  deceit,  haughtiness,  deprav- 
ity, self-will,  greediness,  filthy  talking,  jealousy, 

2  over-confidence,  loftiness,  boastfulness ;  perse- 
cutors of  the  good, 5  hating  truth,  loving  a  lie, 
not  knowing  a  reward  for  righteousness,  not 
cleaving^  to  good  nor  to  righteous  judgment, 
v\'atching  not  for  that  which  is  good,  but  for  that 
which  is  evil ;  from  whom  meekness  and  endur- 
ance are  far,  loving  vanities,  pursuing  requital, 
not  pitying  a  poor  man,  not  labouring  for  the^f- 
flicted,  not  knowing  Him  that  made  them,  mur- 
derers of  children,  destroyers  of  the  handiwork 
of  God,  turning  away  from  him  that  is  in  want, 
afflicting  him  that  is  distressed,  advocates  of  tlie 
rich,  lawless  judges  of  the  poor,  utter  sinners.'' 
Be  delivered,  children,  from  all  these.^ 

CHAP.  VI.^ AGAINST    FALSE   TEACHERS,    AND    FOOD 

OFFERED    TO    IDOLS. 

1  See  that  no  one  cause  thee  to  err  '°  from  this 
way  of  the  Teaching,  since  apart  from  God  it 

2  teacheth  thee.  '  For  if  thou  art  able  to  bear  all 
the  yoke  "  of  the  Lord,  thou  wilt  be  perfect ;  but 
if  thou  art  not  able,  what  thou  art  al)le  that  do. 

3  And  concerning  food,'=  bear  what  thou  art  able  ; 
but  against  that  which  is  sacrificed  to  idols'^  be 
exceedingly  on  thy  guard ;  for  it  is  the  service 
of  dead  gods.''* 


^~) 


'  This  chapter  finds  nearly  exact  parallels  in  Barnnhns,  xx.,  and 
Apostolic  Constitutions,  vii.  i8,  but  with  curious  variations. 

2  Barnabas  has  '  darkness,"  but  afterwards  "  way  of  eternal 
death." 

3  Not  in  Apostolic  Constitutions,  and  no  ex.act  parallel  in  Barna- 
bas 

*  Of  the  twenty-two  sins  named  in  this  verse,  Baruahas  gives 
fourteen,  in  differing  order,  and  in  the  singular:  Apostolic  Constitu- 
tions gWe^M  but  one  ("i>o?,  "  loftiness,"  "  haughtiness  ") ,  in  the  same 
order,  and  with  the  same  change  from  plural  to  singular. 

5  This  verse  appears  almost  word  for  word  in  Barnalias,  whh  two 
additional  clauses 

b  The  Apostolic  Constitutions  give  a  parallel  from  this  point; 
verbally  exact  from  the  phrase,  "  not  for  that  which  is  good." 

7  The  word  n-in-Sa/iaprrjrot  occurs  only  here,  and  in  the  parallel 
passage  in  Barnabas  (rendered  in  this  edition  "  who  are  in  every 
respect  transgressors,"  vol.  i.  p.  149),  and  in  Apostolic  Constitutions 
(rendered  "  full  of  sin").  A  similar  term  occurs  in  the  recently  re- 
covered portion  of  2  Clement,  xviii.,  where  Bishop  Lightfoot  renders, 
as  above,  "  an  utter  sinner." 

8  Found  verbatim  in  Apostolic  Constitutions,  not  in  Barnabas; 
with  the  latter  there  is  no  further  parallel,  except  a  few  phrases  in 
chap.  xvi.  2,  3  (which  see). 

9  Of  this  chapter,  two  phrases  and  one  entire  clause  are  found  in 
Apostolic  Constitutions,  vii.  19-21. 

■°  Comp.  Matt.  xxiv.  4  (Greek);  Revised  Version,  "lead  you 
astray:  "  Apostolic  Constitutions,  vii.  19. 

"  Or,  "  the  whole  yoke."  Those  who  accept  the  Jewish-Christian 
authorship  refer  this  to  the  ceremonial  law.  It  seems  quite  as  likely 
lo  mean  ascetic  regulations.  Of  these  there  are  many  traces,  even  in 
the  New-Testament  churches. 

'^  Apostolic  Constitutions,  vii.  20,  begins  with  a  similar  phrase,  but 
is  explicitly  against  asceticism  in  this  respect.  The  precepts  here  do 
not  indicate  any  such  spirit  as  that  opposeil  by  Paul. 

'3  Comp,  Acts  XV.  20,  29:  I  Cor.  viii.  4,  etc.,  x.  18,  etc.  (Rom. 
xiv  20  refers  to  ascetic  abstinence  )  This  prohibition  had  a  neces- 
sary permanence;  comp.  Apostolic  Constitutions,  vii.  21. 

'*  Comp.  the  same  phrase  in  2  Clement,  iii.  This  chapter  closes 
the  first  part  of  the  I'eaching,  that  supposed  to  be  intended  for 
catechumens.  The  absence  of  doctrinal  statement  does  not  necessa- 
rily prove  the  existence  of  a  circle  of  Gentile  Christians  where  the 


CHAP.    VII.  —  CONCERNING    BAPTISM. 

And  concerning  baptism, '5  thus  baptize  ye  :  '^ 
Having  first  said  all  these  things,  baptize  into 
the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of 
the  Holy  Spirit, '?  in  living  water. '*^  But  if  thou 
have  not  living  water,  baptize  into  other  water ; 
and  if  thou  canst  not  in  cold,  in  warm.  But  if 
thou  have  not  either,  pour  out  water  thrice  '9  upon 
the  head  into  the  name  of  Father  and  Son  and 
Holy  Spirit.  But  before  the  baptism  let  the 
baptizer  fast,  and  the  baptized,  and  whatever 
others  can  ;  but  thou  shalt  order  the  baptized  to 
fast^  one  or  two  days  before. ^°  j 


chap.  viii. ^' concerning  fasting  .-^nd  prayer 

(the  lord's  prayer). 
But  let  not  your  fasts  be  with  the  hypocrites  ;  ^^  i 
for  they  fast  on  the  second  and  fifth  day  of  the 
week ;    but    do  ye   fast  on  the  fourth  day  and 
the  Preparation  (Friday). ^^     Neither  pray  as  the  2~\ 
hypocrites  ;  but  as  the  Lord  commanded  in  His 
Gospel, ^-^    thus  pray :    Our   Father   who    art    in 
heaven,  hallowed  be  Thy  name.     Thy  kingdom 
come.     Thy  will  be  done,  as  in  heaven,  so  on 
earth.       Give    us    to-day   our   daily    (needful) 
bread,^5  and  forgive  us  our  debt  as  we  also  forgive 
our  debtors.     And  bring  us  not  into  temptation, 
but  deliver  us  from  the  evil  one  (or,  evil)  ;  for 
Thine  is   the  power  and   the  glory  for  ever.^'' 
Thrice  in  the  day  thus  pray.-?  3 

ch.ap.  ix.-^  —  the  th.anksgiving  (eucharist). 
Now  concerning    the   Thanksgiving '(Eucha-  i 
rist),  thus  give   thanks.     First,  concerning    the  2 


Pauline  theology  was  unknown.  If  such  a  circle  existed,  emphasizing 
the  ethical  side  of  Christianity  to  the  exclusion  of  its  doctrinal  basis, 
it  disappeared  very  soon.  From  the  nature  ol  the  case,  that  kind  of 
Christianity  is  intellectually  weak  and  necessarily  short-lived. 

'5  Verse  i  is  found,  well-nigh  entire,  in  Apostolic  Constitutions,  vii. 
22,  but  besides  this  only  a  few  words  of  verses  2  and  4.  The  chapter 
has  naturally  called  out  much  discussion  as  to  the  mode  of  baptism. 

">  [Elucidation  I.] 

"■  Matt,  xxviii.  19. 

'5  VrohvihXy  running  ivater. 

■9  The  previous  verses  point  to  immersion:  this  permits  pouring 
in  certain  cases,  which  indicates  that  this  mode  was  not  unknown. 
The  trine  application  of  the  water,  and  its  being  poured  on  the  head, 
are  both  significant.  ^ 

-°  The  fasting  of  the  baptized  is  enjoined  in  Apostolic  Constitu- 
tions, but  that  of  the  baptizer  (and  others)  is  peculiar  to  this  document.     , 

-■  The  entire  chapter  is  found  almost  verbatim  in  Apostolic  Con-^' 
stitutions,  vii    23,  24. 

--  Comp.  .Matt.  vi.  t6. 

-3  The  reasons  for  fasting  on  Wednesday  and  Friday  are  given  in 
Apostolic  Constitutions  (the  days  of  betrayal  and  of  burial) .  Monday 
and  Thursday  were  the  Jewish  fast-days.  The  word  "  Preparation" 
(day  before  the  Jewish  sabbath)  occurs  in  Matt,  .\xvii.  62,  etc.,  and 
for  some  time  retained  a  place  in  Christian  literature. 

*■»  Matt.  vi.  s,  9-13.  This  form  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  is  evidently 
cited  from  Matthew,  not  from  Luke.  The  textual  variations  are  slight. 
The  citation  is  of  im])ortance,  as  proving  that  the  writer  used  this 
Gospel,  and  that  the  liturgical  use  of  the  Lord's  Prayer  was  commoti. 

•^5  On  this  phrase,  comp.  Revised  Version,  Matt.  vi.  11;  Luke  xi. 
3  (text,  margin,  and  American  appendix). 

-''  The  variation  in  the  form  of  the  doxology  confirms  the  judg- 
ment of  textual  criticism,  which  omits  it  in  Matt.  vi.  13.  All  early 
littirgical  literature  tends  in  the  same  direction;  comp.  Apostolic 
Constitutions,  vii.  24. 

27  This  is  in  accordance  with  Jewish  usage.  Dan.  vi.  10;  Ps.  Iv. 
17.    Comp.  Acts  iii.  i,  x.  9. 

-5  The  eucharistic  prayers  of  this  and  the  following  chapter  are 
only  partiallyreproduccd  m  Apostolic  Constitutiuits,  vii.  25,  26;  that 
of  verse  2  has  no  parallel. 


iSo 


THE   TEACHING    OF    THE    TWELVE   APOSTLES. 


cup  :  •  We  thank  thee,  our  Father,  for  the  holy 
j-ine  of  David  Thy  ser\-ant,-  which  Thou  madest 
known  to  us  through  Jesus  Thy  Servant ;  to  Thee 

3  be  the  glory  for  ever.  And  concerning  the  broken 
bread :  ^  We  thank  Thee,  our  Father,  for  the  life 
and  knowledge  which  Thou  niadest  known  to  us 
through  Jesus  Thy  Servant ;  to  Thee  be  the  glory 

4  for  ever.  CEven  as  this  broken  bread  was  scat- 
tered over \he  hills/  and  was  gathered  together 
and  became  one,  so  let  Thy  Church  be  gathered 
together  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  into  Thy 
kingdom  ;  5  for  Thine  is  the  glory  and  the  power 

5  through  Jesus  Christ  for  ever.  vBut  let  no  one 
eat  or  drink  of  your  Thanksgiving  (Eucharist), 
but  they  who  have  been  baptj_zed  into  the  name 
of  the  Lord  ;  for  coiicerning  this  also  the  Lord 
hath  said,  Give  not  that  which  is  holy  to  the 
dogs.^  / 

CHAP.  X.7 PR.AYER    AFTER    COMMUNION. 

1  But  after  ye   are    filled,^  thus   give   thanks : 

2  We  thank  Thee,  holy  Father,  for  Thy  holy  name 
which  Thou  didst  cause  to  tabernacle  in  our 
hearts,  and  for  the  knowledge  and  faith  and  im- 
mortality, which  Thou  madest  known  to  us 
throug'h  Jesus  Thy  Servant ;  to  Thee  be  the  glory 

3  for  ever.  Thou,  Master  almighty,  didst  create 
all  things  for  Thy  name's  sake  ;  Thou  gavest 
food  and  drink  to  men  for  enjoyment,  that 
they  might  give  thanks  to  Thee ;  but  to  us 
Thou  didst  freely  give  spiritual  food  and  drink 

4  and  life  eternal  through  Thy  Servant.''  Before  all 
things  we  thank  Thee  that  Thou  art  mighty ;  to 

5  Thee  be  the  glory  for  ever.  Remember,  Lord, 
Thy  Church,  to  deliver  it  from  all  evil  and  to 
make  it  perfect  in  Thy  love,  and  gather  it  from 
the  four  winds,  sanctified  for  Thy  kingdom  which 
Thou  hast  prepared  for  it ; '°   for  Thine  is  the 

6  power  and  the  glory  for  ever.     Let  grace  come, 


'  This  is  a  variation  from  the  order  of  the  New  Testament  and 
of  all  liturgies:  probably  this  led  to  its  omission  in  Apostolic  Consti- 
tutions. The  word  "for"  may  be  substituted  for  "concerning" 
here  and  in  verse  3.     [Possibly  a  response  for  recipients.] 

^  Peculiar  to  this  passage,  but  derived  from  a  common  scriptural 
figure  and  from  the  paschal  formula.  Comp.  especially  John  xv.  i ; 
Matt.  xxvi.  29;   Mark  xiv.  23. 

3  The  word  xAacrna  is  found  in  the  accounts  of  the  feeding  of  the 
multitude  (Matt.  xiv.  20,  xv.  37,  and  parallels);  it  was  naturally 
applied  to  the  broken  bread  of  the  Eucharist. 

*  This  reference  to  "  hills,"  or  "  mountains,"  is  used  as  an  argu- 
ment against  the  Egyptian  origin  of  the  Teaching. 

5  This  part  of  the  verse  is  found  in  Apostolic  Constitutions. 
Schaff  properly  calls  attention  to  the  distinction  here  made  between 
"  Thy  Church  "  and  "  Thy  kingdom." 

6  Matt.  vii.  6. 

7  This  post-communion  thanksgiving  is  found  in  Apostolic  Con- 
stitutions, vii.  26,  but  with  many  omissions,  alterations,  and  additions. 
Still,  the  correspondence  in  thought  and  language  is  very  remarkable. 
Schafif  cites  a  similar  prayer  at  the  Passover  (after  the  Hallel  cup). 

*  "  After  the  participation'  {Apostolic  Constitutions)  points  to  a 
distinct  eucharistic  service.  Here  the  Lord's  .Supper  is  evidently 
connected  with  the  Agape  (a  noteworthy  suggestion] ;  comp.  i  Cor. 
xi.  20-22,  33  This  is  an  evidence  of  early  d.ite;  comp,  Justin  Mar- 
tyr, Apol.,  i.  chaps.  64-66,  where  the  Lord's  .Supper  is  shown  to  be 
distinct  {Ante-Nicenc  Fathers,  i.  pp.  185,  186). 

9  This  last  clause  has  no  parallel  in  Apostolic  Consfitutions,  and 
points  to  an  earlier  and  more  spiritual  conception  of  the  Eucharist. 
Verse  4  also  is  peculiar  to  this  passage. 

'°  The  above  rendering  follows  P>ryennios;  that  of  Harnack  (for- 
merly accepted  by  Hall  and  .N'apier)  is:  "  Gather  it,  sanctified,  from 
the  (our  winds,  into  Thy  kingdom,"  etc.  The  phrase  "  from  the  four 
winds"  recalls  Malt*,  xxiv.  31. 


and  let  this  world  pass  away."     Hosanna  to  the 
(_lodj(Son)  '^  of  David  !     If  any  one  is  holy,  let 
him  come  ;  if  any  one  is  not  so,  let  him  repent.'^ 
Maran  atha..'/     Amen.  .^But  i:>ermit  the  prophets  7 
to  make  Thanksgiving  as  much  as  they  desire.'^ 

CHAP,     XL'^ CONCERNING     TEACHERS,     APOSTLES, 

AND    PROPHETS. 

Whosoever,  therefore,    cometh    and  teacheth  1 
you  all  these  things  that  have  been  said  before, 
receive  him.'^     But  if  the  teacher  himself  turn'"^  2 
and  teach  another  doctrine  to  the  destruction 
of  this,  hear  him  not ;  but  if  he  teach  so  as  to 
increase  righteousness  and  the  knowledge  of  the 
Lord,  receive  him  as  the  Lord.     But  concern-  3 
ing  the  apostles  and  prophets,  according  to  the 
decree  of  the  Gospel,  thus  do.    Let  every  apostle  4 
that  cometh  to  you  be  received  as  the  Lord.'^ 
But  he  shall  not  remain  except  one  day ;  but  if  5 
there  be  need,  also  the  next ;  but  if  he  remain 
three  days,  he  is  a  false  prophet.     And  when  the  6 
ajDostle  goeth  away,  let   him  take  nothing  but 
biead  until  he  lodgeth  ;  ^°  but  if  he  ask  money, 
he  is  a  false  prophet.     And  every  prophet  that  7 
sj^eaketh  in  the  Spirit^'  ye  shall  neither  try  nor 
judge;  for  every  sin  shall  be  forgiven,  bu_t^_this 
sin  shall  not  be  forgiven. ^^     But  not  every  one  8 
that  speaketh  in  the  Spirit  is  a  prophet ;  but  only 
if  he  hold  the  ways  of  the  Lord.  ,  Therefore  from 
their  ways  shall  the  false  prophet  and  the  prophet 
be  known.  /  And  every  prophet  who  ordereth  _aj 
meal  -^  in  the  Spirit   eateth  not  from  it,  except 
indeed  he  be  a  false  prophet ;  and  every  prophet  10 
who  teacheth  the  truth,  if  he  do  not  what  he 
teacheth,  is  a  false  prophet.     And  every  prophet,  n 
proved  true,^-*  working  unto  the  mystery  of  the 
Church  in  the  vvorld,^5  yet  not  teaching  others  to 


"  This  is  peculiar;  but  comp.  i  Cor.  vii.  31  for  the  last  clause. 

'^  The  Codex  reads  t<u  6eu>,  wliich  Bryennios  alters  to  top  iiieo. 
The  former  is  the  more  difficult  reailing,  and  is  defended  by  Harnack. 

'■^  This  exhortation  indicates  a  mixed  assembly;  comp.  Apostolic 
Constitutions.     [If  so,  it  belongs  to  the  Agape.\ 
—    '*  I  Cor.  xvi.  22,  Revised  Version,  margin:      That  is,  our  Lord 
cometh."    Comp.  Rev.  xxii.  20. 

■5  A  limitation  as  compared  with  T  Cor.  xiv.  29,  31,  and  yet  indi- 
cating a  combination  of  extemporaneous  devotion  with  the  liturgical 
form.     The  verse  prepares  the  way  for  the  next  chapter. 

"'  The  Apostolic  Constitutiotis  (vii.  27)  present  scarcely  any  par- 
allel to  this  chapter,  which  points  to  an  earlier  period,  when  ecclesi- 
astical polity  was  less  developed,  and  the  travellmg  "  Apostles"  and 
"  Prophets  '  here  spoken  of  were  numerous.      [Elucidation  II.] 

■'  This  refers  to  all  teachers,  more  fully  described  afterwards. 

'8  Lit.  "  being  turned;  "  i.e.,  turned  from  the  truth,  perverted. 

■9  Matt.  x.  40.  The  mention  of  apostles  here  has  caused  much 
discussion,  but  there  are  many  indications  that  travelling  evangelists 
were  thus  termed  for  some  time  after  the  apostolic  age.  Bishop 
I.ightfoot  has  shown,  that,  even  in  the  New  Testament,  a  looser  use 
of  the  term  applied  it  to  others  than  the  Twelve.  Comp.  Rom.  xvi. 
7;  I  Cor.  XV.  5,  7  (?);  Gal.  i.  19;  i  Thess.  ii.  6:  also,  as  applied  to 
Barnabas,  Acts  xiv.  4,  14. 

2°  Reach  a  place  where  he  can  lodge. 

2'  Under  the  influence  of  the  charismatic  gift  spoken  of  in  i  Cor. 
xii.  3,  xiv.  2.     Another  indication  of  an  early  date. 

2-  Probably  a  reference  to  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Spirit.  Matt, 
xii.  31,  32;   Mark  iii.  29,  30. 

=3  Probably  a  love-feast,  commanded  by  the  prophet  in  liis  peculiar 
utterance. 

^*  aAijflii'O?,  "genuine." 

-5  noiuiv  eis  /ai>o-T7Jpiof  KoafxiKov  eicKArjo-io?,  "working  unto  a 
worldly  mystery  of  (the)  Church,"  or  "  making  assemblies  for  a 
worldly  mystery."  Either  rendering  is  grammatical:  neither  is  very 
intelligible.     Ihe  paraphrase  in  the  above  version  presents  one  lead- 


THE   TEACHING   OF   THE   TWELVE   APOSTLES. 


381 


do  what  he  himself  doeth,  shall  not  be  judged 
among  you,  for  with  God  he  hath  his  judgment ; 
12  for  so  did  also  the  ancient  prophets.  But  who- 
ever saith  in  the  Spirit,  Give  me  money,  or 
something  else,  ye  shall  not  hsten  to  him ;  but 
if  he  saith  to  you  to  give  for  others'  sake  who 
are  in  need,  let  no  one  judge  him. 


CHAP.    XII. 


RECEPTION    OF    CHRISTIANS. 


1  But  let  every  one  that  cometh  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord  be  received,^  and  afterward  ye  shall 
prove  and  know  him ;  for  ye  shall  have  under- 

2  standing  right  and  left.  If  he  who  cometh  is  a 
wayfarer,  assist  him  as  far  as  ye  are  able  ;  but 
he  shall  not  remain  witli  you,  except  for  two  or 

3  three  days,  if  need  be.  But  if  he  vvilleth  to  abide 
with  you,  being  an  artisan,  let  him  work  and  eat  ;3 

4  but  if  he  hath  no  trade,  according  to  your  under- 
standing see  to  it  that,  as  a  Christian, ■♦  he  shall 

5  not  live  with  you  jdle.  But  if  he  willeth  not  so 
to  do,  he  is  a  Christ-_monger.5  Watch  that  ye 
keep  aloof  from  such.  1 


CHAP.    XIII.° 


SUPPORT   OF   PROPHETS. 


1  But  every  true  prophet  that  willeth  to  abide 

2  among  you  ?  is  worthy  of  his_ support.**  So  also 
a  true  teacher  is  himself  worthy,  as  the  workman, 

3  of  his  support.''  ^  Every  first-fruit,  therefore,  of 
the  products  of  wine-press  and  threshing-floor, 
of  oxen  and  of  sheep,  thou  shalt  take  and  give 
to  the  prophets,  for  they  are  your  high  priests.'" 

4  But  if  ye  have  not  a  prophet,  give  it  to  the  poor. 

5  If  thou  makest  a  batch  of  dough,  take  the  first- 
fruit  and  give  according  to  the  commandment. 


ing  view  of  this  difficult  passage:  the  mystery  is  the  Church,  and  a 
worldly  one,  because  the  Church  is  in  the  world.  The  other  leading 
view  joins  €<KA>)cria?  (as  accusative)  with  noiuiv,  "  making  assemblies 
for  a  worldly  mystery."  So  Bryennios,  who  regards  the  worldly 
mystery  as  a  symbolical  act  of  the  prophet.  Others  suggest,  as  the 
mystery  for   which   the  assemblies   are  called,  revelation   of  future 

;vents,  celibacy,  the  Eucharist,  the  ceremonial  law.  It  seems,  at  all 
events,  to  point  to  incipient  fanaticism  on  the  part  of  the  prophets  of 
those  days.  [Elucidation  III.]  This  was  likely  to  take  the  form 
either  of  asceticism  or  of  extravagant  predictions  and  mystical  fancies 
about  the  Church  in  the  world.  Did  we  know  the  place  and  the  time 
more  accurately,  we  might  decide  which  was  meant.  This  caution  was 
evidently  needed:   Let  God  judge  such  e.xtravagances. 

-.  '  Verse  i  is  almost  identical  with  the  beginning  of  Apostolic  Con- 
stitutions, vii.  iZ;  the  remaining  verses  have  no  parallel. 

2  All  professed  Christians  are  meant. 

3  Comp.  2  Thess.  iii.  lo. 

*  The  term  occurs  only  here  in  the  Teaching: 

5  "  Christ-trafficker.".-  The  abuse  of  Christian  fellowship  and 
hospitality  naturally  followed  the  remarkable  extension  of  Christianity. 
This  expressive  term  was  coined  to  designate  the  class  of  idlers  who 
would  make  gain  out  of  their  professed  Christianity.  It  occurs  in  the 
longer  form  of  the  Ignatian  Epistles  (  Trallians,  vi.)  and  in  literature 
of  the  fourth  century. 

*  A  large  part  of  this  chapter  is  found  in  Apostolic  Co/istitntions, 
vii.  28,  29,  but  with  modifications  and  additions  indicating  a  later 
date. 

7  "Who  will  settle  among  you"  (Hitchcock  and  Brown).  The 
itinerant  prophets  might  become  stationary,  we  infer.  Chaps,  xi.-xv. 
point  to  a  movement  from  an  itinerant  and  extraordinary  ministry  to 
a  more  settled  one. 

*  Lit.,  "  nourishment,"  "  food." 
9  Matt.  X.  10;  comp.  Luke  x.  7. 

'°  This  phrase,  indicating  a  sacerdotal  view  of  the  ministry,  seems 
to  point  to  a  later  date  than  that  claimed  for  the  Tenchitig.  Some 
regard  it  as  an  interpolation:  others  take  it  in  a  figurative  .sense.  In 
Apostolic  Constitutions  the  sacerdotal  view  is  more  marked,  [i  Pet. 
ii.  9.  II  the //f^j  ="  priests,"  prophets  =  "  high  priests."]  Here 
the  term  is  restricted  to  the  prophets;  compare  Schaff /«  loco. 


So  also  when  thou  openest  a  jar  of  wine  or  of  6 
oil,  take  the  first-fruit  and  give  it  to  the  prophets  ; 
and  of  money  (silver)  and  clothing  and  every  7 
possession,  take  the  first-fruit,  as  it  may  seem 
good  to  thee,  and  give  according  to  the  com- 
mandment. 


CHAP.  XIV. 


•CHRISTIAN  ASSEMBLY  ON  THE  LORD's 


But  every  Lord's  day  '^  do  ye  gather  yourselves  i 
together,  and  break  bread,  and  give  thanksgiving 
after  having  confessed  your  transgressions, '^  that 
your  sacrifice  may  be  pure.'^    But  let  no  one  that  2 
is  at  variance  'S  with  his  fellow  come  together 
with  you,  until  they  be  reconciled,  that  your  sac- 
rifice  may  not  be  profaned.     For  this  is  that  3 
which  was  spoken  by  the  Lord  :  In  every  place 
and  time  offer  to  me  a  pure  sacrifice  ;  '^  for  I  am 
a  great  King,  saith  the  Lord,  and  my  name  is 
wonderful  among  the  nations.' 7 

CHAP.    XV.'^  BISHOPS   AND    DEACONS  ;     CHRISTIAN 

REPROOF. 

Appoint,  therefore,  for  yourselves,  bishops  and  i 
deacons  worthy  of  the  Lord,  men  meek,  and  not 
lovers  of  money, ■'^  and  truthful  and  proved  ;  for 
they  also  render  to  you  the  service  ^°  of  prophets 
and  teachers.     Despise  them  not  therefore,  for  2 
they  are  your  honoured  ones,  together  with  the 
prophets  and  teachers.    And  reprove  one  another,  3 
not  in  anger,  but  in  peace,  as  ye  have  //in  the  Gos- 
l^el  ;^'  but  to  every  one  that  acts  amiss ^^  against 
another,  let  no  one  speak,  nor  let  him  hear  aught 
from  you  until  he  rej^ent.     But  your  i^rayers  and  4 
alms  and  all  your  deeds  so  do,  as  ye  have  //  in 
the  Gospel  of  our  Lord.^^ 


't  Verses  i  and  3  are  given  substantially  in  Apostolic  Consti- 
tutions, vii.  30.  This  chapter  would  seem  to  belong  more  properly 
before  chap.  viii. ;  but  the  same  order  of  topics  is  followed  in  Apostolic 
Constitutions,  —  a  remarkable  proof  of  literary  connection. 

'-  Comp.  Rev.  i.  10.  Here  the  full  form  is  KaTo.  Kvpiaxriv  Be 
Kvpiov.  If  the  early  date  is  allowed,  this  verse  confirms  the  view 
that  from  the  first  the  Lord's  Day  was  observed,  and  that,  too,  by  a 
eucharistic  celebration. 

'3  Comp   chap.  iv.  14.     No  parallel  in  Apostolic  Constitutions. 

t*  On  this  spiritual  sense  of  "  sacrifice,"  comp.  Rom.  xii.  i;  Phil, 
ii.  17;   Heb.  xiii.  15;   i  Pet.  ii.  5. 

'5  "  That  hath  the  (or,  any)  dispute  "  (<l(ii</>tj3oAiat') ;  comp.  Matt. 
V.  23,  24. 

'"  [See  Mai.  i.  11.     See  Irenseus,  cap.  xvii.  5,  vol.  i.  p.  484.] 

"  Nlal.  i.  II,  14.  Quoted  in  Apostolic  Constitutions  and  by  sev- 
eral Ante-Nicene  Fathers,  with  the  same  reference  to  the  Eucharist. 

' '  The  larger  part  of  verse  i,  and  a  clause  from  verses  2,  3,  respec- 
tively, are  found  in  Apostolic  Constitutions,  vii  31.  Verses  i,  2,  both 
in  the  use  of  terms  and  in  the  Church  polity  indicated,  point  to  an 
early  date:  (i)  There  are  evident  marks  of  a  transition  from  extr.aor- 
dinary  to  ordinary  ministers.  (2)  The  distinction  between  bishops 
and  elders  does  not  appear  [i  Pet.  v.  i.  Vol.  i.  p.  16,  this  series], and 
yet  it  is  found  in  Ignatius.  (3)  The  word  ^fipoToreiu  is  here  used 
in  the  sense  of  "  elect  "  or  "  appoint  "  (by  show  of  hands) ,  and  not  in 
that  of  "  ordain  "  (by  laying  on  of  hands).  The  former  is  the  New- 
Testament  sense  (Acts  xiv.  23;  2  Cor  viii  19),  also  in  Ignatius;  the 
latter  sense  is  found  in  Apostolic  Canons,  i.  (4)  The  choice  by  the 
people  also  indicates  an  early  period. 

'9  Comp.  1  Tim.  iii.  4 

-°  Or,  "  ministry."  This  clause  and  the  following  verse  indicate 
that  the  extraordinary  ministers  were  as  yet  more  highly  regarded. 

2'  Comp.  Matt,  xviii.  15-17. 

2-  The  word  otrroj^ew,  occurring  here,  means  "  to  miss  the  mark;  " 
in  New  Testament,  "  to  err"  or,  "  swerve."  See  i  TTm.  i.  6,  vi.  21; 
2  Tim.  ii.  18. 

-3  The  reference  here  is  probably  to  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount: 
Matt,  v.-vii.,  especially  to  chap.  vi. 


;82 


ELUCIDATIONS. 


CHAP.  XVI.'  —  watchfulness;  the  coming  of 

THE    LORD. 

Watch  for  your  life's  sake.^  Let  not  your 
lamps  be  quenched,  nor  your  loins  unloosed  ;  ^ 
but  be  ye  ready,  for  ye  know  not  the  hour  in 
which  our  Lord  cometh.*  But  often  shall  ye 
come  together,  seeking  the  things  which  are  be- 
fitting to  your  souls  :  for  the  whole  time  of  your 
faith  will  not  profit  you,5  if  ye  be  not  made  per- 
fect in  the  last  time.  For  in  the  last  days  ^  false 
prophets  and  corrupters  shall  be  multiplied,  and 
the  sheep  shall  be  turned  into  wolves,  and  love 
shall  be  turned  into  hate  ;  ^  for  when  lawlessness 
increaseth,  they  shall  hate  and  persecute  and 
betray  one  another,^  and  then  shall  appear  the 
world-deceiver  9  as  Son  of  God,'°  and  shall  do 
signs  and  wonders,"  and  the  earth  shall  be  deliv- 
ered into  his  hands,  and  he  shall  do  iniquitous 
things  which  have  never  yet  come  to  pass  since 
the  beginning.  Then  shall  the  creation  of  men 
come  into  the  fire  of  trial, '^  and  many  shall  be 


'  The  resemblance  between  this  chapter  and  Apostolic  Constitu- 
tions, vii.  31,  32,  is  mainly  in  order  of  topics  and  in  the  identity  o{ 
some  phrases  and  terms.  Verses  3  and  4  (to  the  word  "  world- 
deceiver")  are  reproduced  almost  verbatim.  That  the  writer  of  the 
Teaching  used  Matt.  .\.\iv.  is  extremely  probable,  but  the  connection 
of  Apostolic  Constitutions  with  this  passage  is  evident.  In  Bartia- 
ias,  iv.,  there  are  a  few  corresponding  phrases. 

^  Or,  "  over  your  life;  "  the  clause  occurs  verbatim  in  Apostolic 
Constitutions. 

3  Comp.  Luke  xii.  35,  which  is  exactly  cited  in  Apostolic  Consti- 
tutions. 

*  Matt.  xxiv.  42. 

i  Here  Barnabas,  iv.,  furnishes  a  parallel. 

*  This  reference  to  the  last  days  as  present  or  impending  is  an 
evidence  of  early  date;  comp  Barnabas,  iv.,  and  many  passages  in 
the  New  Testament.  The  mistake  has  been  in  measuring  God's 
prophetic  chronology  by  our  mathematical  standard  of  years. 

7  Comp.  Matt.  xxiv.  11,  12. 

*  Comp.  Matt.  xxiv.  10. 

9  6  KO(TixoTi\a.vo<;,  found  only  here  and  in  Apostolic  Constitutions, 
vii.  32.     Comp.  2  Thess.  ii.  3,  4,  8;   Rev.  xii.  9. 

'°  Not  found  in  Apostolic  Constitutions.  The  expression  plainly 
implies  the  belief  that  Jesus  Christ  was  Son  of  God. 

''  Comp.  Matt.  xxiv.  24.     The  rest  of  the  verse  has  no  parallel. 

**  Comp.  I  Pet.  iv.  12,  where  n-iijxoais  also  occurs. 


made  to  stumble  and  shall  perish ;  but  they  that 
endure  in  their  faith  shall  be  saved '^  from  under 
the  curse    itself.  "*     And  then  shall   appear  the  6 
signs  of  the  truth ;  '5   first,  the  sign  of  an  out- 
spreading '^  in  heaven ;    then  the    sign   of  the 
sound  of  the  trumpet ;  and  the  third,  the  resur- 
rection of  the  dead  ;  yet  not  of  all,  but  as  it  is  7 
said  :    The  Lord  shall  come  and  all  His  saints 
with  Him. '7     Then  shall  the  world  see  the  Lord  8 
coming  upon  the  clouds  of  heaven.'^ 


'•5  Comp.  Matt.  x.  22  and  similar  passages;  none  of  them  directly 
cited  here. 

■■'  vn'  avrov  ToC  xaTa^eVoTo?,  "from  under  the  curse  itself;" 
namely,  that  which  has  just  been  described.  Bryennios  and  others 
render  "  by  the  curse  Himself;  "  that  is,  Christ,  whom  they  were 
tempted  to  revile.  All  other  interpretations  either  rest  on  textual 
emendations  or  are  open  to  grammatical  objections.  Of  the  two  given 
above,  that  of  Hall  and  Napier  seems  preferable. 

■5  "  Truth  "  might  refer  to  Christ  Himself,  but  the  personal  advent 
is  spoken  of  in  verse  8;  it  is  better,  then,  to  refer  it  to  the  truth  re- 
specting the  parousia  held  by  the  early  Christians.  For  this  beliel 
they  were  mocked,  and  hence  dwelt  upon  it  and  the  prophecies  re- 
spectmg  it.  The  verse  is  probably  based  upon  Matt.  xxiv.  30,  31; 
but  some  find  here,  as  in  verse  4,  an  allusion  to  Paul's  eschatological 
statements  in  the  Epistles  to  the  Thessalonians. 

■6  Professor  Hall  now  prefers  to  render  eKireTritrfw?,  "outspread- 
ing," instead  of  "  imrolling,"  as  in  his  version  originally.  Hitchcock 
and  Brown,  Schaff,  and  others,  prefer  "  opening;  "  that  is,  the  appar- 
ent opening  in  heaven  through  which  the  Lord  will  descend.  "  Out- 
spreading" is  usually  explained  (so  Professor  Hall)  as  meaning  the 
expanded  sign  of  the  cross  in  the  heavens,  the  patristic  interpreta- 
tion of  Matt.  xxiv.  30.  Bryennios  and  F'arrar  refer  it  to  the  flying 
forth  of  the  saints  to  meet  the  Lord.  There  are  other  interpretations 
based  on  textual  emendations.  As  the  word  is  very  rare,  it  is  difficult 
to  determine  the  exact  sense.  "  Opening"  seems  lexically  allowable 
and  otherwise  free  from  objection. 

■''  Zech.  xiv.  5.  This  citation  is  given  substantially  in  Apostolic 
Constitutions.  As  here  used,  it  seems  to  point  to  the  first  resurrec- 
tion. Comp.  I  Thess.  iv.  17;  i  Ccr.  xv.  23;  Rev.  xx.  5.  Probably 
it  is  based  upon  the  Pauline  eschatology  rather  than  upon  that  of  the 
Apocalypse.  At  all  events,  there  is  no  allusion  to  the  millennial 
statement  of  the  latter.  Since  there  was  in  the  early  Church,  in  con- 
nection with  the  expectation  of  the  speedy  coming  of  Christ,  a  marked 
tendency  to  Chiliasm,  the  silence  respecting  the  millennium  may  in- 
dicate that  the  writer  was  not  acquainted  with  the  Apocalypse.  This 
inference  is  allowable,  however,  only  on  the  assumption  of  the  early 
date  of  the  Teaching. 

'8  Comp.  Matt.  xxiv.  30.  The  conclusion  is  abrupt,  and  m  Apos- 
tolic Constitutions  the  New-Testament  doctrine  of  future  punishment 
and  reward  is  added.  The  absence  of  all  reference  to  the  destruction 
of  Jerusalem  would  indicate  that  some  time  had  elapsed  since  that 
event.    An  interval  of  from  thirty  to  sixty  years  may  well  be  claimed. 


ELUCIDATIONS' 


I. 


(Thus  baptize  ye,  p.  379.) 

If  we  compare  this  chapter  with  the  corresponding  one  in  the  Apostolic  Constitiifions,  the 
Teaching  seems  to  me  to  be  a  somewhat  abridged  form  of  a  common  original.  This  being 
designed  for  the  ca/echutneiis,  there  is  an  omission  of  what  they  are  afterwards  to  know.  A 
form  originally  drawn  up  for  clergy  and  people  has  been  very  inartificially  expurgated  for  the 
instruction  of  young  disciples.  This  appears  from  the  ninth  chapter  (p.  380),  where  only  certain 
receptive  or  responsive  forms  are  given.  The  liturgy  of  the  Apostolic  Constitutions,  book  viii., 
embodies  what  was  studiously  kept  from  all  but  the  reA-ttot,  i.e.,  those  "  of  full  age." 


ELUCIDATIONS.  383 


11. 

(Concerning  apostles,  p.  380,  note  16.) 

The  reference  to  "apostles,"  probably  itinerant,  in  Rev.  ii.  2,  corresponds  with  this.  There 
were  officers  known  in  the  Apostolic  day  (compare  2  Cor.  viii.  23,  Greek)  as  airoa-ToXoi  (.kkXtjctiiov, 
for  the  pseud-apostles  of  the  Apocalypse  could  not  have  pretended  what  they  did  had  it  been 
otherwise.  Neither  would  it  have  been  needful  to  "  try  those  who  said  they  were  apostles,"  in 
that  case  :  the  mere  assertion  of  such  a  pretence  would  have  sufficiently  convicted  them. 

The  very  childish  directions  (suited  to  mere  catechumens)  given  in  the  text  illustrates  Rev  ii. 
2,  and  is,  so  far,  evidence  of  the  very  early  origin  of  the  Teaching. 

The  name  apostles  was  made  technical  by  Christ  Himself:  "He  named  \\\tm.  Apostles" 
(Luke  vi.  13).  And  the  word  is  never  used  in  the  loose  way  which  Bishop  Lightfoot  hazardously 
suggests,  as  I  must  venture  to  believe. 

III. 

(Incipient  fanaticism,  p.  381,  note  25.) 

Unquestionably,  for  even  in  St.  Paul's  day  his  admonitions  imply  nothing  less.  See  i  Cor. 
cap.  xiv.,  passim.  But,  as  in  the  Introductory  Notice  '  I  hinted  my  suspicions  of  incipient  Mon- 
tanism  in  the  Teaching,  so  I  am  strengthened  in  this  idea  by  the  learned  critic  to  whose  note  I 
venture  to  append  this  remark  for  the  purpose  of  asking  a  reference  to  my  annotations  of  Her- 
mas  in  vol.  ii.  of  this  series.  May  I  also  ask  a  reference  to  the  same  volume,  pp.  4,  5,  and  6? 
The  "  meal"  (note  23,  p.  380)  of  the  Teaching  is  doubtless  the  Agape,  which  had  been  abused  at 
so  early  a  day,  that  St.  Peter  ^  himself  was  forced  to  denounce  the  "  false  prophets  "  who  polluted 
this  feast  of  charity. 

'  p.  371,  supra.  2  2  Pet.  ii.  13.     Compare  i  John  iv.  i. 


CONSTITUTIONS  OF  THE  HOLY  APOSTLES. 


[EDITED,    WITH    NOTES,   BY  JAMES    DONALDSON,    D.D.] 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE 

TO 

CONSTITUTIONS  OF  THE  HOLY  APOSTLES. 


Having  learned  from  the  erudite  Beveridge  what  I  long  supposed  to  be  a  just  view  of  the 
Constitutions,  I  have  found  in  the  recent  literature  of  the  subject  not  a  little  to  increase  my 
confidence  in  the  general  conclusions  to  which  he  was  led  by  all  that  could  be  known  in  his 
times.  The  treatise  of  Krabbe  guided  me  to  some  results  of  more  modern  investigations  ;  and 
Dr.  Bunsen,  though  not  apart  from  his  critics,  has  enabled  me  still  further  to  correct  some  of  my 
impressions.  But,  in  connection  with  the  late  discovery  of  Bryennios,  the  field  of  discussion  and 
inquiry  has  been  so  much  enlarged,  that  I  have  felt  it  due  to  the  readers  and  students  of  this 
republication  to  invoke  the  aid  of  Professor  Riddle,  who  is  able  to  enrich  the  work  with  the 
results  of  genuine  learning  and  much  patient  research.  Whatever  may  be  my  own  convictions 
on  some  subordinate  points,  I  have  been  glad  to  secure  the  judgment  of  a  critical  scholar  who,  I 
am  persuaded,  aims  to  shed  upon  the  subject  the  colourless  light  of  scientific  investigation.  This 
is  all  I  can  desire,  anxious  only  to  see  facts  clearly  established  and  historic  truth  illustrated,  no 
matter  to  what  results  they  may  seem  to  point.  Where  the  professor's  decisions  coincide  with 
my  own  impressions,  I  am  naturally  gratified  by  his  valued  and  independent  corroboration  :  where 
the  case  is  otherwise,  I  am  hardly  less  gratified  to  present  my  indulgent  readers  with  opinions 
deserving  of  their  highest  respect,  and  by  which  they  will  be  stimulated,  as  well  as  influenced,  in 
forming  convictions  for  themselves. 

The  Constitutions  are  so  full  of  material  on  which  it  is  well  for  one  in  my  position  not  to 
speak  very  freely  in  such  a  work  as  this,  that  I  rejoice  all  the  more  to  confide  the  task  of  annota- 
tion almost  exclusively  to  another  and  to  one  from  whom  American  Christians  must  ever  be 
glad  to  hear  on  subjects  requiring  in  an  almost  equal  degree  the  skill  of  an  expert  critic  and  the 
candour  of  a  conscientious  Christian. 

I  prefix  Professor  Riddle's  Preface  to  the  Introductory  Notice  of  the  Edinburgh  editor,  as 
follows  :  — 

New  interest  has  been  awakened  in  the  Apostolic  Constitutions  by  the  discovery  of  an  ancient 
manuscript  in  Constantinople.'  While  it  does  not  contain  the  Constitutions,  it  affords  much 
material  for  discussion  respecting  the  sources  and  authorship  of  this  compilation.  The  so-called 
Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  found  in  the  Codex  at  Constantinople,  and  published  by 
Bryennios  in  1883,  is  recognised  as  the  basis  of  the  seventh  book  of  the  Constitutions.  The 
verbal  coincidences,  the  order  of  topics,  and  other  obvious  phenomena,  leave  little  room  for 
reasonable  doubt  on  this  point.  That  the  reader  may  be  in  possession  of  the  main  foots,  the 
corresponding  portions  have  been  indicated  both  in  book  vii.  of  the  Constitutions  and  in  the 
version  of  the  Teaching  inserted  in  this  volume.     This  literary  connection  has  some  bearing  on 


I  See  the  brief  account  prefixed  to  the  version  of  the  Teaching;,  p.  372,  supra. 


388  INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE. 


the  discussion  as  to  the  age  of  the  Constitutions.  If  the  Teaching  is  substantially  the  early 
work  bearin'^''  that  name,  then  some  of  the  references  by  early  writers  which  have  been  applied 
to  the  lar^-er  work  must  now  be  regarded  as  pointing  to  the  Teaching;  still,  this  only  bears  against 
the  theory  of  a  date  as  early  as  the  third  century.  The  new  critical  material  furnished  by  the 
Brvennios  manuscript  for  the  Ignatian  controversy  has  a  bearing  on  the  question  respecting 
the  work  before  us.  The  opinion  has  been  strengthened  (see  below),  that  the  same  hand  enlarged 
the  Ignatian  Epistles  and  adapted  earlier  matter  (such  as  the  Teaching^  for  the  Apostolic  Con- 
stitutions. 

We  may  accept  as  established  the  following  positions  :  — 

1.  The  Apostolic  Constitutions  are  a  compilation,  the  material  being  derived  from  sources 
differing  in  age. 

2.  The  first  six  books  are  the  oldest;  the  seventh,  in  its  present  form,  somewhat  later,  but, 
from  its  connection  with  the  Teaching,  proven  to  contain  matter  of  a  very  ancient  date.  The 
eighth  book  is  of  latest  date. 

3.  It  now  seems  to  be  generally  admitted  that  the  entire  work  is  not  later  than  the  fourth  cen- 
tury, although  the  usual  allowance  must  be  made  for  later  textual  changes,  whether  by  accident  or 
design. 

Dr.  Von  Drey'  regards  the  first  six  books  as  of  Eastern  origin  (mainly  Syrian),  and  to  be 
assigned  to  the  second  half  of  the  third  century.  The  seventh  and  eighth  were  more  recent,  he 
thinks,  but  united  with  the  others  before  a.d.  325.  With  this,  Schaff  (in  his  Church  History,  vol.  ii., 
rev.  ed.,  p.  185)  substantially  agreed;  but,  in  his  later  work  on  the  Teaching,  seems  to  assign 
the  completion  of  the  compilation  to  a  date  somewhat  later.  This  is  the  view  of  Harnack,  who, 
"  by  a  critical  analysis  and  comparison,  comes  to  the  conclusion  ^  that  pseudo-Clement,  alias 
pseudoTgnatius,  was  a  Eusebian,  a  semi-Arian,  and  rather  worldly-minded  anti-ascetic  Bishop 
of  Syria,  a  friend  of  the  Emperor  Constantius  between  340  and  360  ;  that  he  enlarged  and 
adapted  the  Didascalia  of  the  third  and  the  Didache  of  the  second  century,  as  well  as  the  Igna- 
tian Epistles,  to  his  own  view  of  morals,  worship,  and  discipline,  and  clothed  them  with  Apostolic 
authority."  ^ 

This  is,  at  all  events,  a  more  reasonable  view  than  that  of  Krabbe,  who  assigns  the  first  six 
books  to  the  end  of  the  third  century,  and  the  eighth  to  the  beginning  of  the  fifth.  The  latter, 
it  is  true,  he  regards  a  compilation  from  older  sources.  The  purpose  of  the  whole,  in  his  view, 
was  to  confirm  the  episcopal  hierarchy,  and  to  establish  the  unity  of  the  Catholic  Church  on  the 
basis  of  the  unity  of  the  priesthood,  etc.  But  it  is  now  generally  held  that  the  purpose  of  the 
compilation  was  merely  to  present  a  manual  of  instruction,  worship,  polity,  and  usage  for 
both  clergy  and  laity.  Had  it  been  designed  to  further  some  ecclesiastical  tendency,  it  would 
be  far  less  valuable,  since  it  would  less  fairly  reproduce  the  ecclesiastical  life  of  the  age  or 
ages  in  which  it  originated.  Bishop  Beveridge  at  first  attributed  the  Constitutions  to  Clemens 
Alexandrinus  (end  of  second  century),  but  afterwards  accepted  the  third  century  as  the  more 
probable  date.  The  views  now  prevalent  do  full  justice  to  his  opinions,  but  seem  to  be  better 
sustained  in  detail. 

The  collection  of  Canons  at  the  close  of  the  Constitutions  is  undoubtedly  a  compilation. 
Some  are  evidently  much  more  ancient  than  others,  and  there  is  every  evidence  that  various  col- 
lections or  recensions  existed.  That  of  Dionysius  (about  a.d.  500),  in  Latin,  contained  fifty 
canons;  that  of  John  (Scholasticus)  of  Antioch  (about  a.d.  565)  contained  eighty-five  canons: 
and  "  it  is  undeniable  that  the  Greek  copy  which  Dionysius  had  before  him  belonged  to  a  differ- 

'  Neue  Untersuchungen  uber  die  ConstiUit.  u.  ICano7ies  der  Ap.,  Tubingen,  1832.  Hefele  {Concilietigcsckichie,  i.,  Freiburg, 
1853,  2d  cd.,  1873,  Edinb.  trans.,  1871,  p.  449)  speaks  of  this  as  the  best  work  on  the  subject. 

-  [Needless  to  say  that  this  seems  to  me  utterly  inconsistent  with  admitted  facts.] 

3  Schaff,  The  Teaching  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  New  York,  1885,  pp.  134,  135.  Comp.  Harnack  on  the  Trnrhittg  in  Texfe  tind 
Vntersuchungen,  u.  s.  w.,  ii.  pp.  246-268,  Leipzig,  1884.  Bishop  Lightfoot  {EpisUes  of  St.  Ignatius,  London  and  Cambridge,  1885),  differs 
from  Harnack,  who  further  discusses  the  topic  in  the  Expositor,  January,  i836. 


INTRODUCTORY    NOTICE.  389 

ent  family  of  collections  from  that  used  by  John  Scholasticus,  for  they  differ  frequently,  if  not 
essentially,  both  in  text  and  in  the  way  of  numbering  the  canons."  ' 

Bishop  Bevendge  sought  to  trace  these  Canons  to  the  synods  of  the  first  two  centuries,  while 
Daille  held  that  the  collection  was  made  as  late  as  the  fifth  century.  The  latter  view  is  not  gener- 
ally accepted,  though  the  existence  of  a  variety  of  collections  tells  against  some  of  the  views  of 
Bishop  Beveridge.-  It  is  impossible  to  enter  into  a  full  discussion  here.  It  seemed  better  to 
annotate  the  Canons  from  the  results  of  Drey  and  Hefele,  two  most  candid  and  scholarly  Roman- 
Catholic  investigators. 3  The  brief  notes  indicate  the  sources  according  to  these  authors.  The 
reader  will  at  once  perceive  from  the  views  thus  suggested,  as  well  as  from  the  contents  of  the 
Ca?ions,  that,  while  some  canons  are  presumably  quite  ancient,  a  number  belong  to  the  fourth 
century,  and  that,  as  a  complete  collection,  they  cannot  antedate  the  compilation  of  the  Apostolic 
Cotistitutions.  Indeed,  Drey,  who  accepts  the  latter  as  Ante-Nicene  (see  above),  thinks  five  of 
the  canons  (30,  67,  74,  81,  83)  were  derived  from  the  canons  of  the  Fourth  Oecumenical  Council  at 
Chalcedon,  a.d.  451,  and  quite  a  number  of  others  he  traces  to  synods  and  councils  of  the  fourth 
century.  Hefele  doubts  the  positions  taken  by  Drey  in  regard  to  most  of  these.  He  does  not, 
however,  insist  that  the  collection  is  Ante-Nicene,  while  he  traces  the  origin  of  many  of  the 
canons  to  the  Apostolic  Constitutions. 

[The  foUowmg  is  Dr.  Donaldson's  Introductory  Notice  :  — ] 

There  has  always  existed  a  great  diversity  of  opinion  as  to  the  author  and  date  of  the  Apostoli- 
cal Constitutions.  Earlier  writers  were  inclined  to  assign  them  to  the  apostolic  age,  and  to  Clem- 
ent ;  but  much  discussion  ensued,  and  the  questions  to  which  they  give  rise  are  still  unsettled. 

The  most  peculiar  opinion  in  regard  to  them  is  that  of  Whiston,  who  devoted  a  volume  (vol. 
iii.)  of  his  Primitive  Christianity  Revived  to  prove  that  "  they  are  the  most  sacred  of  the  can- 
onical books  of  the  New  Testament ;  "  for  "  these  sacred  Christian  laws  or  constitutions  were 
delivered  at  Jerusalem,  and  in  Mount  Sion,  by  our  Saviour  to  the  eleven  apostles  there  assembled 
after  His  resurrection."  * 

Krabbe,  who  wrote  an  elaborate  treatise  on  the  origin  and  contents  of  the  Apostolical  Con- 
stitutions, tried  to  show  that  the  first  seven  books  were  written  "  towards  the  end  of  the  third 
century."  The  eighth  book,  he  thinks,  must  have  been  written  at  the  end  of  the  fourth  or  begin- 
ning of  the  fifth. 

Bunsen  thinks  that,  if  we  expunge  a  few  interpolations  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries,  "  we 
find  ourselves  unmistakeably  in  the  midst  of  the  life  of  the  Church  of  the  second  and  third  centu- 
ries." •♦  "I  think,"  he  says,  "  I  have  proved  in  my  analysis,  more  clearly  than  has  been  hitherto 
done,  the  Ante-Nicene  origin  of  a  book,  or  rather  books,  called  by  an  early  fiction  Apostolical 
Constitutions,  and  consequently  the  still  higher  antiquity  of  the  materials,  both  ecclesiastical  and 
literary,  which  they  contain.  I  ha\-e  shown  that  the  compilers  made  use  of  the  Epistle  of  Barna- 
bas,5  which  belongs  to  the  first  half  of  the  second  century ;  that  the  eighth  is  an  extract  or  tran- 
script of  Hippolytus ;  and  that  the  first  six  books  are  so  full  of  phrases  found  in  the  second 
interpolation  of  the  Ignatian  Epistles,  that  their  last  compiler,  the  author  of  the  present  text,  must 
either  have  lived  soon  after  that  interpolation  was  made,  or  vice  versa,  or  the  mterpolator  and 
compiler' must  have  been  one  and  the  same  person.^     This  last  circumstance  renders  it  probable 

*  Hefele,  History  of  Councils,  i.  p.  460. 

^  The  Ethiopic  form  of  these  Canons  has  recently  appeared  in  an  English  translation  {yournal  of  Society  of  BibUcttl  Literature 
and  Exegesis,  1885,  pp.  63-72).  Professor  George  H.  Schodde,  Ph  D.,  the  translator,  has  made  use  of  the  edition  of  Winand  Fell  (  Co- 
logne, 1871)  with  a  Latin  version.  The  Canons  in  this  form  contain  most  of  the  matter  given  in  the  Edinburgh  version  from  the  Greek, 
and  in  the  same  order.  Puit  the  number  is  only  fifty-seven,  in  many  cases  several  Greek  canons  being  combined  as  one  in  the  Ethiopic. 
Some  modifications  are  found,  but  very  little  that  differs  malcrially  from  the  Greek  This  collection  is  not  part  of  the  Apostolical  Churj:h 
Order  published  by  Tattam,  Lagarde,  Harnack,  and  others.     Comp.  SchafT,  Teaching,  pp.  257-247. 

3  [However  candid,  even  Hefele,  unquestionably  learned,  has  been  enslaved  to  "  Infallibility,"  and  was  never  a  freeman  J 

<  Christianity  and  Mankind,  vol.  ii.  p.  405. 

S  [Evidently  the  Teaching  must  now  be  substituted  for  the  Epistle  of  Rarnabas.  —  R.] 

^  [So  Harnack,  most  decidedly;  but  Dishop  Lightfoot  opposes  this  view.  —  R.  j 


390  INTRODUCTORY    NOTICE. 

that  at  least  the  first  six  books  of  the  Greek  compilation,  like  the  Ignatian  forgeries,'  were  the 
produce  of  Asia  Minor.  Two  points  are  self-evident  —  their  Oriental  origin,  and  that  they  belong 
neither  to  Antioch  nor  to  Alexandria.     I  suppose  nobody  now  will  trace  them  to  Palestine."  ^ 

Modern  critics  are  equally  at  sea  in  determining  the  date  of  the  collections  of  canons  given  at 
the  end  of  the  eighth  book.  Most  believe  that  some  of  them  belong  to  the  apostolic  age,  while 
others  are  of  a  comparatively  late  date.     The  subject  is  very  fully  discussed  in  Krabbe. 

Bovius  first  gave  a  complete  edition  of  the  Coiistitiitious  (Venice,  1563),  but  only  in  a  Latin 
form.  The  Greek  was  first  edited  by  the  Jesuit  Turrianus  (Venice,  1563).  It  was  reprinted 
several  times.  Cotelerius  gave  it  in  his  Apostolical  Fathers.  In  the  second  edition  of  this  work, 
as  prepared  by  Clericus  (1724),  the  readings  of  two  Vienna  manuscripts  were  given.  These  V. 
MSS.  and  Oxford  ms.  of  book  viii.  are  supposed  by  Bunsen  to  be  nearer  the  original  than  the 
others,  alike  in  what  they  give  and  in  what  they  omit.  The  Constitutions  have  been  edited  by 
T'ltzen  (1853),  and  by  Lagarde  in  Bunsen's  Analccta  Ante-Nica:na,  vol.  ii.  (1854).  Lagarde  has 
partially  introduced  readings  from  the  S}riac,  Arabic,  .^thiopic,  and  Coptic  forms  of  the  Consti- 
tutions, Whiston  devoted  the  second  volume  of  his  Primitive  Christianity  to  the  Constitutions 
and  Canons,  giving  both  the  Greek  and  English.  It  is  his  translation  which  we  have  republished, 
with  considerable  alterations.  We  have  not  deemed  it  necessary  to  give  a  tithe  of  the  various 
readings,  but  have  confined  ourselves  to  those  that  seem  important.  We  have  also  given  no 
indication  of  the  Syriac  form  of  the  first  six  books.  We  shall  give  this  form  by  itself.  The 
translation  of  Whiston  was  reprinted  by  Irah  Chase,  D.D.,  very  carefully  revised,  with  a  transla- 
tion of  Krabbe's  Essay  on  the  Origin  and  Contents  of  the  Constitutions,  and  his  Dissertation  on 
the  Canons  (New  York,  i848).3 

'  [Bunsen's  magisterial  views  on  many  subjects  are  swept  away  by  the  recent  work  of  Bishop  Lightfoot  on  the  Ignatian  literature.J 

2  Christianity  and  Mankind,  vol.  ii.  p.  418. 

3  [A  valuable  work,  apart  from  many  of  Dr.  Chase's  personal  ideas  not  generally  received  by  critics.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    HOLY    APOSTLES/ 

BOOK    I. 


CONCERNING  THE   LAITY. 


SEC.   I.  —  GENERAL  COMMANDMENTS. 

The  apostles  and  elders  to  all  those  who  from 
among  the  Gentiles  have  believed  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ;  grace  and  peace  from  Almighty- 
God,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  be  multi- 
plied unto  you  in  the  acknowledgment  of  Him. 

The  Catholic  Church  is  the  plantation  of  God, 
and  His  beloved  vineyard ;  ^  containing  those 
who  have  believed  in  His  unerring  divine  reli- 
gion ;  who  are  the  heirs  by  faith  of  His  ever- 
lasting kingdom ;  who  are  partakers  of  His 
divine  influence,  and  of  the  communication  of 
the  Holy  Spirit ;  who  are  armed  through  Jesus, 
and  have  received  His  fear  into  their  hearts ; 
who  enjoy  the  benefit  of  the  sprinkling  of  the 
precious  and  innocent  blood  of  Christ ;  who 
have  free  liberty  to  call  Almighty  God,  Father ; 
being  fellow-heirs  and  joint-partakers  of  His  be- 
loved Son  :  hearken  to  this  holy  doctrine,  you 
who  enjoy  His  promises,  as  being  delivered  by 
the  command  of  your  Saviour,  and  agreeable  to 
His  glorious  words.  Take  care,  ye  children  of 
God,  to  do  all  things  in  obedience  to  God ;  and 
in  all  things  please  Christ  our  Lord. 3  For  if 
any  man  follows  unrighteousness,  and  does  those 
things  that  are  contrary  to  the  will  of  God,  such 
a  one  will  be  esteemed  by  God  as  the  diso- 
bedient heathen. 

CONCERNING   COVETOUSNESS. 

I.  Abstain,  therefore,  from  all  unlawful  desires 
and  injustice.  For  it  is  written  in  the  law, 
''  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbour's  wife,  nor 
his  field,  nor  his  man-servant,  nor  his  maid-ser- 
vant, nor  his  ox,  nor  his  ass,  nor  anything  that 
is  thy  neighbour's ;  "  •*  for  all  coveting  of  these 
things  is  from  the  evil  one.  For  he  that  covets 
his  neighbour's  wife,  or  his  man-servant,  or  his 


■   [On  the  titlepage  of  the  Edinburgh  edition  is  subjoined;  "by 
Clement,  bishop  and  citizen  of  Rome."] 

2  Isa.  V.  7,  2. 

3  The  reading  of  the  V.  MSS.    The  others  read,  "  Christ  our  God." 
*  Ex.  XX.  17, 


maid-servant,  is  already  in  his  mind  an  adulterer 
and  a  thief;  and  if  he  does  not  repent,  is  con- 
demned by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  through 
whom  5  glory  be  to  God  for  ever.  Amen.  For 
He  says  in  the  Gospel,  recapitulating,  and  con- 
firming, and  fulfilling  the  ten  commandments  of 
the  law :  "  It  is  written  in  the  law,  Thou  shalt 
not  commit  adultery :  but  I  say  unto  you,  that 
is,  I  said  in  the  law,  by  Moses.  But  now  I  say 
unto  you  myself.  Whosoever  shall  look  on  his 
neighbour's  wife  to  lust  after  her,  hath  committed 
adultery  with  her  already  in  his  heart."  ^  Such 
a  one  is  condemned  of  adultery,  who  covets 
his  neighbour's  wite  in  his  mind.  But  does  not 
he  that  covets  an  ox  or  an  ass  design  to  steal 
them?  to  apply  them  to  his  own  use,  and  to 
lead  them  away?  Or,  again,  does  not  he  that 
covets  a  field,  and  continues  in  such  a  disposi- 
tion, wickedly  contrive  how  to  remove  the  land- 
marks, and  to  compel  the  possessor  to  part  with 
somewhat  for  nothing?  For  as  the  prophet 
somewhere  speaks  :  "  Woe  to  those  who  join 
house  to  house,  and  lay  field  to  field,  that  they 
may  deprive  their  neighbour  of  somewhat  which 
was  his."  7  Wherefore  he  says  :  "  Must  you 
alone  inhabit  the  earth  ?  For  these  things  have 
been  heard  in  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  hosts." 
And  elsewhere  :  "  Cursed  be  he  who  removeth 
his  neighbour's  landmarks  :  and  all  the  people 
shall  say.  Amen."  '^  Wherefore  Moses  says : 
"Thou  shalt  not  remove  thy  neighbour's  land- 
marks 9  which  thy  fathers  have  set"  '°  Upon 
this  account,  therefore,  terrors,  death,  tribunals, 
and  condemnations  follow  such  as  these  from 
God.  But  as  to  those  who  are  obedient  to  God, 
there  is  one  law  of  God,  simple,'"  true,  living, 
which  is  this  :  "  Do  not  that  to  another  which 
thou  hatest  another  should  do  to  thee."  "    Thou 


5  "  To  whom  "  in  V.  mss.,  and  "  to  God  "  is  omitted. 
«>  Matt.  V.  28. 

7  Isa.  V.  8. 

8  Deut.  xxvii.  17. 

9  Dent.  xix.  14. 

10  Omitted  in  V.  MSS. 
"  Tob,  iv.  16. 

39» 


392 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  I. 


wouldst  not  that  any  one  should  look  upon  thy 
wife  with  an  evil  design  to  corrupt  her ;  do  not 
thou,  therefore,  look  upon  thy  neighbour's  wife 
with  a  wicked  intention.  Thou  wouldst  not  that 
thy  garment  should  be  taken  away  ;  do  not  thou, 
therefore,  take  away  another's.  Thou  wouldst 
not  be  beaten,  reproached,  affronted ;  do  not 
thou,  therefore,  serve  any  other  in  the  like 
manner. 

THAT  WE  OUGHT  NOT  TO  RETURN  INJURIES,  NOR 
REVENGE  OURSELVES  ON  HIM  THAT  DOES  US 
WRONG. 

II.  But  if  any  one  curse  thee,  do  thou  bless 
him.  For  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  Numbers  : 
"  He  that  blesseth  thee  is  blessed,  and  he  that 
curseth  thee  is  cursed."  '  In  the  same  manner 
it  is  written  in  the  Gospel :  "  Bless  them  that 
curse  you."^  Being  injured,  do  not  avenge 
yourselves,  but  bear  it  with  patience ;  for  the 
Scripture  speaks  thus :  "  Say  not  thou,  I  will 
avenge  myself  on  my  enemy  for  what  injuries  he 
has  offered  me ;  but  acquiesce  under  them,  that 
the  Lord  may  riglit  thee,  and  bring  vengeance 
upon  him  who  injures  thee."  ^  For  so  says  He 
again  in  the  Gospel :  "  Love  your  enemies,  do 
good  to  them  that  hate  you,  and  pray  for  them 
which  despitefully  use  you  and  persecute  you ; 
and  ye  shall  be  the  children  of  your  Father  which 
is  in  heaven  :  for  He  maketh  His  sun  to  shine  on 
the  evil  and  on  the  good,  and  raineth  on  the  just 
and  unjust."  ^  Let  us  therefore,  beloved,  attend 
to  these  commandments,  that  we  may  be  found 
to  be  the  children  of  light  by  doing  them.  Bear, 
therefore,  with  one  another,  ye  servants  and  sons 
of  God. 

SEC.  II. COMMANDMENTS   TO    MEN. 

CONCERNING  THE  ADORNMENT  OF  OURSELVES, 
AND   THE   SIN    WHICH    ARISES    FROM    THENCE. 

Let  the  husband  not  be  insolent  nor  arrogant 
towards  his  wife  ;  but  compassionate,  bountiful, 
willing  to  please  his  own  wife  alonc,'=  and  treat  her 
honourably  and  obligingly,  endeavouring  to  be 
agreeable  to  her;  (in.)  not  adorning  thyself  in 
such  a  manner  as  may  entice  another  woman  to 
thee.  For  if  thou  art  overcome  by  her,  and 
sinnest  with  her,  eternal  death  will  overtake  thee 
from  God  ;  and  thou  wilt  be  jnuiished  with  sen- 
sible and  bitter  torments.  Or  if  thou  dost  not 
perpetrate  such  a  wicked  act,  but  shakest  her 
off,  and  refusest  her,  in  this  case  thou  art  not 
wholly  innocent,  even  though  thou  art  not  guilty 
of  the  crime  itself,  but  only  in  so  far  as  through 
thy  adorning  thou  didst  entice  the  woman  to 


•  Num.  xxiv.  9. 

2  Luke  vi.  28. 

3  Prov.  XX.  22. 

*  Matt.  V.  44,  45. 

i  Omitted  in  V.  mss. 


desire  thee.  For  thou  art  the  cause  that  the 
woman  was  so  affected,  and  by  her  lusting  after 
thee  was  guilty  of  adultery  with  thee  :  yet  art 
thou  not  so  guilty,  because  thou  didst  not  send 
to  her,  who  was  ensnared  by  thee ;  nor  didst 
thou  desire  her.  Since,  therefore,  thou  didst 
not  deliver  up  thyself  to  her,  thou  shalt  find 
mercy  with  the  Lord  thy  God,  who  hath  said, 
"Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery,"  and,  "Thou 
shalt  not  covet."  ^  For  if  such  a  woman,  upon 
sight  of  thee,  or  unseasonable  meeting  with  thee, 
was  smitten  in  her  mind,  and  sent  to  thee,  but 
thou  as  a  religious  person  didst  refuse  her,^  if 
she  was  wounded  in  her  heart  by  thy  beauty,  and 
youth,  and  adorning,  and  fell  in  love  with  thee, 
thou  wilt  be  found  guilty  of  her  transgressions, 
as  having  been  the  occasion  of  scandal  to  her,^ 
and  shalt  inherit  a  woe.'^  Wherefore  pray  thou 
to  the  Lord  God  that  no  mischief  may  befall 
thee  upon  this  account :  for  thou  art  not  to 
please  men,  so  as  to  commit  sin ;  but  God,  so 
as  to  attain  hoUness  of  life,  and  be  partaker  of 
everlasting  rest.  That  beauty  which  God  and 
nature  has  bestowed  on  thee,  do  not  further 
beautify ;  but  modestly  diminish  it  before  men. 
Thus,  do  not  thou  permit  the  hair  of  thy  head  to 
grow  too  long,  but  rather  cut  it  short ;  lest  by  a 
nice  combing  thy  hair,  and  wearing  it  long,  and 
anointing  thyself,  thou  draw  upon  thyself  such 
ensnared  or  ensnaring  women.  Neither  do  thou 
wear  over-fine  garments  to  seduce  any ;  neither 
do  thou,  with  an  evil  subtilty,  affect  over-fine 
stockings  or  shoes  for  thy  feet,  but  only  such 
as  suit  the  measures  of  decency  and  usefulness. 
Neither  do  thou  put  a  gold  ring  upon  thy  fingers ; 
for  all  these  ornaments  are  the  signs  of  lascivious- 
ness,  which  if  thou  be  solicitous  about  in  an  in- 
decent manner,  thou  wilt  not  act  as  becomes  a 
good  man  :  for  it  is  not  lawful  for  thee,  a  be- 
liever and  a  man  of  God,  to  permit  the  hair  of 
thy  head  to  grow  long,  and  to  brush  it  up  to- 
gether, nor  to  suffer  it  to  s])read  abroad,  nor  to 
puff  it  up,  nor  by  nice  combing  and  platting  to 
make  it  curl  and  shine  ;  since  that  is  contrary 
to  the  law,  which  says  thus,  in  its  additional  pre- 
cepts :  "You  shall  not  make  to  yourselves  curls 
and  round  rasures."  '°  Nor  may  men  destroy 
thfe  hair  of  their  beards,  and  unnaturally  change 
the  form  of  a  man.  For  the  law  says  :  "  Ye 
shall  not  mar  your  beards."  '°  For  God  the 
Creator  has  made  this  decent  for  women,  but 
has  determined  that  it  is  unsuitable  for  men. 
But  if  thou  do  these  things  to  i)lease  men,  in 
contradiction  to  the  law,  thou  wilt  be  abominable 
with  God,  who  created  thee  after  His  own  image. 


6  Ex.  XX.  14,  17. 

7  The  v.  MSS.  add:  "didst  abstain  from  her,  and  didst  not  sin 
against  her." 

"  Matt,  xviii  7. 
9  Not  in  V.  MSS. 
'°  Lev.  xix.  27,  xxi.  5. 


Skc.  II.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


393 


If,  therefore,  thou  wilt  be  acceptable  to  God, 
abstain  from  all  those  things  which  He  hates, 
and  do  none  of  those  things  that  are  unpleasing 
to  Him. 

THAT  WE  OUGHT  NOT  TO  BE  OVER-CURIOUS 
ABOUT  THOSE  WHO  LIVE  WICKEDLY,  BUT  TO 
BE  INTENT  UPON  OUR  OWN  PROPER  EMPLOY- 
MENT. 

rv.  Thou  shalt  not  be  as  a  wanderer  and  gad- 
der abroad,  rambling  about  the  streets,  without 
just  cause,  to  spy  out  such  as  live  wickedly.  But 
by  minding  thy  own  trade  and  employment,  en- 
deavour to  do  what  is  acceptable  to  God.  And 
keeping  in  mind  the  oracles  of  Christ,  meditate 
in  the  same  continually.  For  so  the  Scripture 
says  to  thee  :  "  Thou  shalt  meditate  in  His  law 
day  and  night ;  when  thou  walkest  in  the  field, 
and  when  thou  sittest  in  thine  house,  and  when 
thou  liest  down,  and  when  thou  risest  up,  that 
thou  mayest  have  understanding  in  all  things."  ' 
Nay,  although  thou  beest  rich,  and  so  dost  not 
want  a  trade  for  thy  maintenance,  be  not  one 
that  gads  about,  and  walks  abroad  at  random  ; 
but  either  go  to  some  that  are  believers,  and  of 
the  same  religion,  and  confer  and  discourse  with 
them  about  the  lively  oracles  of  God  :  — 

WHAT  BOOKS  OF  SCRIPTURE  WE   OUGHT  TO   READ. 

V.  Or  if  thou  stayest  at  home,  read  the  books 
of  the  Law,  of  the  Kings,  with  the  Prophets  ; 
sing  the  hymns  of  David ;  and  peruse  diligently 
the  Gospel,  which  is  the  completion  of  ihe 
other. 

THAT  WE  OUGHT  TO  ABSTAIN  FROM  ALL  THE 
BOOKS  OF  THOSE  THAT  ARE  OUT  OF  THE 
CHURCH. 

VI.  Abstain  from  all  the  heathen  books.  For 
what  hast  thou  to  do  with  such  foreign  discourses, 
or  laws,  or  false  prophets,  which  subvert  the  faith 
of  the  unstable  ?  For  what  defect  dost  thou  find 
in  the  law  of  God,  that  thou  shouldest  have  re- 
course to  those  heathenish  fables?  For  if  thou 
hast  a  mind  to  read  history,  thou  hast  the  books 
of  the  Kings  ;  if  books  of  wisdom  or  poetry,  thou 
hast  those  of  the  Prophets,  of  Job,  and  the  Prov- 
erbs, in  which  thou  wilt  find  greater  depth  of 
sagacity  than  in  all  the  heathen  poets  and  soph- 
isters,  because  these  are  the  words  of  the  Lord, 
the  only  wise  God.  If  thou  desirest  something 
to  sing,  thou  hast  the  Psalms  ;  if  the  origin  of 
things,  thou  hast  Genesis ;  if  laws  and  statutes, 
thou  hast  the  glorious  law  of  the  Lord  God.  Do 
thou  therefore  utterly  abstain  from  all  strange 
and  diabolical  books.  Nay,  when  thou  readest 
the  law,  think  not  thyself  bound  to  observe  the 
additional  precepts  ;  though  not  all  of  them,  yet 

'  Josh.  i.  8;  Deut.  vi.  7. 


some  of  them.  Read  those  barely  for  the  sake 
of  history,  in  order  to  the  knowledge  of  them, 
and  to  glorify  God  that  He  has  delivered  thee 
from  such  great  and  so  many  bonds.  Propose 
to  thyself  to  distinguish  what  rules  were  from  the 
law  of  nature,  and  what  were  added  afterwards, 
or  were  such  additional  rules  as  were  introduced 
and  given  in  the  wilderness  to  the  Israelites  after 
the  making  of  the  calf;  for  the  law  contains 
those  precepts  which  were  spoken  by  the  Lord 
God  before  the  people  fell  into  idolatry,  and 
made  a  calf  like  the  Egyptian  Apis —  that  is,  the 
ten  commandments.  But  as  to  those  bonds 
which  were  further  laid  upon  them  after  they 
had  sinned,  do  not  thou  draw  them  upon  thy- 
self: for  our  Saviour  came  for  no  other  reason 
but  that  I/e  viiglit  deliver  those  that  zvere  obnox- 
ious thereto  from  the  wrath  tvhich  was  ir served 
for  them,  that-  He  might  fulfil  the  Law  and  the 
Prophets,  and  that  He  might  abrogate  or  change 
those  secondary  bonds  which  were  superadded 
to  the  rest  of  the  law.  For  therefore  did  He 
call  to  us,  and  say,  "  Come  \m.to  me,~  all  ye-  that 
labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you 
rest."  3  When,  therefore,  thou  hast  read  the 
Law,  which  is  agreeable  to  the  Gospel  and  to 
the  Prophets,  read  also  the  books  of  the  Kings, 
that  thou  mayest  thereby  learn  which  of  the 
kings  were  righteous,  and  how  they  were  pros- 
pered by  God,  and  how  the  promise  of  eternal 
life  continued  with  them  from  Him  ;  but  those 
kings  which  went  a-whoring  from  God  did  soon 
perish  in  their  apostasy  by  the  righteous  judg- 
ment of  God,  and  were  deprived  of  His  life, 
inheriting,  instead  of  rest,  eternal  punishment. 
Wherefore  by  reading  these  books  thou  wilt  be 
mightily  strengthened  in  the  faith,  and  edified  in 
Christ,  whose  body  and  member  thou  art.  More- 
over, when  thou  walkest  abroad  in  public,  and 
hast  a  mind  to  bathe,  make  use  of  that  bath 
which  is  appropriated  to  men,  lest,  by  discover- 
ing thy  body  in  an  unseemly  manner  to  women, 
or  by  seeing  a  sight  not  seemly  for  men,  either 
thou  beest  ensnared,  or  thou  ensnarest  and  en- 
ticest  to  thyself  those  women  7uho  easily  yield  to 
si/eh  temptations.^  Take  care,  therefore,  and 
avoid  such  things,  Lest  thou  admit  a  snare  upon 
thy  own  soul. 

CONCERNING   A    BAD    WOMAN. 

VII.  For  let  us  learn  what  the  sacred  word  says 
in  the  book  of  Wisdom  :  "  My  son,  keep  my 
words,  and  hide  my  commandments  with  thee. 
Say  unto  Wisdom,  Thou  art  my  sister  ;  and  make 
understandiitg  familiar  with  thee  :  that  she  may 
keep  thee  from  the  strange  and  wicked  woman, 
in  case  such  a  one  accost  thee  with  sweet  words. 


2  Omitted  iji  V.  mss. 
•5  Matt.  xL  28. 


194 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  1. 


For  from  the  window  of  her  house  she  looks  into 
the  street,  to  see  if  she  can  espy  some  young  man 
among  the  fooHsh  children,  without  understand- 
ing, walking  in  the  market-place,  in  the  meeting 
of  the  street  near  her  house,  and  talking  in  the 
dusk  of  the  evening,  or  in  the  silence  and  dark- 
ness of  the  night.  A  woman  meets  him  in  the 
appearance  of  an  harlot,  who  steals  away  the 
hearts  of  young  persons.  She  rambles  about, 
and  is  dissolute  ;  her  feet  abide  not  in  her  house  : 
sometimes  she  is  without,  sometimes  in  the 
streets,  and  lieth  in  wait  at  every  corner.  Then 
she  catches  him,  and  kisses  him,  and  with  an 
impudent  face  says  unto  him,  I  have  ])eace-offer- 
ings  with  me  ;  this  day  do  I  pay  my  vows  :  .there- 
fore came  I  forth  to  meet  thee  ;  earnestly  I  have 
desired  thy  face,  and  I  have  found  thee.  I  have 
decked  my  bed  with  coverings  ;  with  tapestry 
from  Egypt  have  I  adorned  it.  I  have  perfumed 
my  bed  with  saffron,  and  my  house  with  cinna- 
mon. Come,  let  us  take  our  fill  of  love  until 
the  morning ;  come,  let  us  solace  ourselves  with 
love,"  etc.  To  which  he  adds  :  "  With  much 
discourse  she  seduced  him,  with  snares  from  her 
lips  she  forced  him.  He  goes  after  her  like  a 
silly  bird."  '  And  again  :  "  Do  not  hearken  to 
a  wicked  woman  ;  for  though  the  lips  of  an  har- 
lot are  like  drops  from  an  honey-comb,  wliich 
for  a  while  is  smooth  in  thy  throat,  yet  afterwards 
thou  wilt  find  her  more  bitter  than  gall,  and 
sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword."  ^  And 
again  :  "  But  get  away  quickly,  and  tarry  not ; 
fix  not  thine  eyes  upon  her  :  for  she  hath  thrown 
down  many  wounded  ;  yea,  innumerable  multi- 
tudes have  been  slain  by  her."  3  "If  not,"  says 
he,  "  yet  thou  wilt  repent  at  the  last,  when  thy 
flesh  and  thy  body  are  consumed,  and  wilt  say, 
How  have  I  hated  instruction,  and  my  heart  has 
avoided  the  reproofs  of  the  righteous  !  I  have 
not  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  my  instructor,  nor 
mclined  mine  ear  to  my  teacher.  I  have  almost 
been  in  all  evil."'*  But  we  will  make  no  more 
quotations ;  and  if  we  have  omitted  any,  be  so 
])rudent  as  to  select  the  most  valuable  out  of  the 
Holy  Scriptures,  and  confirm  yourselves  with 
them,  rejecting  all  things  that  are  evil,  that  so 
you  may  be  found  holy  with  God  in  eternal  life. 


SEC.    III. 


COMMANDMENTS   TO  WOMEN. 


CONCERNING  THE  SUBJECTION  OF  A  WIFE  TO  HKR 
HUSBAND,  AND  THAT  SHE  MUST  BE  LOVING 
AND   MODEST. 

VIII.  Let  the  wife  be  obedient  to  her  own 
proper  husband,  because  "  the  husband  is  the 
head  of  the  wife."  5     But  Christ  is  the  head  of 


'  Prov.  vii.  I,  etc. 

2  Prov.  V.  3,  4. 

3  Prov.  vii.  25,  26. 

*  Prov.  V.  II,  etc. 

*  1  Cor.  xi.  3. 


that  husband  who  walks  in  the  way  of  righteous- 
ness ;  and  "the  head  of  Christ  is  God,"  even 
His  Father.  Therefore,  O  wife,  next  after  the 
Almighty,  our  God  and  Father,  the  Lord  of 
the  present  world  and  of  the  world  to  come,  the 
Maker  of  everything  that  breathes,  and  of  every 
power ;  and  after  His  beloved  Son,  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  through  whom^  glory  be  to  God, 
do  thou  fear  thy  husband,  and  reverence  him, 
pleasing  him  alone,  rendering  thyself  acceptable 
to  him  in  the  several  affairs  of  life,  that  so  on 
thy  account  thy  husband  may  be  called  blessed, 
according  to  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  which 
thus  speaks  :  "  Who  can  find  a  virtuous  woman  ? 
for  such  a  one  is  more  precious  than  costly 
stones.  The  heart  of  her  husband  doth  safely 
trust  in  her,  so  that  she  shall  have  no  need  of 
spoil :  for  she  does  good  to  her  husband  all  the 
days  of  her  life.  She  buyeth  wool  and  flax,  and 
worketh  profitable  things  with  her  hands.  She 
is  like  the  merchants'  ships,  she  bringeth  her  food 
from  lar.  She  riseth  also  while  it  is  yet  night, 
and  giveth  meat  to  her  household,  and  food  to 
her  maidens.  She  considereth  a  field,  and  buy- 
eth it ;  with  the  fruit  of  her  hands  she  planteth 
a  vineyard.  She  girdeth  her  loins  with  strength, 
and  strengtheneth  her  arms.  She  tasteth  that  it 
is  good  to  labour ;  her  lamp  goeth  not  out  all 
the  whole  night.  She  stretcheth  out  her  arms 
for  useful  work,  and  layeth  her  hands  to  the 
spindle.  She  openeth  her  hands  to  the  needy ; 
yea,  she  reacheth  forth  her  hands  to  the  poor. 
Her  husband  takes  no  care  of  the  affairs  of  his 
house  ;  for  all  that  are  with  her  are  clothed  with 
double  garments.  She  maketh  coats  for  her  hus- 
band, clothings  of  silk  and  purple.  Her  husband 
is  eminent  in  the  gates,  when  he  sitteth  with  the 
elders  of  the  land.  She  maketh  fine  linen,  and 
selleth  it  to  the  Phoenicians,  and  girdles  to  the 
Canaanites.  She  is  clothed  with  glory  and  beauty, 
and  she  rejoices  in  the  last  days.  She  openeth 
her  mouth  with  wisdom  and  discretion,  and  puts 
her  words  in  order.  The  ways  of  her  household 
are  strict ;  she  eateth  not  the  bread  of  idleness. 
She  will  open  her  mouth  with  wisdom  and  cau- 
tion, and  upon  her  tongue  are  the  laws  of  mercy. 
Her  children  arise  up  and  praise  her  for  her 
riches,  and  her  husband  joins  in  her  praises. 
Many  daughters  have  obtained  wealth  and  done 
worthily,  but  thou  surpasses!  and  excellest  them 
all.  May  lying  flatteries  and  the  vain  beauty  of 
a  wife  be  far  from  thee.  For  a  religious  wife  is 
blessed.  Let  her  praise  the  fear  of  the  Lord  :  7 
give  her  of  the  fruits  of  her  lips,  and  let  her  hus- 
band be  praised  in  the  gates." **  And  again  :  "A 
virtuous  wife  is  a  crown  to  her  husband."  9    And 


<>  "  To  whom  be  glory,"  V.  MSS 

7  [The  incorrect  rendering  of  the  LXX.  is  here  cited,  as  given  in 
the  text.  —  R.l 

8  Prov   xxxi.  10,  etc. 

9  Prov.  xii.  4. 


Sec.  III.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


395 


again  :  "  Many  wives  have  built  an  house." '  You 
have  learned  what  great  commendations  a  pru- 
dent and  loving  wife  receives  from  the  Lord  God. 
If  thou  desirest  to  be  one  of  the  faithful,  and  to 
please  the  Lord,  O  wife,  do  not  superadd  orna- 
ments to  thy  beauty,  in  order  to  please  other 
men ;  neither  affect  to  wear  fine  broidering,  gar- 
ments, or  shoes,  to  entice  those  who  are  allured 
by  such  things.  For  although  thou  dost  not 
these  wicked  things  with  design  of  sinning  thyself, 
but  only  for  the  sake  of  ornament  and  beauty,  yet 
wilt  thou  not  so  escape  future  punishment,  as 
having  compelled  another  to  look  so  hard  at 
thee  as  to  lust  after  thee,  and  as  not  having  taken 
care  both  to  avoid  sin  thyself,  and  the  affording 
scandal  to  others.  But  if  thou  yield  thyself  up, 
and  commit  the  crime,  thou  art  both  guilty  of 
thy  own  sin,  and  the  cause  of  the  ruin  of  the 
other's  soul  also.  Besides,  when  thou  hast  com- 
mitted lewdness  with  one  man,  and  beginnest  to 
despair,  thou  wilt  again  turn  away  from  thy  duty, 
and  follow  others,  and  grow  past  feeling  ;  as  says 
the  divine  word  :  "  When  a  wicked  man  comes 
into  the  depth  of  evil,  he  becomes  a  scorner,  and 
then  disgrace  and  reproach  come  upon  him."  ^ 
For  such  a  woman  afterward  being  wounded,  en- 
snares without  restraint  the  souls  of  the  foohsh. 
Let  us  learn,  therefore,  how  the  divine  word 
triumphs  over  such  women,  saying  :  "  I  hated  a 
woman  who  is  a  snare  and  net  to  the  heart  of 
men  worse  than  death  ;  her  hands  are  fetters."  ^ 
And  in  another  passage  :  "As  a  jewel  of  gold  in  a 
swine's  snout,  so  is  beauty  in  a  wicked  woman."-* 
And  again  :  "As  a  worm  in  wood,  so  does  a 
wicked  woman  destroy  her  husband."  s  And 
again  :  "  It  is  better  to  dwell  in  the  corner  of 
the  house-top,  than  with  a  contentious  and  an 
angry  woman."  ^  You,  therefore,  who  are  Chris- 
tian women,  do  not  imitate  such  as  these.  But 
thou  who  designest  to  be  faithful  to  thine  own 
husband,  take  care  to  please  him  alone.  And 
when  thou  art  in  the  streets,  cover  thy  head  ;  for 
by  such  a  covering  thou  wilt  avoid  being  viewed 
of  idle  persons.  Do  not  paint  thy  face,  which  is 
God's  workmanship  ;  for  there  is  no  part  of  thee 
which  wants  ornament,  inasmuch  as  all  things 
which  God  has  made  are  very  good.     But  the 


'  [ A. v.,  "  Every  wise  woman  buildeth  her  house." — R.]     Prov. 
r.  I. 

2  Prov.  xviii.  3. 

3  Eccles.  vii,  26. 
■♦  Prov.  xi.  22. 

S  Prov.  xii.  4  in  LXX. 
*  Prov.  xxi.  9,  19. 


lascivious  additional  adorning  of  what  is  already 
good  is  an  affront  to  the  bounty  of  the  Creator. 
Look  downward  when  thou  walkest  abroad,  veil- 
ing thyself  as  becomes  women. 

THAT   A   WOMAN   MUST   NOT   BATHE   WITH    MEN. 

IX.  Avoid  also  that  disorderly  practice  of  bath- 
ing in  the  same  place  with  men ;  for  many  are 
the  nets  of  the  evil  one.  And  let  not  a  Christian 
woman  bathe  with  an  hermaphrodite  ;  for  if  she 
is  to  veil  her  face,  and  conceal  it  with  modesty 
from  strange  men,  how  can  she  bear  to  enter 
naked  into  the  bath  together  with  men  ?  But  if 
the  bath  be  appropriated  to  women,  let  her  bathe 
orderly,  modestly,  and  moderately.  But  let  her 
not  bathe  without  occasion,  nor  much,  nor  often, 
nor  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  nor,  if  possible, 
every  day ;  and  let  the  tenth  hour  of  the  day  be 
the  set  time  for  such  seasonable  bathing.  For 
it  is  convenient  that  thou,  who  art  a  Christian 
woman,  shouldst  ever  constantly  avoid  a  curiosity 
which  has  many  eyes. 

CONCERNING     A      CONTENTIOUS      AND     BRAWLING 
WOMAN. 

X.  But  as  to  a  spirit  of  contention,  be  sure  to 
curb  it  as  to  all  men,  but  principally  as  to  thine 
husband ;  lest,  if  he  be  an  unbeliever  or  an  hea- 
then, he  may  have  an  occasion  of  scandal  or  of 
blaspheming  God,  and  thou  be  partaker  of  a 
woe  from  God.  For,  says  He,  "Woe  to  him  by 
whom  My  name  is  blasphemed  among  the  Gen- 
tiles ;  "  ^  and  lest,  if  thy  husband  be  a  Christian, 
he  be  forced,  from  his  knowledge  of  the  Scrip- 
tures, to  say  that  which  is  written  in  the  book 
of  Wisdom  :  "  It  is  better  to  dwell  in  the  wil- 
derness, than  with  a  contentious  and  an  angry 
woman."  ^  You  wives,  therefore,  demonstrate 
your  piety  by  your  modesty  and  meekness  to  all 
without  the  Church,  whether  they  be  women  or 
men,  in  order  to  their  conversion  and  improve- 
ment in  the  faith.  And  since  we  have  warned 
you,  and  instructed  you  briefly,  whom  we  do 
esteem  our  sisters,  daughters,  and  members,  as 
being  wise  yourselves,  persevere  all  your  lives 
in  an  unblameable  course  of  life.  Seek  to  know 
such  kinds  of  learning  whereby  you  may  arrive 
at  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord,  and  please  Him, 
and  so  rest  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 


7  Isa.  lii.  5. 

8  Prov.  xxi.  19. 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 

BOOK    II. 


OF   BISHOPS,    PRESBYTERS,   AND    DEACONS. 


SEC.     I. ON     EXAMINING     CANDIDATES     FOR     THE 

EPISCOPAL    OFFICE. 

THAT  A  BISHOP   MUST   BE  WELL   INSTRUCTED   AND 
EXPERIENCED   IN   THE   WORD. 

I.  But  concerning  bishops,  we  have  heard  from 
our  Lord,  that  a  pastor  who  is  to  be  ordained  a 
bishop  for  the  churches  in  every  parish,  must  be 
unblameable,  unreprovable,  free  from  all  kinds 
of  wickedness  common  among  men,  not  under 
fifty  years  of  age  ;  for  such  a  one  is  in  good 
part  past  youthful  disorders,  and  the  slanders  of 
the  heathen,  as  well  as  the  reproaches  which  are 
sometimes  cast  upon  many  persons  by  some  false 
brethren,  who  do  not  consider  the  word  of  God 
in  the  Gospel :  "  Whosoever  speaketh  an  idle 
word  shall  give  an  account  thereof  to  the  Lord 
in  the  day  of  judgment."  '  And  again  :  "  By 
thy  words  thou  shalt  be  justified,  and  by  thy 
words  thou  shalt  be  condemned."  ^  Let  him 
therefore,  //  it  is  possible,  be  well  educated  ;  but 
if  he  be  icnlettered,  let  him  at  any  rate  be  ^  skilful 
in  the  word,  and  of  competent  age.  But  if  in 
a  small  parish  one  advanced  in  years  is  not  to 
be  found,-*  let  some  younger  person,  who  has  a 
good  report  among  his  neighbours,  and  is  es- 
teemed by  them  worthy  of  the  office  of  a  bishop, 
—  who  has  carried  himself  from  his  youth  with 
meekness  and  regularity,  like  a  much  elder  per- 
son, —  after  examination,  and  a  general  good 
report,  be  ordained  in  peace.  For  Solomon  at 
twelve  years  of  age  was  king  of  Israel, s  and 
Josiah  at  eight  years  of  age  reigned  righteously,*^ 
and  in  like  manner  Joash  governed  the  people 
at  seven  years  of  age.^  Wherefore,  although  the 
person  be  young,  let  him  be  meek,  gentle,  and 


*  Matt.  xii.  36. 

2  Matt.  xii.  37. 

3  The  words  in  italics  occur  only  in  the  V.  MSS. 

*  The  V.  MSS.  read:  "  But  if  in  a  small  parish  one  advanced  in 
years  is  not  to  be  found  whom  his  neighbours  testify  to  be  worthy  of 
the  office  of  bishop,  and  wise  enough  to  be  appointed  to  it,  and  if 
there  be  a  young  man  who  has  carried,"  etc. 

s  1  Kings  xii.  (LXX.). 

6  2  Kings  xxii.  i. 

7  2  Chron.  xxiv.  i ;  2  Kings  xi.  3,  4. 


quiet.  For  the  Lord  God  says  by  Esaias : 
"  Upon  whom  will  I  look,  but  upon  him  who 
is  huml)le  and  quiet,  and  always  trembles  at  my 
words?  "^  In  like  manner  it  is  in  the  Gospel 
also :  "  Blessed  are  the  meek :  for  they  shall 
inherit  the  earth."  9  Let  him  also  be  merciful; 
for  again  it  is  said  :  "  Blessed  are  the  merciful : 
for  they  shall  obtain  mercy."  '°  Let  him  also  be 
a  peacemaker ;  for  again  it  is  said:  '■'Blessed 
are  the  peacemakers  :  for  they  shall  be  called  the 
sons  of  God.''  "  Let  him  also  be  one  of  a  good 
conscience,  purified  from  all  evil,  and  wicked- 
ness, and  unrighteousness ;  for  it  is  said  again  : 
"  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart :  for  they  shall 
see  God."  " 

WHAT     OUGHT     TO     BE     THE     CHARACTERS     OF     A 
BISHOP   AND   OF   THE   REST   OF   THE   CLERGY. 

II.  Let  him  therefore  be  sober,  prudent,  de- 
cent, firm,  stable,  not  given  to  wine  ;  no  striker, 
but  gentle  ;  not  a  brawler,  not  covetous  ;  "  not 
a  novice,  lest,  being  puffed  up  with  pride,  he 
fall  into  condemnation,  and  the  snare  of  the 
devil :  for  every  one  that  exalteth  himself  shall 
be  abased." '3  Such  a  one  a  bishop  ought  to 
be,  who  has  been  the  "  husband  of  one  wife,"  '•♦ 
who  also  has  herself  had  no  other  husband,  "  rul- 
ing well  his  own  house."  's  In  this  manner  let 
examination  be  made  when  he  is  to  receive  or- 
dination, and  to  be  placed  in  his  bishopric, 
whether  he  be  grave,  faithful,  decent ;  whether 
he  hath  a  grave  and  faithful  wife,  or  has  formerly 
had  such  a  one ;  whether  he  hath  educated  his 
children  piously,  and  has  "  brought  them  up  in 
the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord ;  "  '^ 
whether  his  domestics  do   fear  and   reverence 


^  Isa.  Ixvi.  2. 

9  Matt.  V.  5. 
^"^  Matt.  V.  7. 

"  From  the  V.  MSS.;  Matt.  v.  9. 
12  Matt.  V.  8. 

"  I  Tim.  iii.  6;  Luke  xiv.  11. 
'■i  I  Tim.  iii.  2. 
'5  I  Tim.  iii.  4. 
"■  Eph.  vi.  4. 


Sec.  II.] 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


397 


him,  and  are  all  obedient  to  him  :  for  if  those 
who  are  immediately  about  him  for  worldly  con- 
cerns are  seditious  and  disobedient,  how  will 
others  not  of  his  family,  when  they  are  under 
his  management,  become  obedient  to  him  ? 

IN   WHAT   THIXGS    A   BISHOP    IS    TO    BE    EXAMINED 
BEFORE    HE   IS   ORDAINED. 

III.  Let  examination  also  be  made  whether 
he  be  unblameable  as  to  the  concerns  of  this 
life  ;  for  it  is  written  :  "  Search  diligently  for  all 
the  faults  of  him  who  is  to  be  ordained  for  the 
priesthood."  ' 

SEC.    II.  —  ON   THE   CHARACTER   AND   TEACHING   OF 
THE    BISHOP. 

On  which  account  let  him  also  be  void  of 
anger ;  for  Wisdom  says  :  "  Anger  destroys  even 
the  prudent."  ^  Let  him  also  be  merciful,  of  a 
generous  and  loving  temper ;  for  our  Lord  says  : 
"  By  this  shall  all  men  know  that  ye  are  my  dis- 
ciples, if  ye  love  one  another."  ^  Let  him  be 
also  ready  to  give,  a  lover  of  the  widow  and  the 
stranger ;  ready  to  serve,  and  minister,  and  at- 
tend ;  resolute  in  his  duty  ;  and  let  him  know 
who  is  the  most  worthy  of  his  assistance. 

THAT  CHARITABLE  DISTRIBUTIONS  ARE  NOT  TO 
BE  MADE  TO  EVERY  WIDOW,  BUT  THAT  SOME- 
TIMES A  WOMAN  WHO  HAS  A  HUSBAND  IS  TO 
BE  preferred:  and  THAT  NO  DISTRIBUTIONS 
ARE  TO  BE  MADE  TO  ANY  ONE  WHO  IS  GIVEN 
TO  GLUTTONY,  DRUNKENNESS,   AND   IDLENESS. 

IV.  For  if  there  be  a  widow  who  is  able  to 
support  herself,  and  another  woman  who  is  not 
a  widow,  but  is  needy  by  reason  of  sickness,  or 
the  bringing  up  many  children,  or  infirmity  of 
her  hands,  let  him  stretch  out  his  hand  in  char- 
ity rather  to  this  latter.  But  if  any  one  be  in 
want  by  gluttony,  drunkenness,  or  idleness,  he 
does  not  deserve  any  assistance,  or  to  be  es- 
teemed a  member  of  the  Church  of  God.  For 
the  Scripture,  speaking  of  such  persons,  says  : 
"The  slothful  hideth  his  hand  in  his  bosom,  and 
is  not  able  to  bring  it  to  his  mouth  again."  ■* 
And  again  :  "  The  sluggard  folds  up  his  hands, 
and  eats  his  own  flesh."  5  "  For  every  drunkard 
and  whoremonger  shall  come  to  poverty,  and 
every  drowsy  person  shall  be  clothed  with  tatters 
and  rags.'"^  And  in  another  passage  :  "  If  thou 
give  thine  eyes  to  drinking  and  cups,  thou  shalt 
afterwards  walk  more  naked  than  a  pestle."  ^ 
For  certainly  idleness  is  the  mother  of  famine. 

'  Lev.  xxi.  17,  etc. 

2  Prov.  xy.  I  (LXX.). 

3  John  xiii.  35. 

*  Prov.  xix.  24. 
S  Eccles.  iv.  5. 

*  Not  in  v.  Mss.     Prov.  xxiii.  21. 

'  Prov.  xxiii.  31  (LXX.).  The  word  translated  "  pestle  "  has 
also  been  rendered  "  upper  room,"  and  some  suppose  it  corrupt. 


THAT  A  BISHOP  MUST  BE  NO  ACCEPTER  OF  PER- 
SONS IN  JUDGMENT  ;  THAT  HE  MUST  POSSESS 
A  GENTLE  DISPOSITION,  AND  BE  TEMPERATE 
IN    HIS   MODE   OF   LIFE. 

v.  A  bishop  must  be  no  accepter  of  persons ; 
neither  revering  nor  flattering  a  rich  man  con- 
trary to  what  is  right,  nor  overlooking  nor  domi- 
neering over  a  poor  man.  For,  says  God  to 
Moses,  "Thou  shalt  not  accept  the  person  of 
the  rich,  nor  shalt  thou  pity  a  poor  man  in  his 
cause:  for  the  judgment  is  the  Lord's."^  And 
again:  "Thou  shalt  with  exact  justice  follow 
that  which  is  right."  9  Let  a  bishop  be  frugal, 
and  contented  with  a  little  in  his  meat  and  drink, 
that  he  may  be  ever  in  a  sober  frame,  and  dis- 
posed to  instruct  and  admonish  the  ignorant ; 
and  let  him  not  be  costly  in  his  diet,  a  pam- 
perer  of  himself,  given  to  pleasure,  or  fond  of 
delicacies.  Let  him  he  patient  and  gentle  in 
his  admonitions,  well  instructed'himself,  meditat- 
ing in  and  diligently  studying  the  Lord's  books, 
and  reading  them  frequently,  that  so  he  may  be 
able  carefully  to  interpret  the  Scriptures,  ex- 
pounding the  Gospel  in  correspondence  with  the 
prophets  and  with  the  law ;  and  let  the  exposi- 
tions from  the  law  and  the  prophets  correspond 
to  the  Gospel.  For  the  Lord  Jesus  says  :  "Search 
the  Scriptures  ;  for  they  are  those  which  testify 
of  me."  '°  And  again  :  "  For  Moses  wrote  of 
me.""  But,  above  all,  let  him  carefully  dis- 
tinguish between  the  original  law  and  the  ad- 
ditional precepts,  and  show  which  are  the  laws 
for  believers,  and  which  the  bonds  for  the  unbe- 
lievers, lest  any  should  fall  under  those  bonds. 
Be  careful,  therefore,  O  bishop,  to  study  the 
word,  that  thou  mayest  be  able  to  explain  every- 
thing exactly,  and  that  thou  mayest  copiously 
nourish  thy  people  with  much  doctrine,  and  en- 
lighten them  with  the  light  of  the  law ;  for  God 
says  :  "  Enlighten  yourselves  with  the  light  of 
knowledge,  while  we  have  yet  opportunity."  '^ 

THAT   A    BISHOP   MUST   NOT   BE   GIVEN    TO    FILTHY 
LUCRE,  NOR   BE   A   SURETY    XOR   AN    ADVOCATE. 

vi.  Let  not  a  bishop  be  given  to  filthy  lucre, 
especially  before  the  Gentiles,  rather  suffering 
than  offering  injuries ;  not  covetous,  nor  rapa- 
cious ;  no  purloiner ;  no  admirer  of  the  rich, 
nor  hater  of  the  poor ;  no  evil-speaker,  nor  false 
witness  ;  not  given  to  anger ;  no  brawler ;  not 
entangled  with  the  affairs  of  this  life ;  not  a 
surety  for  any  one,  nor  an  accuser  in  suits  about 
money  ;  not  ambitious  ;  not  double-minded,  nor 
douI)le-tongued  ;  not  ready  to  hearken  to  cal- 
umny or  evil-speaking  ;  not  a  dissembler  ;  not  ad- 
dicted to  the  heathen  festivals  ;  not  given  to  vain 


8  Lev.  xix.  15;  Ex.  xxiii.  3. 

9  Deut.  i.  17,  xvi.  20. 

'°  John  V.  3Q. 
"  John  V.  46. 
"  "Hos.  x.  12. 


398 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  II. 


deceits ;  not  eager  after  worldly  things,  nor  a 
lover  of  money.  For  all  these  things  are  oppo- 
site to  God,  and  pleasing  to  demons.  Let  the 
bishop  earnestly  give  all  these  precepts  in  charge 
to  the  laity  also,  persuading  them  to  imitate  his 
conduct.  For,  says  He,  "Do  ye  make  the 
children  of  Israel  pious."  '  Let  him  be  prudent, 
humble,  apt  to  admonish  with  the  instructions 
of  the  Lord,  well-disposed,  one  who  has  re- 
nounced all  the  wicked  projects  of  this  world, 
and  all  heathenish  lusts ;  let  him  be  orderly, 
sharp  in  observing  the  wicked,  anti  taking  heed 
of  them,  but  yet  a  friend  to  all ;  just,  discerning ; 
and  whatsoever  qualities  are  commendable  among 
men,  let  the  bishop  possess  them  in  himself.  For 
if  the  pastor  be  unblameable  as  to  any  wicked- 
ness, he  will  compel  his  own  disciples,  and  by 
his  very  mode  of  life  press  them  to  become 
worthy  imitators  of  his  own  actions.  As  the 
prophet  somewhere  says,  "  And  it  will  be,  as  is 
the  priest,  so  is  the  people  ;  "  ^  for  our  Lord  and 
Teacher  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  ^  of  God,  began 
first  to  do,  and  then  to  teach,  as  Luke  somewhere 
says :  •*  "  which  Jesus  began  to  do  and  to  teach."  '^ 
Wherefore  he  says  :  "  Whosoever  shall  do  and 
teach,  he  shall  be  called  great  in  the  kingdom 
of  God."  5  For  you  bishops  are  to  be  guides 
and  watchmen  to  the  people,  as  you  yourselves 
have  Christ  for  your  guide  and  watchman.  Do 
you  therefore  become  good  guides  and  watch- 
men to  the  people  of  God.  For  the  Lord  says 
by  Ezekiel,  speaking  to  every  one  of  you  :  "  Son 
of  man,  I  have  given  thee  for  a  watchman  to  the 
house  of  Israel ;  and  thou  shalt  hear  the  word 
from  my  mouth,  and  shalt  observe,  and  shalt  de- 
clare it  from  me.  When  I  say  unto  the  wicked, 
Thou  shalt  surely  die ;  if  thou  dost  not  speak  to 
warn  the  wicked  from  his  wickedness,  that  wicked 
man  shall  die  in  his  iniquity,  and  his  blood  will 
I  require  at  thine  hand.  But  if  thou  warn  the 
wicked -from  his  way,  that  he  may  turn  from  it, 
and  he  does  not  turn  from  it,  he  shall  die  in 
his  iniquity,  and  thou  hast  delivered  thy  soul."  ^ 
"  In  the  same  manner,  if  the  sword  of  war  be 
approaching,  and  the  people  set  a  watchman  to 
watch,  and  he  see  the  same  approach,  and  does 
not  forewarn  them,  and  the  sword  come  and 
take  one  of  them,  he  is  taken  away  in  his  in- 
iquity ;  but  his  blood  shall  be  required  at  the 
watchman's  hand,  because  he  did  not  blow  the 
trumpet.  But  if  he  blew  the  trumpet,  and  he 
who  heard  it  would  not  take  warning,  and  the 
sword  come  and  take  him  away,  his  blood  shall 
be  upon  him,  because  he  heard  the  trumpet  and 
took  not  warning.     But  he  who  took  warning 


■  Lev.  XV.  31. 

^  Hos  iv.  9. 

3  Not  in  V.  Mss. 

*  Acts  i.  1. 

S  Matt.  V.  19. 

*>  Ezek.  xxxiii.  7,  etc. 


has  delivered  his  soul ;  and  the  watchman,  be- 
cause he  gave  warning,  shall  surely  live."  ^  The 
sword  here  is  the  judgment ;  the  trumpet  is  the 
holy  Gospel ;  the  watchman  is  the  bishop,  who  is 
set  in  the  Church,  who  is  obliged  by  his  preach- 
ing to  testify  and  vehemently  to  forewarn  ^  con- 
cerning that  judgment.  If  ye  do  not  declare 
and  testify  this  to  the  people,  the  sins  of  those 
who  are  ignorant  of  it  will  be  found  upon  you. 
Wherefore  do  you  warn  and  reprove  the  unin- 
structed  with  boldness,  teach  the  ignorant,  con- 
firm those  that  understand,  bring  back  those 
that  go  astray.  If  we  repeat  the  very  same 
things  on  the  same  occasions,  brethren,  we  shall 
not  do  amiss.  For  by  frequent  hearing  it  is  to 
be  hoped  that  some  will  be  made  ashamed,  and 
at  least  do  some  good  action,  and  avoid  some 
wicked  one.  For  says  God  by  the  prophet : 
"  Testify  those  things  to  them  ;  perhaps  they  will 
hear  thy  voice."  ^  And  again  :  "  If  perhaps  they 
will  hear,  if  perhaps  they  will  submit."  ^  Moses 
also  says  to  the  people  :  "^  hearing  thou  wilt 
hear  the  Lord  God,  and  do  that  which  is  good 
and  right  in  His  eyes.'''  ■"  Arid  again  :  ^  "  Hear, 
O  Israel ;  the  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord."  " 
And  our  Lord  is  often  recorded  in  the  Gospel  to 
have  said :  "  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him 
hear."  '^  And  wise  Solomon  says  :  "  My  son, 
hear  the  instruction  of  thy  father,  and  reject  not 
the  laws  of  thy  mother."  '^  And,  indeed,  to  this 
day  men  have  not  heard ;  for  while  they  seem 
to  have  heard,  they  have  not  heard  aright,  as 
appears  by  their  having  left  the  one  and  only 
true  God,  and  their  being  drawn  into  destructive 
and  dangerous  heresies,  concerning  which  we 
shall  speak  again  afterwards. 


SEC.    III.  —  HOW   THE     BISHOP    IS    TO    TREAT    THE 
INNOCENT,  THE    GUILTY,  AND    THE    PENITENT. 

WHAT    OUGHT    TO    BE    THE    CHARACTER    OF    THE 
INITIATED. 

VII.  Beloved,  be  it  known  to  you  that  those 
who  are  baptized  into  the  death  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  are  obliged  to  go  on  no  longer  in  sin  ;  for 
as  those  who  are  dead  cannot  work  wickedness 
any  longer,  so  those  who  are  dead  with  Christ 
cannot  practise  wickedness.  We  do  not  therefore 
believe,  brethren,  that  any  one  who  has  received 
the  washing  of  life  continues  in  the  practice  of 
the  licentious  acts  of  transgressors.  Now  he  who 
sins  after  his  baptism,  unless  he  repent  and  for- 
sake his  sins,  shall  be  condemned  to  hell-fire. 


7  Ezek.  xxxiii.  2,  etc. 

5  Jer.  xxvi. 

9  Ezek.  ii.  7,  iii.  n. 
'°  Ex.  XV.  26. 

"  Deut.  vi.  4;   Mark  xii.  29. 

'-  Matt,  xi.,  xiii. 

»  Prov.  i.  8. 


Sec.  III.] 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


399 


CONCERNING  A  PERSON  FALSELY  ACCUSED,  OR  A 
PERSON  CONVICTED. 

VIII.  But  if  any  one  be  maliciously  prosecuted 
by  the  heathen,  because  he  will  not  still  go  along 
with  them  to  the  same  excess  of  riot,  let  him 
know  that  such  a  one  is  blessed  of  God,  accord- 
ing as  our  Lord  says  in  the  Gospel :  "  Blessed 
are  ye  when  men  shall  reproach  you,  or  perse- 
cute you,  or  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  you 
falsely,  for  my  sake.  Rejoice  and  be  exceeding 
glad,  for  your  reward  is  great  in  heaven."  '  If^ 
therefore,  any  one  be  slandered  and  falsely  ac- 
cused, such  a  one  is  blessed ;  for  the  Scripture 
says,  "  A  man  that  is  a  reprobate  is  not  tried  by 
God."  ^  But  if  any  one  be  convicted  as  having 
done  a  wicked  action,  such  a  one  not  only  hurts 
himself,  but  occasions  the  whole  body  of  the 
Church  and  its  doctrine  to  be  blasphemed ;  as 
if  we  Christians  did  not  practise  those  things 
that  we  declare  to  be  good  and  honest,  and  we 
ourselves  shall  be  reproached  by  the  Lord,  that 
"  they  say  and  do  not."  ^  Wherefore  the  bishop 
must  boldly  reject  such  as  these  upon  full  con- 
viction, unless  they  change  their  course  of  hfe. 

THAT   A   BISHOP   OUGHT   NOT  TO    RECEIVE   BRIBES. 

IX.  For  the  bishop  must  not  only  himself  give 
no  offence,  but  must  be  no  respecter  of  persons  ; 
in  meekness  instructing  those  that  offend.  But 
if  he  himself  has  not  a  good  conscience,  and  is 
a  respecter  of  persons  for  the  sake  of  filthy  lucre 
and  receiving  of  bribes,  and  spares  the  open 
offender,  and  permits  him  to  continue  in  the 
Church,  he  disregards  the  voice  of  God  and  of 
our  Lord,  which  says,  "  Thou  shalt  exactly  exe- 
cute right  judgment."  *  "  Thou  shalt  not  accept 
persons  in  judgment :  thou  shalt  not  justify  the 
ungodly."  5  "  Thou  shalt  not  receive  gifts  against 
any  one's  life  ;  for  gifts  do  blind  the  eyes  of  the 
wise,  and  pervert  the  words  of  the  righteous."  '^ 
And  elsewhere  He  says :  "  Take  away  from 
among  yourselves  that  wicked  person."  7  And 
Solomon  says  in  his  Proverbs  :  "  Cast  out  a  pes- 
tilent fellow  from  the  congregation,  and  strife 
will  go  out  along  with  him."  * 

THAT  A  BISHOP  WHO  BY  WRONG  JUDGMENT  SPARES 
AN    OFFENDER    IS    HIMSELF    GUILTY. 

X.  But  he  who  does  not  consider  these  things, 
will,  contrary  to  justice,  spare  him  who  deserves 
punishment ;  as  Saul  spared  Agag,^  and  Eli '°  his 


'  Matt.  V.  II,  12. 

2  This  passage  is  not  found  in  Scripture;     Some  compare  Jas. 
12  and  Heb.  xii.  8. 
■5  Matt,  xxiii.  3. 
••  Deut.  xvi.  20,  i.  17. 
S  Ex.  xxiii.  7,  LXX. 

*  Ex.  xxiii.  8. 

'  Deut.  xxvii.  25,  xvi.  19,  xvii.  7. 

*  Prov.  xxii.  10. 
9  I  Sam.  XV. 

'°  I  Sam.  ii. 


sons,  "  who  knew  not  the  Lord."  Such  a  one 
profanes  his  own  dignity,  and  that  Church  of 
God  which  is  in  his  parish.  Such  a  one  is 
esteemed  unjust  before  God  and  holy  men,  as 
affording  occasion  of  scandal  to  many  of  the 
newly  baptized,  and  to  the  catechumens ;  as 
also  to  the  youth  of  both  sexes,  to  whom  a  woe 
belongs,  and  "  a  mill-stone  about  his  neck,"  " 
and  drowning,  on  account  of  his  guilt.  For,  ob- 
serving what  a  person  their  governor  is,  through 
his  wickedness  and  neglect  of  justice  they  will 
grow  sceptical,  and,  indulging  the  same  disease, 
will  be  compelled  to  perish  with  him ;  as  was 
the  case  of  the  people  joining  with  Jeroboam,'^ 
and  those  which  were  in  the  conspiracy  with 
Corah.'3  But  if  the  offender  sees  that  the  bishop 
and  deacons  are  innocent  and  unblameable,  and 
the  flock  pure,  he  will  either  not  venture  to  de- 
spise their  authority,  and  to  enter  into  the  Church 
of  God  at  all,  as  one  smitten  by  his  own  con- 
science :  or  if  he  values  nothing,  and  ventures 
to  enter  in,  either  he  will  be  convicted  imme- 
diately, as  Uzza  ''t  at  the  ark,  when  he  touched 
it  to  support  it;  and  as  Achan,'5  when  he  stole 
the  accursed  thing ;  and  as  Gehazi,'''  when  he 
coveted  the  money  of  Naaman,  and  so  will  be 
immediately  punished  :  or  else  he  will  be  ad- 
monished by  the  pastor,  and  drawn  to  repent- 
ance. For  when  he  looks  round  the  whole 
Church  one  by  one,  and  can  spy  no  blemish, 
neither  in  the  bishop  nor  in  the  people  who  are 
under  his  care,  he  will  be  put  to  confusion,  and 
pricked  at  the  heart,  and  in  a  peaceable  manner 
will  go  his  way  with  shame  and  many  tears,  and 
the  flock  will  remain  pure.  He  will  apply  him- 
self to  God  with  tears,  and  will  repent  of  his 
sins,  and  have  hope.  Nay,  the  whole  flock,  at 
the  sight  of  his  tears,  will  be  instructed,  because 
a  sinner  avoids  destruction  by  repentance. 

HOW   A   BISHOP   OUGHT   TO   JUDGE   OFFENDERS. 

XI.  Upon  this  account,  therefore,  O  bishop, 
endeavour  to  be  pure  in  thy  actions,  and  to 
adorn  thy  place  and  dignity,  which  is  that  of 
one  sustaining  the  character  of  God  among  men, 
as  being  set  over  all  men,  over  priests,  kings, 
rulers,  fathers,  children,  teachers,  and  in  general 
over  all  those  who  are  subject  to  thee  :  and  so 
sit  in  the  Church  when  thou  speakest,  as  having 
authority  to  judge  offenders.  For  to  you,  O 
bishops,  it  is  said  :  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  bind 
on  earth  shall  be  bound  in  heaven  ;  and  what- 
soever ye  shall  loose  on  earth  shall  be  loosed  in 
heaven."  '^ 


"  Matt,  xviii.  6,  7. 

'-  I  Kings  xii. 

"  Num.  xvi. 

'■*  2  Sam.  vi. 

■5  Josh.  vii. 

'^  2  Kings  V. 

'7  Matt,  xviii.  18. 


400 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  II. 


INSTRUCTION    AS     TO    HOW    A    BISHOP    OUGHT    TO 
BEHAVE    HIMSELF   TO   THE   PENITENT. 

XII.  Do  thou  therefore,  O  bishop,  judge  with 
authority  hke  God,  yet  receive  the  penitent ; 
for  God  is  a  God  of  mercy.  Rebuke  those  that 
sin,  admonish  those  that  are  not  converted,  ex- 
hort those  that  stand  to  persevere  in  their  good- 
ness, receive  the  penitent ;  for  the  Lord  God 
has  promised  with  an  oath  to  afford  remission 
to  the  penitent  for  what  things  they  have  done 
amiss.  For  He  says  by  Ezekiel :  "  Speak  unto 
them,  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  I  would  not  the 
death  of  a  sinner,  but  that  the  wicked  turn  from 
his  evil  way,  and  live.  Turn  ye  therefore  from 
your  evil  ways ;  for  why  will  ye  die,  O  house  of 
Israel  ?  "  '  Here  the  ivord-  affords  hope  to  sin- 
ners, that  if  they  will  repent  they  shall  have  hope 
of  salvation,  lest  otherwise  out  of  despair  they 
yield  themselves  up  to  their  transgressions ;  but 
that,*  having  hope  of  salvation,  they  may  be  con- 
verted, and  may  address  to  God  with  tears,  on 
account  of  their  sins,  and  may  repent  from  their 
hearts,  and  so  appease  His  displeasure  towards 
them  ;  so  shall  they  receive  a  pardon  from  Him, 
as  from  a  merciful  Father. 

THAT    WE    OUGHT     TO     BEWARE     HOW    WE     MAKE 
TRIAL   OF   ANY   SINFUL   COURSE. 

XIII.  Yet  it  is  very  necessary  that  those  who 
are  yet  innocent  should  continue  so,  and  not 
make  an  experiment  what  sin  is,  that  they  may 
not  have  occasion  for  trouble,  sorrow,  and  those 
lamentations  which  are  in  order  to  forgiveness. 
For  how  dost  thou  know,  O  man,  when  thou 
sinnest,  whether  thou  shalt  live  any  number  of 
days  in  this  present  state,  that  thou  mayest  have 
time  to  repent?  For  the  time  of  thy  departure 
out  of  this  world  is  uncertain  ;  and  if  thou  diest 
in  sin,  there  will  remain  no  repentance  for  thee  ; 
as  God  says  by  David,  "  In  the  grave  who  will 
confess  to  Thee  ?  "  ^  It  behoves  us,  therefore, 
to  be  ready  in  the  doing  of  our  duty,  that  so  we 
may  await  our  passage  into  another  world  with- 
out sorrow.  Wherefore  also  the  Divine  Word 
exhorts,  speakiii}^  to  thee  by  the  wise  Solomon^ 
"  Prepare  thy  works  against  thy  exit,  and  pro- 
vide all  beforehand  in  the  field,"  •♦  lest  some  of 
the  things  necessary  to  thy  journey  be  wanting  ; 
as  the  oil  of  piety  was  deficient  in  the  five  fool- 
ish virgins  5  mentioned  in  the  Gospel,  when  they, 
on  account  of  their  having  extinguished  their 
lamps  of  divine  knowledge,  were  shut  out  of  the 
bride-chamber.  Wherefore  he  who  values  the 
security  of  his  spul  will  take  care  to  be  out  of 
danger,  by  keeping  free  from  sin,  that  so  he  may 


'  Ezek.  xxxiii.  ii. 
2  Not  in  V.  Mss. 
^  Ps.  vi.  5. 
*  Prov.  xxiv.  27. 
5  Matt.  XXV. 


preserve  the  advantage  of  his  former  good  works 
to  himself.  Do  thou,  therefore,  so  judge  as  exe- 
cuting judgment  for  God.  For,  as  the  Scripture 
says,  "  the  judgment  is  the  Lord's."  ^  In  the 
first  place,  therefore,  condemn  the  guilty  person 
with  authority  ;  afterwards  try  to  bring  him  home 
with  mercy  and  compassion,  and  readiness  to 
receive  him,  promising  him  salvation  if  he  will 
change  his  course  of  life,  and  become  a  penitent ; 
and  when  he  does  repent,  and  has  submitted 
to  his  chastisement,  receive  him  :  remembering 
that  our  Lord  has  said,  "  There  is  joy  in  heaven 
over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  ? 

CONCERNING  THOSE  WHO  AFFIRM  THAT  PENI- 
TENTS ARE  NOT  TO  BE  RECEIVED  INTO  THE 
CHURCH.  THAT  A  RIGHTEOUS  PERSON,  AL- 
THOUGH HE  CONVERSE  WITH  A  SINNER,  WILL 
NOT  PERISH  WITH  HIM.  THAT  NO  PERSON  IS 
PUNISHED  FOR  ANOTHER,  BUT  EVERY  ONE  MUST 
GIVE  AN  ACCOUNT  OF  HIMSELF.  THAT  WE 
MUST  ASSIST  THOSE  WHO  ARE  WEAK  IN  THE 
FAITH;  AND  THAT  A  BISHOP  MUST  NOT  BE 
GOVERNED  BY  ANY  TURIiULENT  PERSON  AMONG 
THE   LAITY. 

XIV.  But  if  thou  refusest  to  receive  him  that 
repents,  thou  exposest  him  to  those  who  lie  in 
wait  to  destroy,  forgetting  what  David  says : 
"  Deliver  not  my  soul,  which  confesses  to  Thee, 
unto  destroying  beasts."  ^  Wherefore  Jeremiah, 
when  he  is  exhorting  men  to  repentance,  says 
thus:  "Shall  not  he  that  falleth  arise?  or  he 
that  turneth  away,  cannot  he  return?  Where- 
fore have  my  people  gone  back  by  a  shameless 
backsliding?  and  they  are  hardened  in  their 
purpose.'^  Turn,  ye  backsliding  children,  and 
I  will  heal  your  backslidings."  '°  Receive,  there- 
fore, without  any  doubting,  him  that  repents. 
Be  not  hindered  by  such  unmerciful  men,  who 
say  that  we  must  not  be  defiled  with  such  as 
those,  nor  so  much  as  speak  to  them  :  for  such 
advice  is  from  men  that  are  unacquainted  with 
God  and  His  providence,  and  are  unreasonable 
judges,  and  unmerciful  brutes.  These  men  are 
ignorant  that  we  ought  to  avoid  society  with 
offenders,  not  in  discourse,  but  in  actions  :  for 
"  the  righteousness  of  the  righteous  shall  be  upon 
him,  and  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked  shall  be 
upon  him.""  And  again:  "If  a  land  sinneth 
against  me  by  trespassing  grievously,  and  I 
stretch  out  my  hand  upon  it,  and  break  the  staff 
of  bread  upon  it,  and  send  famine  upon  it,  and 
destroy  man  and  beast  therein  :  though  these 
three  men,  Noah,  Job,  and  Daniel,  were  in  the 
midst  of  it,  they  shall  only  save  their  own  souls 


6  Deut.  i.  17. 

7  Luke  XV.  7. 

8  Ps.  Ixxiv.  19. 

9  Jcr.  yiii.  4,  5. 
'°  Jer.  iii.  22. 

"  Ezek.  xviii.  20. 


Sec.  III.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


401 


by  their  righteousness,  saith  the  Lord  God."  ' 
The  Scripture  most  clearly  shows  that  a  right- 
eous man  that  converses  with  a  wicked  man 
does  not  perish  with  him.  For  in  the  present 
world  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  are  mingled 
together  in  the  common  affairs  of  life,  but  not 
in  holy  communion  ;  and  in  this  the  friends  and 
favourites  of  God  are  guilty  of  no  sin.  For  they 
do  but  imitate  "  their  Father  which  is  in  heaven, 
who  maketh  His  sun  to  rise  on  the  righteous  and 
unrighteous,  and  sendeth  His  rain  on  the  evil 
and  on  the  good  ; "  ^  and  the  righteous  man 
undergoes  no  peril  on  this  account.  For  those 
who  conquer  and  those  who  are  conquered  are 
in  the  same  place  of  running,  but  only  those 
who  have  bravely  undergone  the  race  are  where 
the  garland  is  bestowed ;  and  "  no  one  is 
crowned,  unless  he  strive  lawfully."  ^  For  every 
one  shall  give  account  of  himself,  and  God  will 
not  destroy  the  righteous  with  the  wicked ;  for 
with  Him  it  is  a  constant  rule,  that  innocence 
is  never  punished.  For  neither  did  He  drown 
Noah,  nor  burn  up  Lot,  nor  destroy  Rahab  for 
company.  And  if  you  desire  to  know  how  this 
matter  was  among  us,  Judas  was  one  of  us,  and 
took  the  like  part  of  the  ministry  which  we  had  ; 
and  Simon  the  magician  received  the  seal  of  the 
Lord.  Yet  both  the  one  and  the  other  proving 
wicked,  the  former  hanged  himself,  and  the  lat- 
ter, as  he  flew  in  the  air  in  a  manner  unnatural, 
was  dashed  against  the  earth.  Moreover,  Noah 
and  his  sons  with  him  were  in  the  ark  ;  but  Ham, 
who  alone  was  found  wicked,  received  punish- 
ment in  his  son.'*  But  if  fathers  are  not  punished 
for  their  children,  nor  children  for  their  fathers, 
it  is  thence  clear  that  neither  will  wives  be  pun- 
ished for  their  husbands,  nor  servants  for  their 
masters,  nor  one  relation  for  another,  nor  one 
friend  for  another,  nor  the  righteous  for  the 
wicked.  But  every  one  will  be  required  an  ac- 
count of  his  own  doing.  For  neither  was  pun- 
ishment inflicted  on  Noah  for  the  world,  nor  was 
Lot  destroyed  by  fire  for  the  Sodomites,  nor  was 
Rahab  slain  for  the  inhabitants  of  Jericho,  nor 
Israel  for  the  Egyptians.  For  not  the  dwelling 
together,  but  the  agreement  in  their  sentiments, 
alone  could  condemn  the  righteous  with  the 
wicked.  We  ought  not  therefore  to  hearken  to 
such  persons  who  call  for  death,  and  hate  man- 
kind, and  love  accusations,  and  under  fair  pre- 
tences bring  men  to  death.  For  one  man  shall 
not  die  for  another,  but  "  every  one  is  held  with 
the  chains  of  his  own  sins." 5  And,  "behold, 
the  man  and  his  work  is  before  his  facc."*^    Now 


'  Ezek.  xiv.  13,  14. 

2  Matt.  V.  45. 

3  2  Tim.  ii.  5. 

*  A  various  reading  gives;  "Ham,  one  of  his  sons,  who  alone 
was  found  wicked,  received  punishment." 
5  Prov   V.  22. 
*>  Isa.  Ixii.  II, 


we  ought  to  assist  those  who  are  with  us,/"  and 
are  in  danger,  and  fall,  and,  as  far  as  lies  in  our 
power,  to  reduce  them  to  sobriety  by  our  exhor- 
tations, and  so  save  them  from  death.  For  "  the 
whole  have  no  need  of  the  physician,  but  the 
sick  ;  "  ^  since  "  it  is  not  pleasing  in  the  sight  of 
your  Father  that  one  of  these  little  ones  should 
perish."  ^  For  we  ought  not  to  establish  the  will 
of  hard-hearted  men,  but  the  will  of  the  God 
and  Father  of  the  universe,  which  is  revealed  to 
us  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  to  whom  be  glory 
for  ever.     Amen. 

For  it  is  not  equitable  that  thou,  O  bishop, 
who  art  the  head,  shouldst  submit  to  the  tail, 
that  is,  to  some  seditious  person  among  the  laity, 
to  the  destruction  of  another,  but  to  God  alone. 
For  it  is  thy  privilege  to  govern  those  under  thee, 
but  not  to  be  governed  by  ihem.  For  neither 
does  a  son,  who  is  subject  by  the  course  of  gen- 
eration, govern  his  father ;  nor  a  slave,  who  is 
subject  by  law,  govern  his  master;  nor  does  a 
scholar  govern  his  teacher,  nor  a  soldier  his 
king,  nor  any  of  the  laity  his  bishop.  For  that 
there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  such  as  con- 
verse with  the  wicked,  in  order  to  their  instruc- 
tion in  the  word,  are  defiled  by  or  partake  of 
their  sins,  Ezekiel,  as  it  were  on  purpose  pre- 
venting the  suspicions  of  ill-disposed  persons, 
says  thus  :  "  Why  do  you  speak  this  proverb 
concerning  the  land  of  Israel  ?  The  fathers  have 
eaten  sour  grapes,  and  the  children's  teeth  are 
set  on  edge.  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  ye 
shall  not  henceforth  have  occasion  to  use  this 
proverb  in  Israel.  For  all  souls  are  mine,  in  like 
manner  as  the  soul  of  the  father,  so  also  the  soul 
of  the  son  is  mine  :  the  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall 
die.  But  the  man  who  is  righteous,  and  does 
judgment  and  justice  "  (and  so  the  propliet  reck- 
ons up  the  rest  of  the  virtues,  and  then  adds  for 
a  conclusion,  "Such  a  one  is  just"),  "he  shall 
surely  live,  saith  the  Lord  God.  And  if  he  be- 
get a  son  who  is  a  robber,  a  shedder  of  blood, 
and  walks  not  in  the  way  of  his  righteous  fatlier  " 
(and  when  the  prophet  had  added  what  follows, 
he  adds  in  the  conclusion),  "he  shall  certainly 
not  live  :  he  has  done  all  this  wickedness ;  he 
shall  surely  die  ;  his  blood  shall  be  upon  him. 
Yet  they  will  ask  thee,  Why?  Does  not  the  son 
bear  the  iniquity  of  the  father;  or  his  righteous- 
ness, having  exercised  righteousness  and  mercy 
himself?  And  thou  shalt  say  unto  them,  The 
soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die.  The  son  shall  not 
bear  the  inicjuity  of  the  father,  and  the  father 
shall  not  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  son.  The 
righteousness  of  the  righteous  shall  be  upon  him, 
and  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked  shall  be  upon 


7  One  V.  MS.  reads: 

8  Matt.  ix.  12. 

9  Matt,  xviii.  14, 


those  who  are  sick,' 


402 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Cook  IT. 


him."  '  And  a  little  after  he  says  :  "  When  the 
righteous  turneth  away  from  his  righteousness, 
and  committeth  iniquity,  all  his  righteousness, 
by  reason  of  all  his  wickedness  which  he  has 
committed,  shall  not  be  mentioned  to  him  :  in 
his  iniciuity  which  he  hath  committed,  and  in  his 
sin  which  he  hath  sinned,  in  them  shall  he  die." 
And  a  little  after  he  adds  :  "  When  the  wicked 
turneth  away  from  his  wickedness  which  he  hath 
committed,  and  doth  judgment  and  justice,  he 
hath  preserved  his  soul,  he  hath  turned  away 
from  all  his  ungodliness  which  he  hath  done  ; 
he  shall  surely  live,  he  shall  not  die."  And 
afterwards  :  "  I  will  judge  every  one  of  you  ac- 
cording to  his  ways,  O  house  of  Israel,  saith  the 
Lord  God." 

THAT    A    PRIEST    MUST     NEITHER    OVERLOOK     OF- 
FENCES,   NOR   BE   RASH    IN    PUNISHING   THEM. 

XV.  Observe,  you  who  are  our  beloved  sons, 
how  merciful  yet  righteous  the  Lord  our  God  is  ; 
how  gracious  and  kind  to  men  ;  and  yet  most 
certainly  "  He  will  not  acquit  the  guilty  :  "  - 
though  He  welcomes  the  returning  sinner,  and 
revives  him,  leaving  no  room  for  suspicion  to 
such  as  wish  to  judge  sternly  and  to  reject  of- 
fenders entirely,  and  to  refuse  to  vouchsafe  to 
them  exhortations  which  might  bring  them  to 
repentance.  In  contradiction  to  such,  God  by 
Isaiah  says  to  the  bishops  :  "  Comfort  ye,  com- 
fort ye  my  people,  ye  priests  :  speak  comforta- 
bly to  Jerusalem."  It  therefore  behoves  you, 
upon  hearing  those  words  of  His,  to  encourage 
those  who  have  offended,  and  lead  them  to  re- 
pentance, and  afford  them  hope,  and  not  vainly 
to  suppose  that  you  shall  be  partakers  of  their 
offences  on  account  of  such  your  love  to  them. 
Receive  the  penitent  with  alacrity,  and  rejoice 
over  them,  and  with  mercy  and  bowels  of  com- 
passion judge  the  sinners.  For  if  a  person  was 
walking  by  the  side  of  a  river,  and  ready  to 
stumble,  and  thou  shouldcst  push  him  and  thrust 
him  into  the  river,  instead  of  offering  him  thy 
hand  for  his  assistance,  thou  wouldst  be  guilty 
of  the  murder  of  thy  brother ;  whereas  thou 
oughtest  rather  to  lend  thy  heli)ing  hand  as  he 
was  ready  to  fall,  lest  he  perish  without  remedy, 
that  both  the  people  may  take  warning,  and  the 
offender  may  not  utterly  perish.  It  is  thy  duty, 
O  bishop,  neither  to  overlook  the  sins  of  the 
people,  nor  to  reject  those  who  are  penitent, 
that  thou  mayst  not  unskilfully  destroy  the 
Lord's  flock,  or  dishonour  His  new  name,  which 
is  imposed  on  His  people,  and  thou  thyself  beest 
reproached  as  those  ancient  pastors  were,  of 
whom  God  speaks  thus  to  Jeremiah  :  "  Many 
shepherds   have   destroyed  my  vineyard ;    they 


'  Ezek.  xviii.  2,  -olc. 
2  Nah.  i.  3. 


have  polluted  my  heritage."  ^  And  in  another 
passage  :  "  My  anger  is  waxed  hot  against  the 
shepherds,  and  against  the  lambs  shall  I  have 
indignation."  +  And  elsewhere  :  "  Ye  are  the 
priests  that  dishonour  my  name."  5 

OF  REPENTANCE,  THE  MANNER  OF  IT,  AND  RULES 
ABOUT  IT. 

XVI.  When  thou  seest  the  offender,  with  sever- 
ity command  him  to  be  cast  out ;  and  as  he  is 
going  out,  let  the  deacons  also  treat  him  with 
severity,  and  then  let  them  go  and  seek  for  him, 
and  detain  him  out  of  the  Church  ;  and  when 
they  come  in,  let  them  entreat  thee  for  him. 
For  our  Saviour  Himself  entreated  His  Father 
for  those  who  had  sinned,  as  it  is  written  in  the 
Gospel :  "  Father,  forgive  them  ;  for  they  know 
not  what  they  do." ''  Then  order  the  offender 
to  come  in  ;  and  if  upon  examination  thou  find- 
est  that  he  is  penitent,  and  fit  to  be  received  at 
all  into  the  Church  when  thou  hast  afflicted  him 
his  days  of  fasting,  according  to  the  degree  of 
his  offence  —  as  two,  three,  five,  or  seven  weeks 
—  so  set  him  at  liberty,  and  speak  such  things 
to  him  as  are  fit  to  be  said  in  way  of  reproof, 
instruction,  and  exhortation  to  a  sinner  for  his 
reformation,  that  so  he  may  continue  privately 
in  his  humility,  and  pray  to  God  to  be  merciful 
to  him,  saying  :  "  If  Thou,  O  Lord,  shouldest 
mark  iniquities,  O  Lord,  who  should  stand? 
For  with  Thee  there  is  propitiation."  ^  Of  this 
sort  of  declaration  is  that  which  is  said  in  the 
book  of  Genesis  to  Cain  :  "  Thou  hast  sinned ; 
be  quiet ;  "  ^  that  is,  do  not  go  on  in  sin.  For 
that  a  sinner  ought  to  be  ashamed  for  his  own 
sin,  that  oracle  of  God  delivered  to  Moses  con- 
cerning Miriam  is  a  sufficient  proof,  when  he 
prayed  that  she  might  be  forgiven.  For  says 
God  to  him  :  "  If  her  father  had  spit  in  her 
face,  should  she  not  be  ashamed  ?  Let  her  be 
shut  out  of  the  camp  seven  days,  and  afterwards 
let  her  come  in  again."  9  We  therefore  ought 
to  do  so  with  offenders,  when  they  profess  their 
repentance,  —  namely,  to  separate  them  some 
determinate  time,  according  to  the  proportion 
of  their  offence,  and  afterwards,  like  fathers  to 
children,  receive  them  again  upon  their  repent- 
ance. 

THAT  A  BISHOP  MUST  BE  UNBLAMEABLE,  AND  A 
PATTERN  FOR  THOSE  WHO  ARE  UNDER  HIS 
CHARGE. 

XVII.  But  if  the  bishop  himself  be  an  offender, 
how  will  he  be  able  any  longer  to  prosecute  the 


3  Jer.  xii.  lo. 

*  Zech.  X.  3. 
5  Mai.  i.  6. 

*  Luke  xxiii.  34. 

7  Ps.  cxxx.  3. 

8  Gen.  iv.  7,  LXX. 

9  [Num.  xii.  14.  —  R,] 


Sec.  III.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


403 


offence  of  another?  Or  how  will  he  be  able  to 
reprove  another,  either  he  or  his  deacons,  if  by 
accepting  of  persons,  or  receiving  of  bribes, 
they  have  not  all  a  clear  conscience  ?  For  when 
the  ruler  asks,  and  the  judge  receives,  judgment 
is  not  brought  to  perfection ;  but  when  both  are 
"  companions  of  thieves,  and  regardless  of  doing 
justice  to  the  widows,"  '  those  who  are  under 
the  bishop  will  not  be  able  to  support  and  vindi- 
cate him  :  for  they  will  say  to  him  what  is  writ- 
ten in  the  Gospel,  "  Why  beholdest  thou  the 
mote  that  is  in  thy  brother's  eye,  but  considerest 
not  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye?"  ^  Let 
the  bishop,  therefore,  with  his  deacons,  dread  to 
hear  any  such  thing ;  that  is,  let  him  give  no 
occasion  for  it.  For  an  offender,  when  he  sees 
any  other  doing  as  bad  as  himself,  will  be  en- 
couraged to  do  the  very  same  things  ;  and  then 
the  wicked  one,  taking  occasion  from  a  single 
instance,  works  in  others,  which  God  forbid  : 
and  by  that  means  the  flock  will  be  destroyed. 
For  the  greater  number  of  offenders  there  are, 
the  greater  is  the  mischief  that  is  done  by  them  : 
for  sin  which  passes  without  correction  grows 
worse  and  worse,  and  spreads  to  others  ;  since 
"  a  little  leaven  infects  the  whole  lump,"  3  and 
one  thief  spreads  the  abomination  over  a  whole 
nation,  and  "  dead  flies  spoil  the  whole  pot  of 
sweet  ointment ;  "  •♦  and  "  when  a  king  hearkens 
to  unrighteous  counsel,  all  the  servants  under 
him  are  wicked."  5  So  one  scabbed  sheep,  if  not 
separated  from  those  that  are  whole,  infects  the 
rest  with  the  same  distemper ;  and  a  man  in- 
fected with  the  plague  is  to  be  avoided  by  all 
men ;  and  a  mad  dog  is  dangerous  to  every  one 
that  he  touches.  If,  therefore,  we  neglect  to 
separate  the  transgressor  from  the  Church  of 
God,  we  shall  make  the  "  Lord's  house  a  den 
of  thieves."^  For  it  is  the  bishop's  duty  not  to 
be  silent  in  the  case  of  offenders,  but  to  rebuke 
them,  to  exhort  them,  to  beat  them  down,  to 
afflict  them  with  fastings,  that  so  he  may  strike 
a  pious  dread  into  the  rest :  for,  as  He  says, 
"  make  ye  the  children  of  Israel  pious."  ^  For 
the  bishop  must  be  one  who  discourages  sin  by 
his  e.xhortations,  and  sets  a  pattern  of  righteous- 
ness, and  i)roclaims  those  good  things  which  are 
prepared  by  God,  and  declares  that  wrath  which 
will  come  at  the  day  of  judgment,  lest  he  con- 
temn and  neglect  the  ])lantation  of  God  ;  and, 
on  account  of  his  carelessness,  hear  that  which 
is  said  in  Hosea :  "  Why  have  ye  held  your 
peace  at  impiety,  and  have  reaped  the  fruit 
thereof?  "  « 


'  Isa.  i.  23. 

^  Luke  vi.  41. 

3  Gal.  V.  9. 

*  Eccles.  x.  I. 

5   Prov.  xxix.  12. 

''  .Matt.  xxi.  13. 

'  Lev.  XV.  31. 

8  Hos.  X.  13,  LXX. 


THAT  A  BISHOP  MUST  TAKE  CARE  THAT  HIS 
PEOPLE  DO  NOT  SIN,  CONSIDERING  THAT  HE 
IS    SET    FOR    A   WATCHMAN    AMONG    THEM. 

xviii.  Let  the  bishop,  therefore,  extend  his 
concern  to  all  sorts  of  people  :  to  those  who 
have  not  offended,  that  they  may  continue  inno- 
cent ;  to  those  who  offend,  that  they  may  re- 
pent. For  to  you  does  the  Lord  speak  thus : 
"  Take  heed  that  ye  offend  not  one  of  these 
little  ones."  9  It  is  your  duty  also  to  give  re- 
mission to  the  penitent.  For  as  soon  as  ever 
one  who  has  offended  says,  in  the  sincerity  of 
his  soul,  "  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord,"  the 
Holy  Spirit  answers,  "  The  Lord  also  hath  for- 
given thy  sin  ;  be  of  good  cheer,  thou  shalt  not 
die."  '°  Be  sensible,  therefore,  O  bishop,  of  the 
dignity  of  thy  place,  that  as  thou  hast  received 
the  power  of  binding,  so  hast  thou  also  that  of 
loosing.  Having  therefore  the  power  of  loosing, 
know  thyself,  and  behave  thyself  in  this  world 
as  becomes  thy  place,  being  aware  that  thou 
hast  a  great  account  to  give.  "  For  to  whom," 
as  the  Scripture  says,  ''  men  have  entrusted 
much,  of  him  they  will  require  the  more."  " 
For  no  one  man  is  free  from  sin,  excepting  Him 
that  was  made  man  for  us  ;  since  it  is  written  : 
"  No  man  is  pure  from  filthiness  ;  no,  not  though 
he  be  but  one  day  old."  '^  Upon  which  account 
the  lives  and  conduct  of  the  ancient  holy  men 
and  patriarchs  are  described  ;  not  that  we  may 
reproach  them  from  our  reading,  but  that  we 
ourselves  may  repent,  and  have  hope  that  we 
also  shall  obtain  forgiveness.  For  their  blem- 
ishes are  to  us  both  security  and  admonition, 
because  we  hence  learn,  when  we  have  offended, 
that  if  we  repent  we  shall  have  pardon.  For  it 
is  written  :  "  Who  can  boast  that  he  has  a  clean 
heart?  and  who  dare  affirm  that  he  is  pure 
from  sin?  "  '^  No  man,  therefore,  is  without  sin. 
Do  thou  therefore  labour  to  the  utmost  of  thy 
power  to  be  unblameable  ;  and  be  solicitous  of 
all  the  parts  of  thy  flock,  lest  any  one  be  scan- 
dalized on  thy  account,  and  thereby  j^erish. 
For  the  layman  is  solicitous  only  for  himself, 
but  thou  for  all,  as  having  a  greater  burden,  and 
carrying  a  heavier  load.  For  it  is  written : 
"And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Thou  and 
Aaron  shall  bear  the  sins  of  the  priesthood."  '•* 
Since,  therefore,  thou  art  to  give  an  account  of 
all,  take  care  of  all.  Preserve  those  that  are 
sound,  admonish  those  that  sin  ;  and  when  thou 
hast  afflicted  them  with  fasting,  give  them  ease 
by  remission  ;  and  when  witli  tears  the  offender 
begs  readmission,  receive  him,  and  let  the  whole 
Church  pray  for  him  ;  and  when  by  imposition 


9  Matt,  xviii.  lo. 
'°  2  Sam.  xii.  13. 
>i  Luke  xii.  48. 
'2  Job  xiv.  4,  LXX. 
'i  Prov.  XX.  ^. 
'*  Num.  xviii.  i. 


404 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  IL 


of  thy  hand  thou  hast  admitted  him,  give  him 
leave  to  abide  afterwards  in  the  flock.  But  for 
the  drowsy  and  the  careless,  do  thou  endeavour 
to  convert  and  confirm,  and  warn  and  cure  them, 
as  sensible  how  great  a  reward  thou  shalt  have 
for  doing  so,  and  how  great  danger  thou  wilt 
incur  if  thou  beest  negligent  therein.  For  Eze- 
kiel  speaks  thus  to  those  overseers  who  take  no 
care  of  the  people  :  '•  Woe  unto  the  shepherds 
of  Israel,  for  they  have  fed  themselves ;  the 
shepherds  feed  not  the  sheep,  but  themselves. 
Ye  eat  the  milk,  and  are  clothed  with  the  wool ; 
ye  slay  the  strong,  ye  do  not  feed  the  sheep. 
The  weak  have  ye  not  strengthened,  neither  have 
ye  healed  that  which  was  sick,  neither  have  ye 
bound  up  that  which  was  broken,  neither  have 
ye  brought  again  that  which  was  driven  away, 
neither  have  ye  sought  that  which  was  lost ;  but 
violently  ye  chastised  them  with  insult :  and  they 
were  scattered,  because  there  was  no  shepherd  ; 
and  they  became  meat  to  all  the  beasts  of  the 
forest."  And  again  :  "  The  shepherds  did  not 
search  for  my  sheep ;  and  the  shepherds  fed 
themselves,  but  they  fed  not  my  sheep."  And 
a  little  after :  "  Behold,  I  am  against  the  shep- 
herds, and  I  will  require  my  sheep  at  their 
hands,  and  cause  them  to  cease  from  feeding 
my  sheep,  neither  shall  the  shepherds  feed 
themselves  any  more ;  and  I  will  deliver  my 
sheep  out  of  their  hands,  and  they  shall  not  be 
meat  for  them."  And  he  also  adds,  speaking 
to  the  people  :  "  Behold,  I  will  judge  between 
sheep  and  sheep,  and  between  rams  and  rams. 
Seemed  it  a  small  thing  unto  you  to  have  eaten 
up  the  good  pasture,  and  to  have  trodden  down 
with  your  feet  the  residue  of  your  pasture,  and 
that  the  sheep  have  eaten  what  was  trodden 
down  with  your  feet?"  And  a  little  after  He 
adds  :  "  And  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord, 
and  you  the  sheep  of  my  pasture  ;  ye  are  my 
men,  and  I  am  your  God,  saith  the  Lord  God."  ' 

THAT  A  SHEPHERD  WHO  IS  CARELESS  OF  HIS 
SHEEP  WILL  BE  CONDEMNED,  AND  THAT  A 
SHEEP  WHICH  WILL  NOT  13E  LED  BY  THE  SHEP- 
HERD  IS   TO   BE   PUNISHED. 

XIX.  Hear,  O  ye  bishops ;  and  hear,  O  ye  of 
the  laity,  how  God  speaks  :  "  I  will  judge  be- 
tvveen  ram  and  ram,  and  between  sheep  and 
sheep."  And  He  says  to  the  shepherds  :  "  Ye 
shall  be  judged  for  your  unskilfulness,  and  for 
destroying  the  sheep."  That  is,  I  will  judge 
between  one  bishop  and  another,  and  between 
one  lay  person  and  another,  and  between  one 
ruler  and  another  (for  these  sheep  and  these 
rams  are  not  irrational,  but  rational  creatures)  : 
lest  at  any  time  a  lay  person  should  say,  I  am  a 
sheep  and  not  a  shepherd,  and  I  am  not  con- 


'  Ezek.  xxxiv.  2,  etc. 


cerned  for  myself;  let  the  shepherd  look  to  that, 
for  he  alone  will  be  required  to  give  an  account 
for  me.  For  as  that  sheep  that  will  not  follow 
its  good  shepherd  is  exposed  to  the  wolves,  to 
its  destruction ;  so  that  which  follows  a  bad 
shepherd  is  also  exposed  to  unavoidable  death, 
since  his  shepherd  will  devour  him.  Wherefore 
care  must  be  had  to  avoid  destructive  shepherds, 

HOW   THE   GOVERNED   ARE   TO   OBEY   THE   BISHOPS 
WHO   ARE   SET   OVER   THEM. 

XX,  As  to  a  good  shepherd,  let  the  lay  person 
honour  him,  love  him,  reverence  him  as  his  lord, 
as  his  master,  as  the  high  priest  of  God,  as  a 
teacher  of  piety.  For  he  that  heareth  him, 
heareth  Christ ;  and  he  that  rejecteth  him,  re- 
jecteth  Christ ;  and  he  who  does  not  receive 
Christ,  does  not  receive  His  God  and  Father : 
for,  says  He,  "  He  that  heareth  you,  heareth 
me  ;  and  he  that  rejecteth  you,  rejecteth  me ; 
and  he  that  rejecteth  me,  rejecteth  Him  that 
sent  me."  -  In  like  manner,  let  the  bishop  love 
the  laity  as  his  children,  fostering  and  cherishing 
them  with  affectionate  diligence  ;  as  eggs,  in 
order  to  the  hatching  of  young  ones ;  or  as 
young  ones,  taking  them  in  his  arms,  to  the 
rearing  them  into  birds  :  admonishing  all  men  ; 
reproving  all  who  stand  in  need  of  reproof; 
reproving,  that  is,  but  not  striking  ;  beating  them 
down  to  make  them  ashamed,  but  not  over- 
throwing them  ;  warning  them  in  order  to  their 
conversion  ;  chiding  them  in  order  to  their  ref- 
ormation and  better  course  of  life  ;  watching 
the  strong,  that  is,  keeping  him  firm  in  the  faith 
who  is  already  strong  ;  feeding  the  people  peace- 
ably ;  strengthening  the  weak,  that  is,  confirming 
with  exhortation  that  which  is  tempted  ;  healing 
that  which  is  sick,  that  is,  curing  by  instruction 
that  which  is  weak  in  the  faith  through  doubtful- 
ness of  mind  ;  binding  up  that  which  is  broken, 
that  is,  binding  up  by  comfortable  admonitions 
that  which  is  gone  astray,  or  wounded,  bruised, 
or  broken  by  their  sins,  and  put  out  of  the  way  ; 
easing  it  of  its  offences,  and  giving  hope  :  by 
this  means  restore  it  in  strength  to  the  Church, 
bringing  it  back  into  the  flock.  Bring  again 
that  which  is  driven  away,  that  is,  do  not  permit 
that  which  is  in  its  sins,  and  is  cast  out  by  way 
of  punishment,  to  continue  excluded  ;  but  re- 
ceiving it,  and  bringing  it  back,  restore  it  to  the 
flock,  that  is,  to  the  people  of  the  undefiled 
Church.  Seek  for  that  which  is  lost,  that  is, 
do  not  suffer  that  which  desponds  of  its  salva- 
tion, by  reason  of  the  multitude  of  its  offences, 
utterly  to  perish.  Do  thou  search  for  that  which 
is  grown  sleepy,  drowsy,  and  sluggish,  and  that 
which  is  unmindful  of  its  own  life,  through  the 
depth  of  its  sleep,  and  which  is  at  a  great  dis- 


2  Luke  X.  16, 


Sec.  III.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


405 


tance  from  its  own  flock,  so  as  to  be  in  danger 
of  falling  among  the  wolves,  and  being  devoured 
by  them.  Bring  it  back  by  admonition,  exhort 
it  to  be  watchful ;  and  insinuate  hope,  not  per- 
mitting it  to  say  that  which  was  said  by  some  : 
"  Our  impieties  are  upon  us,  and  we  pine  away 
in  them  ;  how  shall  we  then  live?  "  '  As  far  as 
possible,  therefore,  let  the  bishop  make  the 
offence  his  own,  and  say  to  the  sinner.  Do  thou 
but  return,  and  I  will  undertake  to  suffer  death 
for  thee,  as  our  Lord  suffered  death  for  me,  and 
for  all  men.  For  "  the  good  shepherd  lays  down 
his  life  for  the  sheep  ;  but  he  that  is  an  hireling, 
and  not  the  shepherd,  whose  own  the  sheep  are 
not,  seeth  the  wolf  coming,  that  is,  the  devil, 
and  he  leaveth  the  sheep,  and  fleeth,  and  the 
wolf  seizes  upon  them."^  We  must  know,  there- 
fore, that  God  is  very  merciful  to  those  who 
have  offended,  and  hath  promised  repentance 
with  an  oath.  But  he  who  has  offended,  and  is 
unacquainted  with  this  promise  of  God  concern- 
ing repentance,  and  does  not  understand  His 
long-suffering  and  forbearance,  and  besides  is 
ignorant  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  proclaim 
repentance,  inasmuch  as  he  has  never  learned 
them  from  you,  perishes  through  his  folly.  But 
do  thou,  like  a  compassionate  shepherd,  and  a 
diligent  feeder  of  the  flock,  search  out,  and  keep 
an  account  of  thy  flock.  Seek  that  which  is 
wanting ;  ^  as  the  Lord  God  our  gracious  Father 
has  sent  His  own  Son,  the  good  Shepherd  and 
Saviour,  our  Master  Jesus,  and  has  commanded 
Him  to  "  leave  the  ninety-nine  upon  the  moun- 
tains, and  to  go  in  search  after  that  which  was 
lost,  and  when  He  had  found  it,  to  take  it  upon 
His  shoulders,  and  to  carry  it  into  the  flock, 
rejoicing  that  He  had  found  that  which  was 
lost."  ■♦  In  like  manner,  be  obedient,  O  bishop, 
and  do  thou  seek  that  which  was  lost,  guide 
that  which  has  wandered  out  of  the  right  way, 
bring  back  that  which  is  gone  astray :  for  thou 
hast  authority  to  bring  them  back,  and  to  deliver 
those  that  are  broken-hearted  by  remission.  For 
by  thee  does  our  Saviour  say  to  him  who  is  dis- 
couraged under  the  sense  of  his  sins,  "  Thy  sins 
are  forgiven  thee  :  thy  faith  hath  saved  thee  ; 
go  in  peace."  5  But  this  peace  and  haven  of 
tranquillity  is  the  Church  of  Christ,  into  which 
do  thou,  when  thou  hast  loosed  them  from  their 
sins,  restore  them,  as  being  now  sound  and  un- 
blameable,  of  good  hope,  diligent,  laborious  in 
good  works.  As  a  skilful  and  compassionate 
physician,  heal  all  such  as  have  wandered  in 
the  ways  of  sin  ;  for  "  they  that  are  whole  have 
no  need  of  a  physician,  but  they  that  are  sick. 
For  the  Son  of  man  came  to  save  and  to  seek 


*  Ezek.  xxxiii.  lo. 

2  John  X.  II,  12. 

3  Matt,  xviii.  12. 

*  I-uke  XV.  4,  etc. 

S  Luke  V.  20;  Matt.  ix.  2;  Mark  v.  34. 


that  which  was  lost."  ^  Since  thou  art  therefore 
a  physician  of  the  Lord's  Church,  provide  reme- 
dies suitable  to  every  patient's  case.  Cure  them, 
heal  them  by  all  means  possible  ;  restore  them 
sound  to  the  Church.  Feed  the  flock,  '•  not 
with  insolence  and  contempt,  as  lording  it  over 
them,"  7  but  as  a  gentle  shepherd,  "  gathering 
the  lambs  into  thy  bosom,  and  gently  leading 
those  which  are  with  young."  '^ 

THAT  IT  IS  A  DANGEROUS  THING  TO  JUDGE  WITH- 
OUT HEARING  BOTH  SIDES,  OR  TO  DETERMINE 
OF  PUNISHMENT  AGAINST  A  PERSON  BEFORE 
HE   IS   CONVICTED. 

XXI.  Be  gentle,  gracious,  mild,  without  guile, 
without  falsehood  ;  not  rigid,  not  insolent,  not 
severe,  not  arrogant,  not  unmerciful,  not  puffed 
up,  not  a  man-pleaser,  not  timorous,  not  double- 
minded,  not  one  that  insults  over  the  people 
that  are  under  thee,  not  one  that  conceals  the 
divine  laws  and  the  promises  to  repentance,  not 
hasty  in  thrusting  out  and  expelling,  but  steady, 
not  one  that  delights  in  severity,  not  heady.  Do 
not  admit  less  evidence  to  convict  any  one  than 
that  of  three  witnesses,  and  those  of  known  and 
established  reputation  ;  inquire  whether  they  do 
not  accuse  out  of  ill-will  or  envy  :  for  there  are 
many  that  delight  in  mischief,  forward  in  dis- 
course, slanderous,  haters  of  the  brethren,  mak- 
ing it  their  business  to  scatter  the  sheep  of  Christ ; 
whose  affirmation  if  thou  admittest  without  nice 
scanning  the  same,  thou  wilt  disperse  thy  flock, 
and  betray  it  to  be  devoured  by  wolves,  that  is, 
by  demons  and  wicked  men,  or  rather  not  men, 
but  wild  beasts  in  the  shape  of  men  —  by  the 
heathen,  by  the  Jews,  and  by  the  atheistic  here- 
tics. For  those  destroying  wolves  soon  address 
themselves  to  any  one  that  is  cast  out  of  the 
Church,  and  esteem  him  as  a  lamb  delivered  for 
them  to  devour,  reckoning  his  destruction  their 
own  gain.  For  he  that  is  "  their  father,  the  devil, 
is  a  murderer."  9  He  also  who  is  se])arated  un- 
justly by  thy  want  of  care  in  judging  will  be 
overwhelmed  with  sorrow,  and  be  disconsolate, 
and  so  will  either  wander  over  to  the  heathen, 
or  be  entangled  in  heresies,  and  so  will  be  alto- 
gether estranged  from  the  Church  and  from  hope 
in  (iod,  and  will  be  entangled  in  impiety,  where- 
by thou  wilt  be  guilty  of  his  i)erditiun  :  for  it  is 
not  fair  to  be  too  hasty  in  casting  out  an  offender, 
but  slow  in  receiving  him  when  he  returns  ;  to 
be  forward  in  cutting  off,  but  unmerciful  when 
he  is  sorrowful,  and  ought  to  be  healed.  For 
of  such  as  these  speaks  the  divine  Scripture  : 
"Their  feet  run  to  mischief;  they  are  hasty  to 
shed  blood.     Destruction  and  miserv  are  in  their 


6  Matt.  ix.  12;  Luke  xix.  10. 

7  Ezek.  xxxiv.  4. 

8  Matt.  XX.  25;    Isa.  xl.  11. 

9  John  viii.  44. 


4o6 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  II. 


ways,  and  the  way  of  peace  have  they  not  known. 
The  fear  of  God  is  not  before  their  eyes."  '  Now 
the  way  of  peace  is  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  who 
has  taught  us,  saying  :  "  Forgive,  and  ye  shall  be 
forgiven.  Give,  and  it  shall  be  given  to  you  ;  "  ^ 
that  is,  give  remission  of  sins,  and  your  offences 
shall  1)6  forgiven  you.  As  also  He  instructed  us 
by  His  prayer  to  say  unto  God  :  "  Forgive  us  our 
debts,  as  we  forgive  our  debtors."  ^  If,  there- 
fore, you  do  not  forgive  offenders,  how  can  you 
expect  the  remission  of  your  own  sins  ?  Do  not 
you  rather  bind  yourselves  faster,  by  pretending 
in  your  prayers  to  forgive,  when  you  really  do 
not  forgive?  Will  you  not  be  confronted  with 
your  own  words,  when  you  say  you  forgive  and 
do  not  forgive?  For  know  ye,  that  he  who  casts 
out  one  who  has  not  behaved  himself  wickedly, 
or  who  will  not  receive  him  that  returns,  is  a 
murderer  of  his  brother,  and  sheds  his  blood, 
as  Cain  did  that  of  his  brother  Abel,  and  his 
"blood  cries  to  God,"-*  and  will  be  required. 
For  a  righteous  man  unjustly  slain  by  any  one 
will  be  in  rest  with  God  for  ever.  The  same  is 
the  case  of  him  who  without  cause  is  separated 
by  his  bishop.  He  who  has  cast  him  out  as  a 
pestilent  fellow  when  he  was  innocent,  is  more 
furious  than  a  murderer.  Such  a  one  has  no 
regard  to  the  mercy  of  God,  nor  is  mindful  of 
His  goodness  to  those  that  are  penitent,  nor 
keeping  in  his  eye  the  examples  of  those  who, 
having  been  once  great  offenders,  received  for- 
giveness upon  their  repentance.  Upon  which 
account,  he  who  casts  off  an  innocent  person  is 
more  cruel  than  he  that  murders  the  body.  In 
like  manner,  he  who  does  not  receive  the  peni- 
tent, scatters  the  flock  of  Christ,  being  really 
against  Him.  For  as  God  is  just  in  judging  of 
sinners,  so  is  He  merciful  in  receiving  them 
when  they  return.  For  David,  the  man  after 
God's  own  heart,  in  his  hymns  ascribes  both 
mercy  and  judgment  to  Him. 


THAT  DAVID,  THE  NIXEVITES,  HEZEKIAH,  AND 
HIS  SOX  MANASSEH,  ARE  EMINENT  EXAMPLES 
OF  REPENTANCE.  THE  PRAYER  OF  MANASSEH, 
KING   OF   JUDAH. 

XXII.  It  is  also  thy  duty,  O  bishop,  to  have 
before  thine  eyes  the  examples  of  those  that 
have  gone  before,  and  to  apply  them  skilfully  to 
the  cases  of  those  who  want  words  of  severity 
or  of  consolation.  Besides,  it  is  reasonable  that 
in  thy  administration  of  justice  tlfou  shouldest 
follow  the  will  of  God  ;  and  as  (^od  deals  with 
sinners,  and  with  those  who  return,  that  thou 
shouldest  act  accordingly  in  thy  judging.  Now, 
did  not  God  by  Nathan  reproach  David  for  his 


*  Prov.  i.  16;  Isa.  lix.  7, 

2  Luke  vi.  37,  38. 

3  Matt   vi.  12. 

*  Gen.  iv.  10. 


8;  Ps.  xxxvi.  i;  Rom.  iii.  15. 


offence?  And  yet  as  soon  as  he  said  he  re- 
pented, He  delivered  him  from  death,  saying, 
"Be  of  good  cheer;  thou  shalt  not  die."  5  So 
also,  when  God  had  caused  Jonah  ^  to  be  swal- 
lowed up  by  the  sea  and  the  whale,  upon  his 
refusal  to  preach  to  the  Ninevites,  when  yet  he 
prayed  to  Him  out  of  the  belly  of  the  whale. 
He  retrieved  his  life  from  corruption.  And 
when  Hezekiah  had  been  puffed  up  for  a  while, 
yet,  as  soon  as  he  prayed  with  lamentation.  He 
remitted  his  offence.  But,  O  ye  bishops,  hearken 
to  an  instance  useful  upon  this  occasion.  For  it 
is  written  thus  in  the  fourth  book  of  Kings  and 
the  second  book  of  Chronicles  :  "  And  Heze- 
kiah died ;  and  Manasseh  his  son  reigned.  He 
was  twelve  years  old  when  he  began  to  reign, 
and  he  reigned  fifty  and  five  years  in  Jerusalem  ; 
and  his  mother's  name  was  Hephzibah.  And 
he  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  :  he  did  not 
abstain  from  the  abominations  of  the  heathen, 
whom  the  Lord  destroyed  from  the  face  of  the 
children  of  Israel.  And  Manasseh  returned  and 
built  the  high  places  which  Hezekiah  his  father 
had  overthrown  ;  and  he  reared  pillars  for  Baal, 
and  set  up  an  altar  for  Baal,  and  made  groves, 
as  did  Ahab  king  of  Israel.  And  he  made  al- 
tars in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  of  which  the 
Lord  spake  to  David  and  to  Solomon  his  son, 
saying.  Therein  will  I  put  my  name.  And  Manas- 
seh set  up  altars,  and  by  them  served  Baal,  and 
said.  My  name  shall  continue  for  ever.''  And 
he  built  altars  to  the  host  of  heaven  in  the  two 
courts  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  ;  and  he  made 
his  children  pass  through  the  fire  in  a  place 
named  Ge  Benennom  ;  ^  and  he  consulted  en- 
chanters, and  dealt  with  wizards  and  familiar 
spirits,  and  with  conjurers  and  observers  of 
times,  and  with  teraphim.  And  he  sinned  ex- 
ceedingly in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  to  provoke 
Him  to  anger.  And  he  set  a  molten  and  a 
graven  image,  the  image  of  his  grove,  which  he 
made  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  wherein  the 
Lord  had  chosen  to  put  His  name  in  Jerusalem, 
the  holy  city,  for  ever,  and  had  said,  I  will  no 
more  remove  my  foot  from  the  land  of  Israel, 
which  I  gave  to  their  fathers ;  only  if  they  will 
observe  to  do  according  to  all  that  I  have  com- 
manded them,  and  according  to  all  the  precepts 
that  my  servant  Moses  commanded  them.  And 
they  hearkened  not.  And  Manasseh  seduced 
them  to  do  more  evil  before  the  Lord  than  did 
the  nations  whom  the  Lord  cast  out  from  the 
face  of  the  children  of  Israel.  And  the  Lord 
spake  concerning  Manasseh  and  concerning  His 
people  by  the  hand  of  His  servants  the  proph- 
ets, saying.   Because   Manasseh  king  of  Judah 


s  2  Sam.  xii.  13. 
^  Jonah  i.  17,  and  ii 

7  From  "  said  "  to  "  ever"  is  not  in  Scripture. 
^  I'aken  from  2  Chron.  xxiii.  3,i.XX.,  instead  of  the  reading  of 
the  Mss.,  "  Gebanai." 


Sec.  III.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


407 


has  done  all  these  wicked  abominations  in  a 
higher  degree  than  the  Amorite  did  which  was 
before  him,  and  hath  made  Judah  to  sin  with 
his  idols,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God  of  Israel, 
Behold,  I  bring  evils  upon  Jerusalem  and  Judah, 
that  whosoever  heareth  of  them,  both  his  ears 
shall  tingle.  And  I  will  stretch  over  Jerusalem 
the  line  of  Samaria,  and  the  plummet  of  the 
house  of  Ahab  ;  and  I  will  blot  out  Jerusalem 
as  a  table-book  is  blotted  out  by  wiping  it. 
And  I  will  turn  it  upside  down  ;  and  I  will  give 
up  the  remnant  of  my  inheritance,  and  will  de- 
liver them  into  the  hands  of  their  enemies,  and 
they  shall  become  a  prey  and  a  spoil  to  all  their 
enemies,  because  of  all  the  evils  which  they  hav& 
done  in  mine  eyes,  and  have  provoked  me  to 
anger  from  the  day  that  I  brought  their  fathers 
out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  even  until  this  day. 
Moreover,  Manasseh  shed  innocent  blood  very 
much,  till  he  had  filled  Jerusalem  from  one  end 
to  another,  beside  his  sins  wherewith  he  made 
Judah  to  sin  in  doing  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord.  And  the  Lord  brought  upon  him  the 
captains  of  the  host  of  the  king  of  Assyria,  and 
they  caught  Manasseh  in  bonds,  and  they  bound 
him  in  fetters  of  brass,  and  brought  him  to  Baby- 
lon ;  and  he  was  bound  and  shackled  with  iron 
all  over  in  the  house  of  the  prison.  And  bread 
made  of  bran  was  given  unto  him  scantily,  and 
by  weight,  and  water  mixed  with  vinegar  but  a 
little  and  by  measure,  so  much  as  would  keep 
him  alive  ;  and  he  was  in  straits  and  sore  afflic- 
tion. And  when  he  was  violently  afflicted,  he 
besought  the  face  of  the  Lord  his  God,  and 
huml)led*himself  greatly  before  the  face  of  the 
Lord  God  of  his  fathers.  And  he  prayed  unto 
the  Lord,  saying,  O  Lord,  almighty  God  of  our 
fathers  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  of  their 
righteous  seed,  who  hast  made  heaven  and  earth, 
with  all  the  ornament  thereof,  who  hast  bound 
the  sea  by  the  word  of  Thy  commandment,  who 
hast  shut  up  the  deep,  and  sealed  it  by  Thy  ter- 
rible and  glorious  name,  whom  all  men  fear  and 
tremble  before  Thy  power ;  for  the  majesty  of 
Thy  glory  cannot  be  borne,  and  Thine  angry 
threatening  towards  sinners  is  insupportable. 
But  Thy  merciful  promise  is  unmeasurable  and 
unsearchable  ;  for  Thou  art  ^/le  most  hii::;h  Lord,'' 
of  great  compassion,  long-suffering,  very  merci- 
ful, and  repentest  of  the  evils  of  men.  Thou, 
O  Lord,  according  to  Thy  great  goodness,  hast 
promised  repentance  and  forgiveness  to  them 
that  have  sinned  against  Thee,  and  of  Thine  in- 
finite mercy  hast  appointed  repentance  unto  sin- 
ners, that  they  may  be  saved.  Thou  therefore, 
O  Lord,  that  art  the  God  of  the  just,  has  not 
appointed  repentance  to  the  just  as  to  Abraham 
and  Isaac  and  Jacob,  which  have  not  sinned 


'  Not  in  MSS. 


against  Thee  ;  but  Thou  hast  appointed  repent- 
ance unto  me  that  am  a  sinner :  for  I  have 
sinned  above  the  number  of  the  sands  of  the 
sea.  My  transgressions,  O  Lord,  are  multiplied  ; 
my  transgressions  are  multiplied,  and  I  am  not 
worthy  to  behold  and  see  the  height  of  heaven 
for  the  multitude  of  mine  iniquity.  I  am  bowed 
down  with  many  iron  bands  ;  for  I  have  pro- 
voked Thy  wrath,  and  done  evil  before  Thee, 
setting  up  abominations,  and  multiplying  of- 
fences. Now,  therefore,  I  bow  the  knee  of 
mine  heart,  beseeching  Thee  of  grace.  I  have 
sinned,  O  Lord,  I  have  sinned,  and  I  acknowl- 
edge mine  iniquities ;  wherefore  I  humbly  be- 
seech Thee,  forgive  me,  O  Lord,  forgive  me, 
and  destroy  me  not  with  mine  iniquities.  Be 
not  angry  with  me  for  ever,  by  reserving  evil  for 
me  ;  neither  condemn  me  into  the  lower  part 
of  the  earth.  For  Thou  art  the  God,  even  the 
God  of  them  that  repent,  and  in  me  Thou  wilt 
show  Thy  goodness  ;  for  Thou  wilt  save  me  that 
am  unworthy,  according  to  Thy  great  mercy. 
Therefore  I  will  praise  Thee  for  ever  all  the  days 
of  my  life  ;  for  all  the  powers  of  the  heavens  do 
praise  Thee,  and  Thine  is  the  glory  for  ever  and 
ever.  Amen.  And  the  Lord  heard  his  voice, 
and  had  compassion  upon  him.  And  there  ap- 
peared a  flame  of  fire  about  him,  and  all  the 
iron  shackles  and  chains  which  were  about  him 
fell  off ;  and  the  Lord  healed  Manasseh  from  his 
affliction,  and  brought  him  back  to  Jerusalem 
unto  his  kingdom  :  and  Manasseh  knew  that  the 
Lord  He  is  God  alone.  And  he  worshipped 
the  Lord  God  alone  with  all  his  heart,  and  with 
all  his  soul,  all  the  days  of  his  life  ;  and  he  was 
esteemed  righteous.  And  he  took  away  the 
strange  gods  and  the  graven  image  out  of 
the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  all  the  altars  which 
he  had  built  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  all 
the  altars  in  Jerusalem,  and  he  cast  them  out 
of  the  city.  And  he  repaired  the  altar  of  the 
Lord,  and  sacrificed  thereon  peace-offerings  and 
thank-offerings.  And  Manasseh  spake  to  Judah 
to  serve  the  Lord  God  of  Israel.  And  he  slept 
in  peace  with  his  fathers  ;  and  Anion  his  son 
reigned  in  his  stead.  And  he  did  evil  in  the 
sight  of  the  Lord  according  to  all  things  that 
Manasseh  his  father  had  done  in  the  former  part 
of  his  reign.  And  he  provoked  the  Lord  his 
God  to  anger."  ^ 

Ye  have  heard,  our  beloved  children,  how  the 
Lord  God  for  a  while  punished  him  that  was 
addicted  to  idols,  and  had  slain  many  innocent 
persons  ;  and  yet  that  He  received  him  when 
he  repented,  and  forgave  him  his  offences,  and 
restored  him  to  his  kingdom.  For  He  not  only 
forgives  the  penitent,  but  reinstates  them  in  their 
former  dignity. 


2  2  Kings  XX.,  xxi.;  2  Chron.  xxxii.,  xxxiii. 


4o8 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


[Book  II. 


AMON    MAY    BE    AN    EXAMPLE     TO     SUCH     AS     SIN 
WITH   AN    HIGH    HAND. 

xxni.  There  is  no  sin  more  grievous  than 
idolatry,  for  it  is  an  impiety  against  God  :  and 
yet  even  this  sin  has  been  forgiven,  upon  sincere 
repentance.  But  if  any  one  sin  in  direct  oppo- 
sition, and  on  purpose  to  try  whether  God  will 
punish  the  wicked  or  not,  such  a  one  shall  have 
no  remission,  although  he  say  with  himself,  "  All 
is  well,  and  I  will  walk  according  to  the  con- 
versation of  my  evil  heart."  Such  a  one  was 
Amon  the  son  of  Manasseh.  For  the  Scripture 
says  :  "  And  Amon  reasoned  an  evil  reasoning 
of  transgression,  and  said.  My  father  from  his 
childhood  was  a  great  transgressor,  and  repented 
in  his  old  age  ;  and  now  I  will  walk  as  my  soul 
lusteth,  and  afterwards  I  will  return  unto  the 
Lord.  And  he  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
above  all  that  were  before  him.  And  the  Lord 
God  soon  destroyed  him  utterly  from  His  good 
land.  And  his  servants  conspired  against  him, 
and  slew  him  in  his  own  house,  and  he  reigned 
two  years  only." 

THAT    CHRIST    JESUS     OUR    LORD    CAME    TO    SAVE 
SINNERS   BY    REPENTANCE. 

XXTV.  Take  heed,  therefore,  ye  of  the  laity, 
lest  any  one  of  you  fix  the  reasoning  of  Amon 
in  his  heart,  and  be  suddenly  cut  off,  and  perish. 
In  the  same  manner,  let  the  bishop  take  all  the 
care  he  can  that  those  which  are  yet  innocent 
may  not  fall  into  sin ;  and  let  him  heal  and  re- 
ceive those  which  turn  from  their  sins.  But  if 
he  is  pitiless,  and  will  not  receive  the  repenting 
sinner,  he  will  sin  against  the  Lord  his  God, 
pretending  to  be  more  just  than  God's  justice, 
and  not  receiving  him  whom  He  has  received, 
through  Christ ;  for  whose  sake  He  sent  His  Son 
upon  earth  to  men,  as  a  man ;  for  whose  sake 
God  was  pleased  that  He,  who  was  the  Maker  of 
man  and  woman,  should  be  born  of  a  woman ; 
for  whose  sake  He  did  not  spare  Him  from  the 
cross,  from  death,  and  burial,  but  permitted  Him 
to  die,  who  by  nature  could  not  suffer.  His  be- 
loved Son,  God  the  Word,  the  Angel  of  His 
great  council,  that  he  might  deliver  those  from 
death  who  were  obnoxious  to  death.  Him  do 
those  provoke  to  anger  who  do  not  receive  the 
penitent.  For  He  was  not  ashamed  of  me, 
Matthew,  who  had  been  formerly  a  publican  ; 
and  admitted  of  Peter,  when  he  had  through 
fear  denied  Him  three  times,  but  had  appeased 
Him  by  repentance,  and  had  wept  bitterly  ;  nay. 
He  made  him  a  shepherd  to  His  own  lambs. 
Moreover,  He  ordained  Paul,  our  fellow-apostle, 
to  be  of  a  persecutor  an  apostle,  and  declared 
him  a  chosen  vessel,  even  when  he  had  heaped 
many  mischiefs  upon  us  before,  and  had  blas- 
phemed His   sacred   name.     He   says   also    to 


another,  a  woman  that  was  a  sinner :  "  Thy  sins, 
which  are  many,  are  forgiven,  for  thou  lovest 
much."  '  And  when  the  elders  had  set  another 
woman  which  had  sinned  before  Him,  and  had 
left  the  sentence  to  Him,  and  were  gone  out,  our 
Lord,  the  Searcher  of  the  hearts,  inquiring  of 
her  whether  the  elders  had  condemned  her,  and 
being  answered  No,  He  said  unto  her  :  "  Go  thy 
way  therefore,  for  neither  do  I  condemn  thee."  ^ 
This  Jesus,  O  ye  bishops,  our  Saviour,  our  King, 
and  our  God,  ought  to  be  set  before  you  as  your 
pattern  ;  and  Him  you  ought  to  imitate,  in  being 
meek,  quiet,  compassionate,  merciful,  peaceable, 
without  passion,  apt  to  teach,  and  diligent  to 
Convert,  willing  to  receive  and  to  comfort ;  no 
strikers,  not  soon  angry,  not  injurious,  not  arro- 
gant, not  supercilious,  not  wine-bibbers,  not 
drunkards,  not  vainly  expensive,  not  lovers  of 
delicacies,  not  extravagant,  using  the  gifts  of 
God  not  as  another's,  but  as  their  own,  as  good 
stewards  appointed  over  them,  as  those  who  will 
be  required  by  God  to  give  an  account  of  the 
same. 

SEC.  TV. ON  THE  MANAGEMENT  OF  THE  RE- 
SOURCES COLLECTED  FOR  THE  SUPPORT  OF  THE 
CLERGY,    AND    THE    RELIEF   OF   THE    POOR. 

Let  the  bishop  esteem  such  food  and  raiment 
sufficient  as  suits  necessity  and  decency.  Let 
him  not  make  use  of  the  Lord's  goods  as  an- 
other's, but  moderately ;  "for  the  labourer  is 
worthy  of  his  reward."  ^  Let  him  not  be  luxuri- 
ous in  diet,  or  fond  of  idle  furniture,  but  con- 
tented with  so  much  alone  as  is  necess^y  for  his 
sustenance. 

OF  FIRST-FRUITS  AND  TITHES,  AND  AFTER  WHAT 
MANNER  THE  BISHOP  IS  HIMSELF  TO  PARTAKE 
OF  THEM,  OR   TO  DISTRIBUTE   THEM  TO  OTHERS. 

XXV.  Let  him  use  those  tenths  and  first-fruits, 
which  are  given  according  to  the  command  of 
God,  as  a  man  of  God  ;  as  also  let  him  dispense 
in  a  right  manner  the  free-will  offerings  which' 
are  brought  in  on  account  of  the  poor,  to  the 
orphans,  the  widows,  the  afflicted,  and  strangers 
in  distress,  as  having  that  God  for  the  examiner 
of  his  accounts  who  has  committed  the  disposi- 
tion to  him.  Distribute  to  all  those  in  want 
with  righteousness,  and  yourselves  use  the  things 
which  belong  to  the  Lord,  but  do  not  abuse 
them  ;  eating  of  them,  but  not  eating  them  all 
up  by  yourselves  :  communicate  with  those  that 
are  in  want,  and  thereby  show  yourselves  un- 
blameable  before  God.  For  if  you  shall  con- 
sume them  by  yourselves,  you  will  be  reproached 
by  God,  who  says  to  such  unsatiable  people,  who 


'  Luke  vii.  47. 

2  John  viii.  11. 

3  Luke  X.  7. 


Sec.  IV.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


409 


alone  devour  all,  "  Ye  eat  up  the  milk,  and  clothe 
yourselves  with  the  wool ; " '  and  in  another 
passage,  "  Must  you  alone  live  upon  the  earth?  "^ 
Upon  which  account  you  are  commanded  in  the 
law,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  3 
Now  we  say  these  things,  not  as  if  you  might  not 
partake  of  the  fruits  of  your  labours ;  for  it  is 
written,  "  Thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the  mouth  of 
the  ox  which  treadeth  out  the  corn  ;  "  •*  but  that 
you  should  do  it  with  moderation  and  righteous- 
ness. As,  therefore,  the  ox  that  labours  in  the 
threshing-floor  without  a  muzzle  eats  indeed,  but 
does  not  eat  all  up  ;  so  do  you  who  labour  in 
the  threshing-floor,  that  is,  in  the  Church  of  God, 
eat  of  the  Church  :  which  was  also  the  case  of 
the  Levites,  who  served  in  the  tabernacle  of  the 
testimony,  which  was  in  all  things  a  type  of  the 
Church.  Nay,  further,  its  very  name  implied 
that  that  tabernacle  was  fore -appointed  for  a 
testimony  of  the  Church.  Here,  therefore,  the 
Levites  also,  who  attended  upon  the  tabernacle, 
partook  of  those  things  that  were  offered  to  God 
by  all  the  people,  —  namely,  gifts,  offerings,  and 
first-fruits,  and  tithes,  and  sacrifices,  and  obla- 
tions, without  disturbance,  they  and  their  wives, 
and  their  sons  and  their  daughters.  Since  their 
employment  was  the  ministration  to  the  taber- 
nacle, therefore  they  had  not  any  lot  or  inherit- 
ance in  the  land  among  the  children  of  Israel, 
because  the  oblations  of  the  people  were  the  lot 
of  Levi,  and  the  inheritance  of  their  tribe.  You, 
therefore,  O  bishops,  are  to  your  people' priests 
and  Levites,  ministering  to  the  holy  tabernacle, 
the  holy  Catholic  Church  ;  who  stand  at  the 
altar  of  the  Lord  your  God,  and  offer  to  Him 
reasonable  and  unbloody  sacrifices  through  Jesus 
the  great  High  Priest.  You  are  to  the  laity 
prophets,  rulers,  governors,  and  kings  ;  the  medi- 
ators between  God  and  His  faithful  people,  who 
receive  and  declare  His  word,  well  acquainted 
with  the  Scriptures.  Ye  are  the  voice  of  God, 
and  witnesses  of  His  will,  who  bear  the  sins  of 
all,  and  intercede  for  all ;  whom,  as  you  have 
heard,  the  word  severely  threatens  if  you  hide 
the  key  of  knowledge  from  men,  who  are  liable 
to  perdition  if  you  do  not  declare  His  will  to  the 
people  that  are  under  you  ;  who  shall  have  a 
certain  reward  from  God,  and  unspeakable  hon- 
our and  glory,  if  you  duly  minister  to  the  holy 
tabernacle.  For  as  yours  is  the  burden,  so  you 
receive  as  your  fruit  the  supply  of  food  and  other 
necessaries.  For  you  imitate  Christ  the  Lord; 
and  as  He  "  bare  the  sins  of  us  all  upon  the 
tree  "  at  His  crucifixion,  the  innocent  for  those 
who  deserved  punishment,  so  also  you  ought  to 
make  the  sins  of  the  people  your  own.  For  con- 
cerning  our  Saviour  it   is  said  in  Isaiah,  "  He 


'  Ezek.  xxxiv.  3. 

2  Isa.  V.  S. 

3  Lev.  xix.  18. 

*  Deut.  XXV.  4:   I  Cor.  ix.  g. 


bears  our  sins,  and  is  afflicted  for  us."  5  And 
again  :  "  He  bare  the  sins  of  many,  and  was  de- 
livered for  our  offences."  ^  As,  therefore,  you 
are  patterns  for  others,  so  have  you  Christ  for 
your  pattern.  As,  therefore,  He  is  concerned 
for  all,  so  be  you  for  the  laity  under  you.  For 
do  not  thou  imagine  that  the  office  of  a  bishop 
is  an  easy  or  light  burden.  As,  therefore,  you 
bear  the  weight,  so  have  you  a  right  to  partake 
of  the  fruits  before  others,  and  to  impart  to  those 
that  are  in  want,  as  being  to  give  an  account  to 
Him,  who  without  bias  will  examine  your  ac- 
counts. For  those  who  attend  upon  the  Church 
ought  to  be  maintained  by  the  Church,  as  being 
priests,  Levites,  presidents,  and  ministers  of  God  ; 
as  it  is  written  in  the  book  of  Numbers  concern- 
ing the  priests  :  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Aaron, 
Thou,  and  thy  sons,  and  the  house  of  thy  family, 
shall  bear  the  iniquities  of  the  holy  things  of 
your  priesthood."  ?  "  Behold,  I  have  given  unto 
you  the  charge  of  the  first-fruits,  from  all  that 
are  sanctified  to  me  by  the  children  of  Israel ; 
I  have  given  them  for  a  reward  to  thee,  and  to 
thy  sons  after  thee,  by  an  ordinance  for  ever. 
This  shall  be  yours  out  of  the  holy  things,  out  of 
the  oblations,  and  out  of  the  gifts,  and  out  of  all 
the  sacrifices,  and  out  of  every  trespass-offering, 
and  sin-offerings ;  and  all  that  they  render  unto 
me  out  of  all  their  holy  things,  they  shall  belong 
to  thee,  and  to  thy  sons  :  in  the  sanctuary  shall 
they  eat  them."  '^  And  a  little  after  :  "  All  the 
first-fruits  of  the  oil,  and  of  the  wine,  and  of  the 
wheat,  all  which  they  shall  give  unto  the  Lord, 
to  thee  have  I  given  them  ;  and  all  that  is  first 
ripe,  to  thee  have  I  given  it,  and  every  devoted 
thing.  Every  first-born  of  man  and  of  beast, 
clean  and  unclean,  and  of  sacrifice,  with  the 
breast,  and  the  right  shoulder,  all  these  appertain 
to  the  priests,  and  to  the  rest  of  those  belonging 
to  them,  even  to  the  Levites."  ^ 

Hear  this,  you  of  the  laity  also,  the  elect 
Church  of  God.  For  the  people  were  formerly 
called  "  the  people  of  God,"  '°  and  "  an  holy  na- 
tion." "  You,  therefore,  are  the  holy  and  sacred 
"  Church  of  God,  enrolled  in  heaven,  a  royal 
priesthood,  an  holy  nation,  a  ])eculiar  people,"  '^ 
a  bride  adorned  for  the  Lord  God,  a  great 
Church,  a  faithful  Church.  Hear  attentively  now 
what  was  said  formerly  :  oblations  and  tithes  be- 
long to  Christ  our  High  Priest,  and  to  those  who 
minister  to  Him.  Tenths  of  salvation  are  the 
first  Iftter  of  the  name  of  Jesus.  Hear,  O  thou 
Holy  Catholic  Church,  who  hast  escaped  the 
ten  plagues,  and  hast   received   the    ten  com- 


5  Isa.  liii.  4. 

*>  Isa.  liii.  12. 

'  Num.  xviii.  i. 

8  Num.  xviii.  8,  etc. 

9  Num.  xviii.  12,  etc. 
'°  Kx.  xix.  5,  6. 

"  Heh.  xii.  23, 

»=  I  Pet.  ii.  9. 


4IO 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  II. 


mandments,  and  hast  learned  the  law,  and  hast 
kept  the  faith,  and  hast  believed  in  Jesus,  and 
hast  known  tJie  ikcad,  and  hast  believed  in  the 
iota  which  is  the  first  letter  of  the  name  of  Jesus, '^ 
and  art  named  after  His  name,  and  art  estab- 
lished, and  shinest  in  the  consummation  of  His 
glory.  Those  which  were  then  the  sacrifices  now 
are  prayers,  and  intercessions,  and  thanksgivings. 
Those  which  were  then  first-fruits,  and  tithes, 
and  offerings,  and  gifts,  now  are  oblations,  which 
are  presented  by  holy  bishops  to  tlie  Lord  God, 
through  Jesus  Christ,  who  has  died  for  them. 
For  these  are  your  high  priests,  as  the  presbyters 
are  your  priests,  and  your  present  deacons  in- 
stead of  your  Levites ;  as  are  also  your  readers, 
your  singers,  your  porters,  your  deaconesses, 
your  widows,  your  virgins,  and  your  orphans  :  but 
He  who  is  above  all  these  is  the  High  Priest. 

ACCORDING  TO  WHAT  PATTERNS  AND  DIGNITY 
EVERY  ORDER  OF  THE  CLERGY  IS  APPOINTED 
BY    GOD. 

XXVI.  The  bishop,  he  is  the  minister  of  the 
word,  the  keeper  of  knowledge,  the  mediator 
between  God  and  you  in  the  several  parts  of 
your  divine  worship.  He  is  the  teacher  of  piety  ; 
and,  next  after  God,  he  is  your  father,  who  has 
begotten  you  again  to  the  adoption  of  sons  by 
water  and  the  Spirit.  He  is  your  ruler  and  gov- 
ernor ;  he  is  your  king  and  potentate  ;  he  is, 
next  after  God,  your  earthly  god,  who  has  a  right 
to  be  honoured  by  you.  For  concerning  him, 
and  such  as  he,  it  is  that  God  pronounces,  "  I 
have  said.  Ye  are  gods  ;  and  ye  are  all  children 
of  the  Most  High."  ^  And,  "  Ye  shall  not  speak 
evil  of  the  gods."^  For  let  the  bishop  preside 
over  you  as  one  honoured  with  the  authority  of 
God,  which  he  is  to  exercise  over  the  clergy,  and 
by  which  he  is  to  govern  all  the  people.  But  let 
the  deacon  minister  to  him,  as  Christ  does  to 
His  Father ;  '  and  let  him  serve  him  unblame- 
ably  in  all  things,  as  Christ  does  nothing  of  Him- 
self, but  does  always  those  things  that  please 
His  Father.  Let  also  the  deaconess  be  hon- 
oured by  you  in  the  place  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  not  do  or  say  anything  without  the  deacon  ; 
as  neither  does  the  Comforter  say  or  do  anything 
of  Himself,  but  gives  glory  to  Christ  by  waiting 
for  His  pleasure.  And  as  we  cannot  believe  on 
Christ  without  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit,  so  let 
not  any  woman  address  herself  to  the  deacon  or 
bishop  without  the  deaconess.  Let  the  presbyters 
be  esteemed  by  you  to  represent  us  the  apostles, 
and  let  them  be  the  teachers  of  divine  knowl- 
edge ;  since  our  Lord,  when  He  sent  us,  said, 
*'  Go  ye,  and  make  disciples  of  all  nations,  bap- 

*  Inserted  from  V.  MSS. 

2  Ps.  Ixxxii.  6. 

3  Ex.  xxii.  28. 

*  The  v.  MSS.  read,  "  .is  the  powers  do  to  God,"  which,  ijltzen  re- 
marks, is  an  orthodox  correction  of  an  Arian  opinion. 


tizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of 
the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost :  teaching  them 
to  observe  all  things  whatsoever  I  have  com- 
manded you."  5  Let  the  widows  and  orphans 
be  esteemed  as  representing  the  altar  of  burnt- 
offering ;  and  let  the  virgins  be  honoured  as 
representing  the  altar  of  incense,  and  the  in- 
cense itself. 

THAT  IT  IS  A  HORRIBLE  THING  FOR  A  MAN  TO 
THRUST  HIMSELF  INTO  ANY  SACERDOTAL  OF- 
FICE, AS  DID  CORAH  AND  HIS  COMPANY,  SAUL 
AND    UZZIAH. 

XXVII.  As,  therefore,  it  was  not  lawful  for  one 
of  another  tribe,  that  was  not  a  Levite,  to  offer 
anything,  or  to  approach  the  altar  without  the 
priest,  so  also  do  you  do  nothing  witliout  the 
bishop  ;  ^  for  if  any  one  does  anything  without 
the  bishop,  he  does  it  to  no  purpose.  For  it 
will  not  be  esteemed  as  of  any  avail  to  him.  For 
as  Saul,  when  he  had  offered  without  Samuel,  was 
told,  "  It  will  not  avail  for  thee  ;"''  so  every  per- 
son among  the  laity,  doing  anything  without  the 
priest,  labours  in  vain.  And  as  Uzziah  the  king,^ 
wlio  was  not  a  priest,  and  yet  would  exercise  the 
functions  of  the  priests,  was  smitten  with  leprosy 
for  his  transgression  ;  so  every  lay  person  shall 
not  be  unpunished  who  despises  God,  and  is  so 
mad  as  to  affront  His  priests,  and  unjustly  to 
snatch  that  honour  to  himself:  not  imitating 
Christ,  "who  glorified  not  Himself  to  be  made 
an  high  priest ;  "^  but  waited  till  He  heard  from 
His  Father,  "  The  Lord  sware,  and  will  not  re- 
pent. Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever,  after  the  order 
of  iMelchizedek."  '°  If,  therefore,  Christ  did  not 
glorify  Himself  without  the  Father,  how  dare  any 
man  thrust  himself  into  the  priesthood  who  has 
not  received  that  dignity  from  his  superior,  and 
do  such  things  which  it  is  lawful  only  for  the 
priests  to  do  ?  \Vere  not  the  followers  of  Corah, 
even  though  they  were  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  con- 
sumed with  fire,  because  they  rose  up  against 
Moses  and  Aaron,  and  meddled  with  such  things 
as  did  not  belong  to  them  ?  And  Dathan  and 
Abiram  went  down  quick  into  hell ;  and  the  rod 
that  budded  put  a  stop  to  the  madness  of  the 
multitude,  and  demonstrated  who  was  the  high 
priest  ordained  by  God."  You  ought  therefore, 
brethren,  to  bring  your  sacrifices  and  your  obla- 
tions to  the  bishop,  as  to  your  high  priest,  either 
by  yourselves  or  by  the  deacons  ;  and  do  you 
bring  not  those  only,  but  also  your  first-fruits, 
and  your  tithes,  and  your  free-will  offerings  to 
him.  For  he  knows  who  they  are  that  are  in 
affliction,  and  gives  to  every  one  as  is  convenient, 


5  Matt,  xxviii.  19. 

*  t)ne  V.  MS.  reads  "  priest." 

7  I  Sam.  xiii.  13. 

8  2  Chron.  xxvi. 

9  Heb.  V.  5. 
'•'  Ps.  ex.  4. 
"  Num.  xvi. 


Sec.  IV.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


411 


that  they  do,  and  without  him  they  do  nothing  ; 
and  they  honour  him,  their  pretended  priest,  and 
esteem  his  name  as  venerable  in  honour  of  hfe- 
less  statues,  and  in  order  to  the  worship  of 
wicked  spirits.  If  these  heathens,  therefore,  who 
give  glory  to  lying  vanities,  and  place  their  hope 
upon  nothing  that  is  firm,  endeavour  to  imitate 
the  sacred  rules,  how  much  more  reasonable  is 
it  that  you,  who  have  a  most  certain  faith  and 
undoubted  hope,  and  who  expect  glorious,  and 
eternal,  and  never- failing  promises,  should  hon- 
our the  Lord  God  in  those  set  over  you,  and 
esteem  your  bishop  to  be  the  mouth  of  God  ! 


that  so  one  may  not  receive  alms  twice  or  oftener 
the  same  day,  or  the  same  week,  while  another 
has  nothing  at  all.  For  it  is  reasonable  rather  to 
supply  the  wants  of  those  who  really  are  in  dis- 
tress, than  of  those  who  only  appear  to  be  so. 

OF  AN  ENTERTAINMENT,  AND  AFTER  WHAT  MAN- 
NER EACH  DISTINCT  ORDER  OF  THE  CLERGY 
IS  TO  BE  TREATED  BY  THOSE  WHO  INVITE 
THEM   TO   IT. 

xxviii.  If  any  determine  to  invite  elder  women 
to  an  entertainment  of  love,  or  a  feast,  as  our 
Saviour  calls  it,'  let  them  most  frequently  send 
to  such  a  one  whom  the  deacons  know  to  be  in 
distress.  But  let  what  is  the  pastor's  due,  I  mean 
the  first-fruits,^  be  set  apart  in  the  feast  for  him, 
even  though  he  be  not  at  the  entertainment,  as 
being  your  priest,  and  in  honour  of  that  God 
who  has  entrusted  him  with  the  priesthood.  But 
as  much  as  is  given  to  every  one  of  the  elder 
women,  let  double  so  much  be  given  to  the  dea- 
cons, in  honour  of  Christ.  Let  also  a  double 
portion  be  set  apart  for  the  presbyters,  as  for 
such  who  labour  continually  about  the  word  and 
doctrine,  upon  the  account  of  the  apostles  of 
our  Lord,  whose  place  they  sustain,  as  the  coun- 
sellors of  the  bishop  and  the  crown  of  the  Church. 
For  they  are  the  Sanhedrim  and  senate  of  the 
Church.  If  there  be  a  reader  there,  let  him  re- 
ceive a  single  portion,  in  honour  of  the  prophets, 
and  let  the  singer  and  the  porter  have  as  much. 
Let  the  laity,  therefore,  pay  proper  honours  ^^-^'l[;;.lal^^ongW^^^ 
their  presents,  and  utmost  marks  of  respect  to  ^.^^  p^phet.  For  as  Christ  does  nothing  with- 
each  distinct  order.  But  let  them  not  on  all  1  ^^^^  ^.^^  p^^j^^^^  ^^  ^^^1^,^^^  ^1^^^  ^j^^  ^j^^^oj,  do 
occasions  trouble  their  governor  but  let  them  1  ^^^-  ^^.-^^^^^^^^  ^,^  i^^^hop  .  and  as  the  Son 
signify  their  desires  by  those  who  minister  to  ^^.j^^^^^  ^is  Father  is  nothing,  so  is  the  deacon 
him,  that  is,  by  the  deacons,  with  whom  they  1  ^^^^.  ^^,^^^^^^^  ^.^  ^j^j^^p  .  .^^^j  ^^^  ^^^  g^^^  is 
may  be  more  free.  For  neither  may  we  address  |  ^^^^.  ^^  ^^^  P^^j^^^.^  ^^  j^  ^^,^^^  ^^^^oj^  ^^^^j^.^,^ 
ourselves  to  Almighty  God,  but  only  by  Christ,  j  ^^  j^.^  ^.^,^  .  ^^^  ^^  ^^^  g^^^  i^  ^1^^  messenger 
In  the  same  manner,  therefore,  let  the  laity  make  |  ^^^  p^phet  of  the  Father,  so  is  the  deacon  the 
known  all  their  desires  to  the  bishop  by  the  |  ^^^^^^^^„^,  ^nd  prophet  of  his  bishop.  Where- 
fore let  all  things  that  he  is  to  do  with  any  one 
be  made  known  to  the  bishop,  and  be  finally. 
ordered  by  him. 


WHAT   IS   THE   DIGNITY    OF    A    BISHOP    AND    OF    A 
DEACON. 

XXIX.  For  if  Aaron,  because  he  declared  to 
Pharaoh  the  words  of  God  from  Moses,  is  called 
a  prophet ;  and  Moses  himself  is  called  a  god 
to  Pharaoh,  on  account  of  his  being  at  once  a 
king  and  a  high  priest,  as  God  says  to  him,  "  I 
have  made  thee  a  god  to  Pharaoh,  and  Aaron 
thy  brother  shall  be  thy  prophet ;  "  •*  why  do  not 
ye  also  esteem  the  mediators  of  the  word  to  be 
prophets,  and  reverence  them  as  gods? 

AFTER    WHAT    MANNER     THE    LAITY    ARE    TO    BE 
OBEDIENT   TO   THE   DEACON. 

XXX.  For  now  the  deacon  is  to  you  Aaron, 
and  the  bishop  Moses.  If,  therefore,  Moses  was 
called  a  god  by  the  Lord,  let  the  bishop  be  hon- 


deacon,  and  accordingly  let  them  act  as  he  shall 
direct  them.  For  there  was  no  holy  thing  offered 
or  done  in  the  temple  formerly  without  the  priest. 
"  For  the  priest's  lips  shall  keep  knowledge,  and 
they  shall  seek  the  law  at  his  mouth,"  as  the 
prophet  somewhere  says,  "  for  he  is  the  messenger 
of  the  Lord  Almighty."  ^  For  if  the  worshippers 
of  demons,  in  their  hateful,  abominable,  and  im- 
pure performances,  imitate  the  sacred  rules  till 
this  very  day  (it  is  a  wide  comparison  indeed, 
and  there  is  a  vast  distance  between  their  abomi- 1 
nations  and  God's  sacred  worship),  in  theirs 
mockeries  of  worship  they  neither  offer  nor  do 
anything  without  their  pretended  priest,  but 
esteem  him  as  the  very  mouth  of  their  idols  of 
stone,  waiting  to  see  what  commands  he  will  lay 
upon  them.    And  whatsoever  he  commands  them, 


Luke  xiv.  13. 

rCompare  Teaching,  chap.  xiii.  p.  381.  —  R.J 

Mai.  ii.  7. 


THAT     THE     DEACON     MUST     NOT     DO     ANYTHING 
WITHOUT   THE   BISHOP. 

XXXI.  Let  him  not  do  anything  at  all  without 
his  bishoj),  nor  give  anything  without  his  consent. 
For  if  he  gives  to  any  one  as  to  a  person  in  dis- 
tress without  the  bishop's  knowledge,  he  gives 
it  so  that  it  must  tend  to  the  reproach  of  the 
bishop,  and  he  accuses  him  as  careless  of  the 
distressed.  But  he  that  casts  reproach  on  his 
bishop,  either  by  word  or  deed,  opposes  God, 
not  hearkening  to  what  He  says  :  "  Thou  shalt 
not  speak  evil  of  the  gods."  s  For  He  did  not 
make  that  law  concerning  deities  of  wood  and 


*■  Ex.  vii.  I. 
S  Ex.  xxii.  28 


412 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  II. 


of  stone,  which  are  abominable,  because  they 
are  falsely  called  gods,  but  concerning  the  priests 
and  the  judges,  to  whom  He  also  said,  "  Ye  are 
gods,  and  children  of  the  ^Nlost  High."  ' 

THAT  THE  DEACON  MUST  NOT  MAKE  ANY  DIS- 
TRIBUTIONS WITHOUT  THE  CONSENT  OF  THE 
BISHOP,  BECAUSE  THAT  WILL  TURN  TO  THE 
REPROACH  OF  THE  BISHOP. 

xxxii.  If  therefore,  O  deacon,  thou  knowest 
any  one  to  be  in  distress,  put  the  bishop  in  mind 
of  him,  and  so  give  to  him ;  but  do  nothing  m  a 
clandestine  way,  so  as  may  tend  to  his  reproach, 
lest  thou  raise  a  murmur  against  him  ;  for  the 
murmur  will  not  be  against  him,  but  against  the 
Lord  God  :  and  the  deacon,  with  the  rest,  will 
hear  what  Aaron  and  Miriam  heard,  when  they 
spake  against  Moses  :  "  How  is  it  that  ye  were 
not  afraid  to  speak  against  my  servant  Moses?  "  ^ 
And  again,  Moses  says  to  those  who  rose  up 
against  him  :  "  Your  murmuring  is  not  against 
us,  but  against  the  Lord  our  God."  ^  For  if  he 
that  calls  one  of  the  laity  Raka,-*  or  fool,  shall 
not  be  unpunished,  as  doing  injury  to  the  name  s 
of  Christ,  how  dare  any  man  speak  against  his 
bishop,  by  whom  the  Lord  gave  the  Holy  Spirit 
among  you  upon  the  laying  on  of  his  hands,  by 
whom  ye  have  learned  the  sacred  doctrines,  and 
have  known  God,  and  have  believed  in  Christ, 
by  whom  ye  were  known  of  God,  by  whom  ye 
were  sealed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  and  the 
ointment  of  understanding,  by  whom  ye  were 
declared  to  be  the  children  of  light,  by  whom 
the  Lord  in  your  illumination  testified  by  the 
imposition  of  the  bishop's  hands,  and  sent  out 
His  sacred  voice  upon  every  one  of  you,  saying, 
"Thou  art  my  son,  this  day  have  1  begotten 
thee?"^  By  thy  bishop,  O  man,  God  adopts 
thee  for  His  child.  Acknowledge,  O  son,  that 
right  hand  which  was  a  mother  to  thee.  Love 
him  who,  after  God,  is  become  a  father  to  thee, 
and  honour  him. 

AFTER  WHAT  MANNER  THE  BISHOPS  ARE  TO  BE 
HONOURED,  AND  TO  BE  REVERENCED  AS  OUR 
SPIRITUAL   PARENTS. 

XXXIII.  For  if  the  divine  oracle  says,  concern- 
ing our  ])arents  according  to  the  flesh,  "  Honour 
thy  father  and  thy  mother,  that  it  may  be  well 
with  thee  ;  "  ?  and,  "  He  that  curseth  his  father 
or  his  mother,  let  him  die  the  death  ;  "  '^  how 
much  more  should  the  word  exhort  you  to  hon- 
our your  spiritual  parents,  and  to  love  them  as 
your  benefactors  and  ambassadors  with  God,  who 


'  Ps.  Ixxxii.  6. 

2  Num.  xli.  8. 

3  Ex.  xvi.  8. 

*  Matt   V.  22. 

s  Capcliius  reads,  "  the  law  of  Christ." 

6  Ps.  ii.  7. 

7  Ex.    XX.    12. 

*  Ex.  xxi.  17. 


have  regenerated  you  by  water,  and  endued  you 
with  the  fulness  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  have 
fed  you  with  the  word  as  with  milk,  who  have 
nourished  you  with  doctrine,  who  have  confirmed 
you  by  their  admonitions,  who  have  imparted  to 
you  the  saving  body  and  i^recious  blood  of 
Christ,  who  have  loosed  you  from  your  sins,  who 
have  made  you  partakers  of  the  holy  and  sacred 
eucharist,  who  have  admitted  you  to  be  partakers 
and  fellow-heirs  of  the  promise  of  God  !  Rev- 
erence these,  and  honour  tliem  with  all  kinds  of 
honour ;  for  they  have  obtained  from  God  the 
power  of  life  and  death,  in  their  judging  of  sin- 
ners, and  condemning  them  to  the  death  of 
eternal  fire,  as  also  of  loosing  returning  sinners 
from  their  sins,  and  of  restoring  them  to  a  new 
life. 

THAT    PRIESTS    ARE    TO    BE    PREFERRED    BEFORE 
RULERS   AND   KINGS. 

XXXIV.  Account  these  worthy  to  be  esteemed 
your  rulers  and  your  kings,  and  bring  them 
tribute  as  to  kings ;  for  by  you  they  and  their 
families  ought  to  be  maintained.  As  Samuel 
made  constitutions  for  the  people  concerning  a 
king,9  in  the  first  book  of  Kings,  and  Moses  did 
so  concerning  priests  in  Leviticus,  so  do  we  also 
make  constitutions  for  you  concerning  bishops. 
For  if  there  the  multitude  distributed  the  inferior 
services  in  proportion  to  so  great  a  king,  ought 
not  therefore  the  bishop  much  more  now  to  re- 
ceive of  you  those  things  which  are  determined 
by  God  for  the  sustenance  of  himself  and  of  the 
rest  of  the  clergy  belonging  to  him  ?  But  if  we 
may  add  somewhat  further,  let  the  bishop  receive 
more  than  the  other  received  of  old  :  for  he  only 
managed  the  affairs  of  the  soldiery,  being  en- 
trusted with  war  and  peace  for  the  preservation 
of  men's  bodies ;  but  the  other  is  entrusted  with 
the  exercise  of  the  priestly  office  in  relation  to 
God,  in  order  to  preserve  both  body  and  soul 
from  dangers.  By  how  much,  therefore,  the 
soul  is  more  valuable  than  the  body,  so  much 
the  priestly  office  is  beyond  the  kingly.  For  it 
binds  and  looses  those  that  are  worthy  of  pun- 
ishment or  of  remission.  Wherefore  you  ought 
to  love  the  bishop  as  your  father,  and  fear  him 
as  your  king,  and  honour  him  as  your  lord,  bring- 
ing to  him  your  fruits  and  the  works  of  your 
hands,  for  a  blessing  upon  you,  giving  to  him 
your  first-fruits,  and  your  tithes,  and  your  obla- 
tions, and  your  gifts,  as  to  the  priest  of  God  ; 
the  first-fruits  of  your  wheat,  and  wine,  and  oil, 
and  autumnal  fruits,  and  wool,'°  and  all  things 
which  the  Lord  God  gives  thee.  And  thy  offer- 
ing shall  be  accepted  as  a  savour  of  a  sweet 
smell  to  the  Lord  thy  God  ;  and  the  Lord  will 
bless  the  works  of  thy  hands,  and  will  multiply 


9  I  Sam.  viii. 
'°  One  V.  MS.  reads  "  olives  "  instead  of  "  wool." 


Sec.  v.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


41, 


the  good  things  of  the  land.     "  For  a  blessing 
is  upon  the  head  of  him  that  giveth."  ' 

THAT    BOTH     THE     LAW     AND     THE     GOSPEL     PRE- 
SCRIBE  OFFERINGS. 

XXXV.  Now  you  ought  to  know,  that  ahhough 
the  Lord  has  deHvered  you  from  the  additional 
bonds,  and  has  brought  you  out  of  them  to  your 
refreshment,  and  does  not  permit  you  to  sacri- 
fice irrational  creatures  for  sin-offerings,  and 
purifications,  and  scapegoats,  and  continual 
washings  and  sprinklings,  yet  has  He  nowhere 
freed  you  from  those  oblations  which  you  owe 
to  the  priests,  nor  from  doing  good  to  the  poor. 
For  the  Lord  says  to  you  in  the  Gospel :  "  Un- 
less your  righteousness  abound  more  than  that 
of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  ye  shall  by  no 
means  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."- 
Now  herein  will  your  righteousness  exceed  theirs, 
if  you  take  greater  care  of  the  priests,  the  or- 
phans, and  the  widows  ;  as  it  is  written  :  "  He 
hath  scattered  abroad  :  he  hath  given  to  the 
poor ;  his  righteousness  remaineth  for  ever."  ^ 
And  again  :  *'  By  acts  of  righteousness  and  faith 
iniquities  are  purged."'*  And  again:  "Every 
bountiful  soul  is  blessed."  5  So  therefore  shalt 
thou  do  as  the  Lord  has  appointed,  and  shalt 
give  to  the  priest  what  things  are  due  to  him, 
the  first-fruits  of  thy  floor,  and  of  thy  wine-press, 
and  sin-offerings,  as  to  the  mediator  between 
God  and  such  as  stand  in  need  of  purgation  and 
forgiveness.  For  it  is  thy  duty  to  give,  and  his 
to  administer,  as  being  the  administrator  and 
disposer  of  ecclesiastical  affairs.  Yet  shalt  thou 
not  call  thy  bishop  to  account,  nor  watch  his 
administration,  how  he  does  it,  when,  or  to 
whom,  or  where,  or  whether  he  do  it  well  or 
ill,  or  indifferently ;  for  he  has  One  who  will  call 
him  to  an  account,  the  Lord  God,  who  put  this 
administration  into  his  hands,  and  thought  him 
worthy  of  the  priesthood  of  so  great  dignity. 

THE  RECITAL  OF  THE  TEN  COMMANDMENTS,  AND 
AFTER  WHAT  MANNER  THEY  DO  HERE  PRE- 
SCRIBE  TO    US. 

XXXVI.  Have  before  thine  eyes  the  fear  of 
God,  and  always  remember  the  ten  command- 
ments of  God,  —  to  love  the  one  and  only  Lord 
God  with  all  thy  strength ;  to  give  no  heed  to 
idols,  or  any  other  beings,  as  being  lifeless  gods, 
or  irrational  beings  or  dasmons.  Consider  the 
manifold  workmanship  of  God,  which  received 
its  beginning  through  Christ.  Thou  shalt  ob- 
serve the  Sabl^ath,  on  account  of  Him  who 
ceased  from  His  work  of  creation,  but  ceased 
not  from  His  work  of  providence  :  it  is  a  rest 


'  Prov.  xi.  26. 

2  Matt.  V.  20. 

3  Ps   cxii.  p. 

*  Prov.  XVI.  6. 
S  Prov.  xi.  25. 


for  meditation  of  the  law,  not  for  idleness  of  the 
hands.  Reject  every  unlawful  lust,  everything 
destructive  to  men,  and  all  anger.  Honour  thy 
parents,  as  the  authors  of  thy  being.  Love  thy 
neighbour  as  thyself.  Communicate  the  neces- 
saries of  life  to  the  needy.  Avoid  swearing 
falsely,  and  swearing  often,  and  in  vain ;  for 
thou  shalt  not  be  held  guiltless.  Do  not  appear 
before  the  priests  empty,  and  offer  thy  free-will 
offerings  continually.  ^Moreover,  do  not  leave 
the  church  of  Christ ;  but  go  thither  in  the 
morning  before  all  thy  work,  and  again  meet 
there  in  the  evening,  to  return  thanks  to  God 
that  He  has  preserved  thy  life.  Be  diligent,  and 
constant,  and  laborious  in  thy  calling.  Offer  to 
the  Lord  thy  free-will  offerings ;  for  says  He, 
"  Honour  the  Lord  with  the  fruit  of  thy  honest 
labours."  ^  If  thou  art  not  able  to  cast  anything 
considerable  into  the  Corban,''  yet  at  least  be- 
stow upon  the  strangers  one,  or  two,  or  five 
mites.  "  Lay  up  to  thyself  heavenly  treasure, 
which  neither  the  moth  nor  thieves  can  de- 
stroy."^ And  in  doing  this,  do  not  judge  thy 
bishop,  or  any  of  thy  neighbours  among  the 
laity  ;  for  if  thou  judge  thy  brother,  thou  becom- 
est  a  judge,  without  being  constituted  such  by 
anybody,  for  the  priests  are  only  entrusted  with 
the  power  of  judging.  For  to  them  it  is  said, 
"Judge  righteous  judgment ;  "^  and  again,  "  Ap- 
prove yourselves  to  be  exact  money-changers."  '° 
For  to  you  this  is  not  entrusted ;  for,  on  the 
contrary,  it  is  said  to  those  who  aie  not  of  the 
dignity  of  magistrates  or  ministers  :  "Judge  not, 
and  ye  shall  not  be  judged."  " 

SEC.    V, ON   ACCUS.\TIONS,    AND   THE   TREATMENT 

OF    ACCU.SERS. 

CONCERNING  ACCUSERS  AND  FALSE  ACCUSERS, 
AND  HOW  A  JUDGE  IS  NOT  RASHLY  EITHER  TO 
BELIEVE  THEM  OR  DISBELIEVE  THEM,  BUT 
AFTER   AN    ACCURATE   EXAMINATION. 

XXXVII.  But  it  is  the  duty  of  the  bishop  to 
judge  rightly,  as  it  is  written,  "  Judge  righteous 
judgment ;  "  '^  and  elsewhere,  "  Why  do  ye  not 
even  of  yourselves  judge  what  is  right?"  '^  Be 
ye  therefore  as  skilful  dealers  in  money :  for  as 
ihese  reject  ba^  money,  but  take  to  themselves 
what  is  current,  in  the  same  manner  it  is  the 
bishop's  duty  to  retain  the  unblameable,  but 
either  to  heal,  or,  if  they  be  past  cure,  to  cast 
off  those  that  are  blameworthy,  so  as  not  to  be 
hasty  in  cutting  off,  nor  to  believe  all  accusa- 
tions ;  for  it  sometimes  happens  that  some,  either 


*  Prov.  iii.  9. 

7  The  V.  Mss.  read:  "Casting  into  the  treasury  whatever  you 
can  bestow." 

8  Matt.  vi.  2o. 

9  Dcut.  i.  16,  xvi.  i3. 
'°  Zcch.  vii.  9. 

"  Luke  vi.  37. 
'-  John  vii.  24. 
'•J  Luke  xii.  57. 


414 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


[Book  II. 


through  passion  or  envy,  do  insist  on  a  false  ac- 
cusation against  a  brother,  as  did  the  two  elders 
in  the  case  of  Susanna  in  Babylon,'  and  the 
Egyptian  woman  in  the  case  of  Joseph.^  Do 
thou  therefore,  as  a  man  of  God,  ufit  rashly  re- 
ceive such  accusations,  lest  thou  take  away  the 
innocent  and  slay  the  righteous  ;  for  he  that  will 
receive  such  accusations  is  the  author  of  anger 
rather  than  of  peace.  But  where  there  is  anger, 
there  the  Lord  is  not ;  for  that  anger,  which  is 
the  friend  of  Satan  —  I  mean  that  which  is  ex- 
cited unjustly  by  the  means  of  false  brethren  — 
never  suffers  unanimity  to  be  in  the  Church. 
Wherefore,  when  you  know  such  persons  to  be 
foolish,  quarrelsome,  passionate,  and  such  as  de- 
light in  mischief,  do  not  give  credit  to  them  ;  but 
observe  such  as  they  are,  when  you  hear  any- 
thing from  them  against  their  brother  :  for  mur- 
der is  nothing  in  their  eyes,  and  they  cast  a  man 
down  in  such  a  way  as  one  would  not  suspect. 
Do  thou  therefore  consider  diligently  the  ac- 
cuser,3  wisely  observing  his  mode  of  life,  what, 
and  of  what  sort  it  is  ;  and  in  case  thou  findest 
him  a  man  of  veracity,  do  according  to  the  doc- 
trine of  our  Lord,-*  and  taking  him  who  is  ac- 
cused, rebuke  him,  that  he  may  repent,  when 
nobody  is  by.  But  if  he  be  not  persuaded,  take 
with  thee  one  or  two  more,  and  so  show  him  his 
fault,  and  admonish  him  with  mildness  and  in- 
struction ;  for  "  wisdom  will  rest  upon  an  heart 
that  is  good,  but  is  not  understood  in  the  heart 
of  the  foolish."  5 

THAT  SINNERS  ARE  PRIVATELY  TO  BE  REPROVED, 
AND  THE  PENITENT  TO  BE  RECEIVED,  ACCORD- 
ING  TO   THE   CONSTITUTION   OF   OUR   LORD. 

XXXVIII.  If,  therefore,  he  be  persuaded  by  the 
mouth  of  you  three,  it  is  well.  But  if  any  one 
hardens  himself,  "  tell  it  to  the  Church  :  but  if 
he  neglects  to  hear  the  Church,  let  him  be  to 
thee  as  an  heathen  man  and  a  publican ;  "  ^  and 
receive  him  no  longer  into  the  Church  as  a  Chris- 
tian, but  reject  him  as  an  heathen.  But  if  he  be 
willing  to  repent,  receive  him.  For  the  Church 
does  not  receive  an  heathen  or  a  publican  to 
communion,  before  they  every  one  repent  of 
their  former  impieties ;  for  our  Lord  Jesus,  the 
Christ  of  God,  has  appointed  filace  for  the  ac- 
ceptance of  men  upon  their  repentance. 

EXAMPLES   OF   REPENTANCE. 

XXXIX.  For  I  Matthew,  one  of  those  twelve 
which  speak  to  you  in  this  doctrine,  am  an  apos- 
tle, having  myself  been  formerly  a  publican,  but 
now  have  obtained  mercy  through  believing,  and 


'  Hist.  Susanna. 

^  Gen.  xxxix. 

3  The  Mss.  read,  "  the  accused." 

*  Matt,  xviii.  15. 

5  Prov.  xiv.  32. 

'  Matt,  xviii.  17. 


have  repented  of  my  former  practices,  and  have 
been  vouchsafed  the  honour  to  be  an  apostle  and 
preacher  of  the  word.  And  Zacchaeus,  whom 
the  Lord  received  upon  his  repentance  and 
prayers  to  Him,  was  also  himself  in  the  same 
manner  a  publican  at  first.  And,  besides,  even 
the  soldiers  and  multitude  of  publicans,  who 
came  to  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  about  re- 
pentance, heard  this  from  the  prophet  John,  after 
he  had  baptized  them  :  "  Do  nothing  more  than 
that  which  is  appointed  you."  7  In  like  manner, 
life  is  not  refused  to  the  heathen,  if  they  repent 
and  cast  away  their  unbelief.  Esteem,  there- 
fore, every  one  that  is  convicted  of  any  wicked 
action,  and  has  not  repented,  as  a  publican  or  an 
heathen.  But  if  he  afterward  repents,  and  turns 
from  his  error,  then,  as  we  receive  the  heathen, 
when  they  wish  to  repent,  into  the  Church  indeed 
to  hear  the  word,  but  do  not  receive  them  to 
communion  until  they  have  received  the  seal  of 
baptism,  and  are  made  complete  Christians ;  so 
do  we  also  permit  such  as  these  to  enter  only  to 
hear,  until  they  show  the  fruit  of  repentance,  that 
by  hearing  the  word  they  may  not  utterly  and 
irrecoverably  perish.  But  let  them  not  be  ad- 
mitted to  communion  in  prayer ;  and  let  them 
depart  after  the  reading  of  the  law,  and  the 
prophets,  and  the  Gospel,  that  by  such  departure 
they  may  be  made  better  in  their  course  of  life, 
by  endeavouring  to  meet  every  day  about  the 
public  assemblies,  and  to  be  frequent  in  prayer, 
that  they  also  may  be  at  length  admitted,  and 
that  those  who  behold  them  may  be  affected, 
and  be  more  secured  by  fearing  to  fall  into  the 
same  condition. 

THAT   WE   ARE    NOT    TO    BE    IMPLACABLE    TO    HIM 
WHO    HAS   ONCE   OR   TWICE   OFFENDED. 

XL.  But  yet  do  not  thou,  O  bishop,  presently 
abhor  any  person  who  has  fallen  into  one  or  two 
offences,  nor  shalt  thou  exclude  him  from  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  nor  reject  him  from  common 
intercourse,  since  neither  did  the  Lord  refuse  to 
eat  with  publicans  and  sinners ;  and  when  He 
was  accused  by  the  Pharisees  on  this  account. 
He  said  :  "  They  that  are  well  have  no  need  of 
the  physician,  but  they  that  are  sick."^  Do  you, 
therefore,  live  and  dwell  with  those  who  are 
separated  from  you  for  their  sins ;  and  take  care 
of  them,  comforting  them,  and  confirming  them, 
and  saying  to  them  :  "  Be  strengthened,  ye  weak 
hands  and  feeble  knees."  ^  For  we  ought  to 
comfort  those  that  mourn,  and  afford  encourage- 
ment to  the  fainthearted,  lest  by  immoderate 
sorrow  they  degenerate  into  distraction,  since  "  he 
that  is  fainthearted  is  exceedingly  distracted." '° 


7  Luke  iii.  13. 

8  Matt.  ix.  12. 

9  Isa.  XXXV.  3. 

10  Prov.  xiv.  29,  LXX. 


Sec.  v.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


415 


AFTER  WHAT  MANNER  WE  OUGHT  TO  RECEIVE  A 
PENITENT  ;  HOW  WE  OUGHT  TO  DEAL  WITH 
OFFENOERS,  AND  WHEN  THEY  ARE  TO  BE  CUT 
OFF   FROM   THE   CHURCH. 

XLi.  But  if  any  one  returns,  and  shows  forth 
the  fruit  of  repentance,  then  do  ye  receive  him 
to  prayer,  as  the  lost  son,  the  prodigal,  who  had 
consumed  his  father's  substance  with  harlots, 
who  fed  swine,  and  desired  to  be  fed  with  husks, 
and  could  not  obtain  it.  This  son,  when  he  re- 
pented, and  returned  to  his  father,  and  said.  "  I 
have  sinned  against  Heaven,  and  before  thee, 
and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son  ;" ' 
the  father,  full  of  affection  to  his  child,  received 
him  with  music,  and  restored  him  his  old  robe, 
and  ring,  and  shoes,  and  slew  the  fatted  calf,  and 
made  merry  with  his  friends.  Do  thou  there- 
fore, O  bishop,  act  in  the  same  manner.  And 
as  thou  receivest  an  heathen  after  thou  hast  in- 
structed and  baptized  him,  so  do  thou  let  all 


ceivest  that  from  the  feet  to  the  head  there  is 
no  room  for  a  fomentation,  or  oil,  or  bandage, 
but  that  the  malady  spreads  and  prevents  all 
cure,  as  a  gangrene  which  corrupts  the  entire 
member ;  then,  with  a  great  deal  of  considera- 
tion, and  the  advice  of  other  skilful  physicians, 
cut  off  the  putrefied  member,  that  the  whole 
body  of  the  Church  be  not  corrupted.  Be  not 
therefore  ready  and  hasty  to  cut  off,  nor  do  thou 
easily  have  recourse  to  the  saw,  with  its  many 
teeth  ;  but  first  use  a  lancet  to  lay  open  the 
wound,  that  the  inward  cause  whence  the  pain 
is  derived  being  drawn  out,  may  keep  the  body 
free  from  pain.  But  if  thou  seest  any  one  past 
repentance,  and  he  is  become  insensible,  then 
cut  off  the  incurable  from  the  Church  with  sor- 
row and  lamentation.  For  :  "  Take  out  from 
among  yourselves  that  wicked  person."  ^  And  : 
"  Ye  shall  make  the  children  of  Israel  to  fear."  -* 
And  again  :  "  Thou  shalt  not  accept  the  persons 


not  pity  a  poor  man  m  his  cause 
ment  is  the  Lord's."  ^ 


THAT    A    JUDGE 


MUST    NOT    BE 
PERSONS. 


join  in  prayers  for  this  man,  and  restore  him  by  I  of  the  rich  in  judgment."  5  And 
imposition  of  hands  to  his  ancient  place  among 
the  flock,  as  one  purified  by  repentance  ;  and 
that  imposition  of  hands  shall  be  to  him  instead 
of  baptism  :  for  by  the  laying  on  of  our  hands 
the  Holy  Ghost  was  given  to  believers.  And  in 
case  some  one  of  those  brethren  who  had  stood 
immoveable  accuse  thee,  because  thou  art  recon- 
ciled to  him,  say  to  him  :  '"Thou  art  always  with 
me,  and  all  that  I  have  is  thine.  It  was  meet  to 
make  merry  and  be  glad  :  for  this  thy  brother 
was  dead,  and  is  alive  again ;  he  was  lost,  and  is 
found."  For  that  God  does  not  only  receive  the 
penitent,  but  restores  them  to  their  former  dig- 
nity, holy  David  is  a  sufficient  witness,  who,  after 
his  sin  in  the  matter  of  Uriah,  prayed  to  God, 


Thou  shalt 
for  the  judg- 


A   RESPECTER    OF 


XLii.  But  if  the  slanderous  accusation  be 
false,  and  you  that  are  the  pastors,  with  the 
deacons,  admit  of  that  falsehood  for  truth,  either 
by  acceptance  of  persons  or  receiving  of  bribes, 
as  willing  to  do  that  which  will  be  pleasing  to 
the  devil,  and  so  you  thrust  out  from  the  Church 
him  that  is  accused,  but  is  clear  of  the  crime, 
you  shall  give  an  account  in  the  day  of  the  Lord. 
For  it  is  written  :  "  The  innocent  and  the  right- 
eous thou  shalt  not  slay."?     "Thou   shalt  not 


and  said:  '<  Restore  unto  me  the  joy  of  Fhy  sal-  ^^,.  j^g  ^o  smite  the  soul:  for  gifts  blind  the 
vation,  and  uphold  me  with  Thy  free  Spirit.  ^^^  ^,^^  ^^^.       ^^^^  ^,^^^^^^.  ^,^^  ^^.^^^^^  ^f  ^j^^ 

And  again:  ".  Turn  I hy  face  from  my  sins,  and  ?  ,^^^^^^„ 8  ^^^^^  .^^._  /.^rhey  that  justify 
blot  out  all  mine  offences.    Create  in  me  a  clean  ,  ^^^  ^^.^^^^  ^^^    .^     ^^^^  ^^^^  ^1^^  righteous- 

heart,  O  (}od,  and  renew  a  right  spirit  in  my  in-  |  ^^^^  ^^  ^^^  righteous  from  him."  9  Be  careful, 
ward  parts.  Cast  me  not  away  from  Thy  pres-  ^^^^^^^  ^^t  to  condemn  any  persons  unjustly, 
ence,  and  take  not  Thy  Holy  Spirit  from  me.  ^^^  ^^  ^J  ^^^.^^  ^j^^  ^^.^^^^^  P^^  .  ^^.^^  t^  hj^ 
Do  thou  therefore,  as  a  compassionate  physician,  ]  ^^^^^  ^^^j^  ^^,.^    ^^^  ^^^^  ^^^^^  ^^-^ .  ^-^^^^  ^^^.^^^^ 


heal  all  that  have  sinned,  making  use  of  saving 
methods  of  cure  ;  not  only  cutting  and  searing, 
or  using  corrosives,  but  binding  up,  and  putting 
in  tents,  and  using  gentle  healing  medicines,  and 
sprinkling  comfortable  words.  If  it  be  an  hollow 
wound,  or  great  gash,  nourish  it  with  a  suitable 
plaister,  that  it  may  be  filled  up,  and  become 
even  with  the  rest  of  the  whole  flesh.  If  it  be 
foul,  cleanse  it  with  corrosive  powder,  that  is, 
with  the  words  of  reproof.  If  it  have  proud  flesh, 
eat  it  down  with  a  sharp  plaister — the  threats  of 
judgment.  If  it  spreads  further,  sear  it,  and  cut 
off  the  putrid  flesh,  mortifying  him  with  fastings. 
But  if,  after  all  that  thou  hast  done,  thou  per- 


*  Luke  XV.  21. 

*  Ps.  li. 


and  sweet  bitter;  that  puts  light  for  darkness, 
and  darkness  for  light."  ■°  2'ake  care,  therefore, 
lest  by  any  ineans  ye  become  acceptors  of  persons, 
and  thereby  fall  under  this  voice  of  the  Lord}"- 
For  if  you  condemn  others  unjustly,  you  pass 
sentence  against  yourselves.  P'or  the  Lord  says  : 
"With  what  judgment  ye  judge,  ye  shall  be 
judged ;   and   as   you   condemn,   you   shall   be 


3  Deut.  xvii.  7. 

*  Lev.  XV.  31. 

5  Deut.  i.  17;  Lev.  xix.  15. 

'  Ex.  xxiii.  3. 

?  Ex,  xxiii.  7,  8. 

8  Deut.  xxvii.  25,  xvi.  19. 

9  Isa.  V.  23. 
'0  Isa.  V.  20. 

"  This  sentence  follows  the  passage  frnm  Isa,  v.  23  in  most  mss. 
One  V.  MS.  has  the  order  adopted  in  the  text. 


4i6 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  II. 


condemned."  '  If,  therefore,  ye  judge  without 
respect  of  persons,  ye  will  discover  that  accuser 
who  bears  false  witness  against  his  neighbour, 
and  will  prove  him  to  be  a  sycophant,  a  spiteful 
person,  and  a  murderer,  causing  perplexity  by 
accusing  the  man  as  if  he  were  wicked,  incon- 
stant in  his  words,  contradicting  himself  in  what 
he  affirms,  and  entangled  with  the  words  of  his 
own  mouth  ;  for  his  own  lips  are  a  dangerous 
snare  to  him  :  whom,  when  thou  hast  convicted 
him  of  speaking  falsely,  thou  shalt  judge  severely, 
and  shalt  deliver  him  to  the  fiery  sword,  and  thou 
shalt  do  to  him  as  he  wickedly  proposed  to  do 
to  his  brother;  for  as  much  as  in  him  lay  he 
slew  his  brother,  by  forestalling  the  ears  of  the 
judge. 2  Now  it  is  written,  that  "  he  that  shed- 
deth  man's  blood,  for  that  his  own  blood  shall 
be  shed."  ^  And  :  "  Thou  shalt  take  away  that 
innocent  blood,  which  was  shed  without  cause, 
from  thee."  •♦ 

AFTER   WHAT   MANNER   FALSE   ACCUSERS    ARE   TO 
BE   PUNISHED. 

XLiir.  Thou  shalt  therefore  cast  him  out  of 
the  congregation  as  a  murderer  of  his  brother. 
Some  time  afterwards,  if  he  says  that  he  repents, 
mortify  him  with  fastings,  and  afterwards  ye  shall 
lay  your  hands  upon  him  and  receive  hirh,  but 
still  securing  him,  that  he  does  not  disturb  any- 
body a  second  time.  But  if,  when  he  is  admitted 
again,  he  be  alike  troublesome,  and  will  not 
cease  to  disturb  and  to  quarrel  with  his  brother, 
spying  faults  out  of  a  contentious  spirit,  cast 
him  out  as  a  pernicious  person,  that  he  may  not 
lay  waste  the  Church  of  God.  For  such  a  one 
is  the  raiser  of  disturbances  in  cities  ;  for  he, 
though  he  be  within,  does  not  become  the  Church, 
but  is  a  superfluous  and  vain  member,  casting  a 
blot,  as  far  as  in  him  lies,  on  the  body  of  Christ. 
For  if  such  men  as  are  born  with  superfluous 
members  of  their  body,  which  hang  to  them  as 
fingers,  or  excrescences  of  flesh,  cut  them  away 
from  themselves  on  account  of  their  indecency, 
whereby  the  unseemliness  vanishes,  and  the  man 
recovers  his  natural  good  shape  by  the  means  of 
the  surgeon ;  how  much  more  ought  you,  the 
pastors  of  the  Church  (for  the  Church  is  a  per- 
fect body,  and  sound  members;  of  such  as 
believe  in  God,  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  in 
love),  to  do  the  like  when  there  is  found  in  it  a 
superfluous  member  with  wicked  designs,  and 
rendering  the  rest  of  the  body  unseemly,  and 
disturbing  it  with  sedition,  and  war,  and  evil- 
speaking  ;  causing  fears,  disturbances,  blots,  evil- 
speaking,  accusations,  disorders,  and  doing  the 
like  works  of  the  devil,  as  if  he  were  ordained 


'  Matt.  vii.  2;  Luke  vi.  37, 
^  Dcut.  xix.  19. 
3  Gen.  ix.  6. 
*  Deut.  xix.  13, 


by  the  devil  to  cast  a  reproach  on  the  Church  by 
calumnies,  and  mighty  disorders,  and  strife,  and 
division  !  Such  a  one,  therefore,  when  he  is  a 
second  time  cast  out  of  the  Church,  is  justly  cut 
off  entirely  from  the  congregation  of  the  Lord. 
And  now  the  Church  of  the  Lord  will  be  more 
beautiful  than  it  was  before,  when  it  had  a  super- 
fluous, and  to  itself  a  disagreeable  member. 
Wherefore  henceforward  it  will  be  free  from 
blame  and  reproach,  and  become  clear  of  such 
wicked,  deceitful,  abusive,  unmerciful,  traitorous 
persons  ;  of  such  as  are  "  haters  of  those  that 
are  good,  lovers  of  pleasure,"  s  affecters  of  vain- 
glory, deceivers,  and  pretenders  to  wisdom ;  of 
such  as  make  it  their  business  to  scatter,  or 
rather  utterly  to  disperse,  the  lambs  of  the  Lord. 

SEC,  VL  —  THE  DISPUTES  OF  THE  FAITHFUL  TO  BE 
SETTLED  BY  THE  DECISIONS  OF  THE  BISHOP, 
AND    THE    FAITHFUL   TO    BE    RECONCILED. 

Do  thou  therefore,  O  bishop,  together  with  thy 
subordinate  clergy,  endeavour  rightly  to  divide 
the  word  of  truth.  For  the  Lord  says  :  "  If  you 
walk  cross-grained  to  me,  I  will  walk  cross- 
grained  to  you."  ^  And  elsewhere  :  "  With  the 
holy  Thou  wilt  be  holy,  and  with  the  perfect  man 
Thou  wilt  be  perfect,  and  with  the  froward  Thou 
wilt  be  froward."  ^  Walk  therefore  holily,  that 
you  may  rather  appear  worthy  of  praise  from  the 
Lord  than  of  complaint  from  the  adversary. 

THAT  THE  DEACON  IS  TO  EASE  THE  BURTHEN 
OF  THE  BISHOPS,  AND  TO  ORDER  THE  SMALLER 
MATTERS  HIMSELF. 

XLiv.  Be  ye  of  one  mind,  O  ye  bishops,  one 
with  another,  and  be  at  peace  with  one  another ; 
sympathize  with  one  another,  love  the  brethren, 
and  feed  the  people  with  care  ;  with  one  consent 
teach  those  that  are  under  you  to  be  of  the  same 
sentiments  and  to  be  of  the  same  opinions  about 
the  same  matters,  "  that  there  may  be  no  schisms 
among  you  ;  that  ye  may  be  one  body  and  one 
spirit,  perfectly  joined  together  in  the  same  mind 
and  in  the  same  judgment,"  ^  according  to  the 
appointment  of  the  Lord.  And  let  the  deacon 
refer  all  things  to  the  bishop,  as  Christ  does  to 
His  Father.  But  let  him  order  such  things  as  he  is 
able  by  himself,  receiving  power  from  the  bishop, 
as  the  Lord  did  from  His  Father  the  power  of 
creation  and  of  providence.  But  the  weighty 
matters  let  the  bishop  judge  ;  but  let  the  deacon 
be  the  bishop's  ear,  and  eye,  and  mouth,  and 
heart,  and  soul,  that  the  bishop  may  not  be  dis- 
tracted with  many  cares,  but  with  such  only  as 
are  more  considerable,  as  Jethro  did  appoint  for 
Moses,  and  his  counsel  was  received.'^ 


5  2  Tim.  iii.  3,  4. 
^  Lev.  XX vi.  27,  28. 

7  Ps   xviii.  26. 

8  I  Cor.  i.  10;  Eph.  iv.  4, 

9  £x.  xviii. 


Skc.  VI.] 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


417 


THAT   CONTENTIONS    AND    QUARRELS    ARE    UNBE- 
COMING  CHRISTIANS. 

XLV.  It  is  therefore  a  noble  encomium  for  a 
Christian  to  have  no  contest  with  any  one  ; '  but 
if  by  any  management  or  temptation  a  contest 
arises  with  any  one,  let  him  endeavour  that  it 
may  be  composed,  though  thereby  he  be  obliged 
to  lose  somewhat ;  and  let  it  not  come  before  an 
heathen  tribunal.  Nay,  indeed,  you  are  not  to 
permit  that  the  rulers  of  this  world  should  pass 
sentence  against  your  people  ;  for  by  them  the 
devil  contrives  mischief  to  the  servants  of  God, 
and  occasions  a  reproach  to  be  cast  upon  us,  as 
though  we  had  not  "  one  wise  man  that  is  able 
to  judge  between  his  brethren,"  or  to  decide 
their  controversies. 

THAT  BELIEVERS  OUGHT  NOT  TO  GO  TO  LAW 
BEFORE  UNBELIEVERS  ;  NOR  OUGHT  ANY  UN- 
BELIEVER TO  BE  CALLED  FOR  A  WITNESS 
AGAINST  BELIEVERS. 

XLVi.  Let  not  the  heathen  therefore  know  of 
your  differences  among  one  another,  nor  do  you 
receive  unbelievers  as  witnesses  against  your- 
selves, nor  be  judged  by  them,  nor  owe  them 
anything  on  account  of  tribute  or  fear  ;  but "  ren- 
der to  Ceesar  the  things  that  are  Caesar's,  and 
unto  God  the  things  that  are  God's,"  ^  as  tribute, 
taxes,  or  poll-money,  as  our  Lord  by  giving  a 
piece  of  money  was  freed  from  disturbance. ^ 
Choose  therefore  rather  to  suffer  harm,  and  to 
endeavour  after  those  things  that  make  for  peace, 
not  only  among  the  brethren,  but  also  among  the 
unbelievers.  For  by  suffering  loss  in  the  affairs 
of  this  life,  thou  wilt  be  sure  not  to  suffer  in  the 
concerns  of  piety,  and  wilt  live  religiously,  and 
according  to  the  command  of  Christ.*  But  if 
brethren  have  lawsuits  one  with  another,  which 
God  forbid,  you  who  are  the  rulers  ought  thence 
to  learn  that  such  as  these  do  not  do  the  work 
of  brethren  in  the  Lord,  but  rather  of  public 
enemies  ;  and  one  of  the  parties  will  be  found  to 
be  mild,  gentle,  and  the  child  of  light ;  but  the 
other  unmerciful,  insolent,  and  covetous.  Let 
him,  therefore,  who  is  condemned  be  rebuked, 
let  him  be  separated,  let  him  undergo  the  pun- 
ishment of  his  hatred  to  his  brother.  Afterwards, 
when  he  repents,  let  him  be  received  ;  and  so, 
when  they  have  learned  j)rudence,  they  will  ease 
your  judicatures.  It  is  also  a  duty  to  forgive 
each  other's  trespasses  —  not  the  duty  of  those 
that  judge,  but  of  those  that  have  quarrels  ;  as 
the  Lord  determined  when  I  Peter  asked  Him, 
"  How  oft  shall  my  brother  sin  against  me,  and 
I  forgive  him?  Till  seven  times?"  He  replied, 
"  I  say  not  unto  thee.  Until  seven  times,  but  until 


'  I  Cor.  vi.  I,  etc. 

'  Matt.  xxii.  21. 

3  Matt.  xvii.  24,  etc. 

*  One  V.  MS.  reads  "  God"  instead  of"  Christ." 


seventy  times  seven."  5  For  so  would  our  Lord 
have  us  to  be  truly  His  disciples,  and  never  to 
have  anything  against  anybody  ;  as,  for  instance, 
anger  without  measure,  passion  without  mercy, 
covetousness  without  justice,  hatred  without  rec- 
onciliation. Draw  by  your  instruction  those  who 
are  angry  to  friendship,  and  those  who  are  at 
variance  to  agreement.  For  the  Lord  says : 
"  Blessed  are  the  peacemakers,  for  they  shall  be 
called  the  children  of  God."  ^ 

THAT  THE  JUDICATURES  OF  CHRISTIANS  OUGHT 
TO  BE  HELD  ON  THE  SECOND  DAY  OF  THE 
WEEK. 

XLVii.  Let  your  judicatures  be  held  on  the 
second  day  of  the  week,  that  if  any  controversy 
arise  about  your  sentence,  having  an  interval  till 
the  Sabbath, 7  you  may  be  able  to  set  the  contro- 
versy right,  and  to  reduce  those  to  peace  who 
have  the  contests  one  with  another  against  the 
Lord's  day.  Let  also  the  deacons  and  presby- 
ters be  present  at  your  judicatures,  to  judge 
without  acceptance  of  persons,  as  men  of  God, 
with  righteousness.  When,  therefore,  both  the 
parties  are  come,  according  as  the  law  says,** 
those  that  have  the  controversy  shall  stand  sev- 
erally in  the  middle  of  the  court ;  and  when 
you  have  heard  them,  give  your  votes  holily, 
endeavouring  to  make  them  both  friends  before 
the  sentence  of  the  bishop,  that  judgment  against 
the  offender  may  not  go  abroad  into  the  world  ; 
knowing  that  he  has  in  the  court  the  Christ  of 
God  as  conscious  of  and  confirming  his  judg- 
ment. But  if  any  persons  are  accused  by  any 
one,  and  their  fame  suffers  as  if  they  did  not 
walk  uprightly  in  the  Lord,  in  like  manner  you 
shall  hear  both  parties  —  the  accuser  and  ac- 
cused ;  but  not  with  prejudice,  nor  with  heark- 
ening to  one  part  only,  but  with  righteousness, 
as  passing  a  sentence  concerning  eternal  life  or 
death.  For  says  God  :  "  He  shall  prosecute 
that  which  is  right  jusdy."  9  For  he  that  is 
justly  punished  and  separated  by  you  is  rejected 
from  eternal  life  and  glory ;  he  becomes  dis- 
honourable among  holy  men,  and  one  con- 
demned of  God. 

THAT  THE  SAME  PUNISHMENT  IS  NOT  TO  BE  IN- 
FLICTED FOR  EVERY  OFFENCE,  BUT  DIFFERENT 
PUNISHMENTS    FOR   DIFFERENT   OFFENDERS. 

XLViii.  Do  not  pass  the  same  sentence  for 
every  sin,  but  one  suitable  to  each  crime,  dis- 
tinguishing all  the  several  sorts  of  offences  with 
much  prudence,  the  great  from  the  little.  Treat 
a  wicked  action  after  one  manner,  and  a  wicked 
word  after  another ;  a  bare  intention  still  other- 


S  Matt,  xviii.  21,  22. 
*>  Matt.  V.  9. 
'  [i.e.,  Saturday.] 
*  Dent.  xix.  17. 
9  Deut.  xvi.  20. 


4i8 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  II. 


wise.  So  also  in  the  case  of  a  contumely  or 
suspicion.  And  some  thou  shalt  curb  by  threat- 
enings  alone  ;  some  thou  shalt  punish  with  fines 
to  the  poor ;  some  thou  shalt  mortify  with  fast- 
ings ;  and  others  thou  shalt  separate  according 
to  the  greatness  of  their  several  crimes.  For 
the  law  did  not  allot  the  same  punishment  to 
every  offence,  but  had  a  different  regard  to  a 
sin  against  God,  against  the  priest,  against  the 
temple,  or  against  the  sacrifice ;  from  a  sin 
against  the  king,  or  ruler,  or  a  soldier,  or  a  fel- 
low-subject ;  and  so  were  the  offences  different 
which  were  against  a  servant,  a  possession,  or  a 
brute  creature.  And  again,  sins  were  differently 
rated  according  as  they  were  against  parents 
and  kinsmen,  and  those  differently  which  were 
done  on  purpose  from  those  that  happened  in- 
voluntarily. Accordingly  the  punishments  were 
different :  as  death  either  by  crucifixion  or  by 
stoning,  fines,  scourgings,  or  the  suffering  the 
same  mischiefs  they  had  done  to  others.  Where- 
fore do  you  also  allot  different  penalties  to  dif- 
ferent offences,  lest  any  injustice  should  happen, 
and  provoke  God  to  indignation.  For  of  what 
unjust  judgment  soever  you  are  the  instruments, 
of  the  same  you  shall  receive  the  reward  from 
God.  "  For  with  what  judgment  ye  judge  ye 
shall  be  judged."  ' 

WHAT  ARE  TO  BE  THE  CHARACTERS   OF  ACCUSERS 
AND   WITNESSES. 

XLix.  When,  therefore,  you  are  set  down  at 
your  tribunal,  and  the  parties  are  both  of  them 
present  (for  we  will  not  call  them  brethren  until 
they  receive  each  other  in  peace),  examine  dili- 
gently concerning  those  who  appear  before  you  ; 
and  first  concerning  the  accuser,  whether  this  be 
the  first  person  he  has  accused,  or  whether  he 
has  advanced  accusations  against  some  others 
before,  and  whether  this  contest  and  accusation 
of  theirs  does  not  arise  from  some  quarrel,  and 
what  sort  of  life  the  accuser  leads.  Yet,  though 
he  be  of  a  good  conscience,  do  not  give  credit 
to  him  alone,  for  that  is  contrary  to  the  law ; 
but  let  him  have  others  to  join  in  his  testimony, 
and  those  of  the  same  course  of  life.  As  the 
law  says  :  "  At  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  wit- 
nesses everything  shall  be  established."  ^  But 
why  did  we  say  that  the  character  of  the  wit- 
nesses was  to  be  inquired  after,  of  what  sort  it 
is?  Because  it  frequently  happens  that  two  and 
more  testify  for  mischief,  and  with  joint  consent 
prefer  a  lie  ;  as  did  the  two  elders  against  Su- 
sanna in  Babylon,^  and  the  sons  of  transgressors 
against  Naboth  in  Samaria,'*  and  the  multitude 
of  the  Jews  against  our  Lord  at  Jerusalem,''  and 


'  Matt.  vii.  2. 
2  Deut.  xix.  15. 
'  Susanna  28. 
*  I  Kings  xxi. 
S  Matt.  xxvi. 


against  Stephen  His  first  martyr.^  Let  the  wit- 
nesses therefore  be  meek,  free  from  anger,  full 
of  equity,  kind,  prudent,  continent,  free  from 
wickedness,  faithful,  religious ;  for  the  testimony 
of  such  persons  is  firm  on  account  of  their 
character,  and  true  on  account  of  their  mode 
of  life.  But  as  to  those  of  a  different  character, 
do  not  ye  receive  their  testimony,  although  they 
seem  to  agree  together  in  their  evidence  against 
the  accused ;  for  it  is  ordained  in  the  law : 
"  Thou  shalt  not  be  with  a  multitude  for  wick- 
edness ;  thou  shalt  not  receive  a  vain  report ; 
thou  shalt  not  consent  with  a  multitude  to  per- 
vert judgment."  ^  You  ought  also  particularly 
to  know  him  that  is  accused ;  what  he  is  in  his 
course  and  mode  of  life  ;  whether  he  have  a 
good  report  as  to  his  life  ;  whether  he  has  been 
unblameable  ;  whether  he  has  been  zealous  in 
holiness  ;  whether  he  be  a  lover  of  the  widows, 
a  lover  of  the  strangers,  a  lover  of  the  poor, 
and  a  lover  of  the  brethren  ;  whether  he  be  not 
given  to  filthy  lucre  ;  whether  he  be  not  an  ex- 
travagant person,  or  a  spendthrift ;  whether  he 
be  sober,  and  free  from  luxury,  or  a  drunkard, 
or  a  glutton  ;  whether  he  be  compassionate  and 
charitable. 

THAT  FORMER    OFFENCES  DO   SOMETIMES    RENDER 
AFTER    ACCUSATIONS   CREDIBLE. 

L.  For  if  he  has  been  before  addicted  to 
wicked  works,  the  accusations  which  are  now 
brought  against  him  will  thence  in  some  measure 
appear  to  be  true,  unless  justice  do  plainly  plead 
for  him.  For  it  may  be,  that  though  he  had 
formerly  been  an  offender,  yet  that  he  may  not 
be  guilty  of  this  crime  of  which  he  is  accused. 
Wherefore  be  exactly  cautious  about  such  cir- 
cumstances, and  so  render  your  sentences,  when 
pronounced  against  the  offender  convicted,  safe 
and  firm.  And  if,  after  his  separation,  he  begs 
pardon,  and  falls  down  before  the  bishop,  and 
acknowledges  his  fault,  receive  him.  But  neither 
do  you  suffer  a  false  accuser  to  go  unpunished, 
that  he  may  not  calumniate  another  who  lives 
well,  or  encourage  some  other  person  to  do  like 
him.  Nor,  to  be  sure,  do  ye  suffer  a  person 
convicted  to  go  off  clear,  lest  another  be  en- 
snared in  the  same  crimes.  For  neither  shall  a 
witness  of  mischiefs  be  unpunished,  nor  shall  he 
that  offends  be  without  censure. 

AGAINST  JUDGING  WITHOUT  HEARING  BOTH  SIDES. 

LI.  We  said  before  that  judgment  ought  not  to 
be  given  upon  hearing  only  one  of  the  parties ; 
for  if  you  hear  one  of  them  when  the  other  is 
not  there,  and  so  cannot  make  his  defence  to 
the  accusation  brought  against  him,  and  rashly 


6  Acts  vi.  and  vii. 
'  Ex.  xxiii.  2. 


Sec.  VI.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


419 


give  your  votes  for  condemnation,  you  will  be 
found  guilty  of  that  man's  destruction,  and  par- 1 
taker  with  the  false  accuser  before  God,  the  just  i 
Judge.  For  "  as  he  that  holdeth  the  tail  of  a 
dog,  so  is  he  that  presides  at  unjust  judgment."  ' 
But  if  ye  become  imitators  of  the  elders  in 
Babylon,  who,  when  they  had  borne  witness 
against  Susanna,  unjustly  condemned  her  to 
death,  you  will  become  obnoxious  to  their  judg- 
ment and  condemnation.  For  the  Lord  by 
Daniel  delivered  Susanna  from  the  hand  of  the 
ungodly,  but  condemned  to  the  fire  those  elders 
who  were  guilty  of  her  blood,  and  reproaches 
you  by  him,  saying :  "  Are  ye  so  foolish,  ye 
children  of  Israel?  Without  examination,  and 
without  knowing  the  truth,  have  ye  condemned 
a  daughter  of  Israel?  Return  again  to  the 
place  of  judgment,  for  these  men  have  borne 
false  witness  against  her."  ^ 

THE  CAUTION  OBSERVED  AT  HEATHEN  TRIBUNALS 
BEFORE  THE  CONDEMNATION  OF  CRIMINALS 
AFFORDS   CHRISTIANS    A   GOOD   EXAMPLE. 

Lii.  Consider  even  the  judicatures  of  this 
world,  by  whose  power  we  see  murderers,  adul- 
terers, wizards,  robbers  of  sepulchres,  and  thieves 
brought  to  trial ;  and  those  that  preside,  when 
they  have  received  their  accusations  from  those 
that  brought  them,  ask  the  malefactor  whether 
those  things  be  so.  And  though  he  does  not 
deny  the  crimes,  they  do  not  presently  send  him 
out  to  punishment ;  but  for  several  days  they 
make  inquiry  about  him  with  a  full  council,  and 
with  the  veil  interposed.  And  he  that  is  to  pass 
the  final  decree  and  suffrage  of  death  against 
him,  lifts  up  his  hands  to  the  sun,  and  solemnly 
affirms  that  he  is  innocent  of  the  blood  of  the 
man.  Though  they  be  heathens,  and  know  not 
the  Deity,  nor  the  vengeance  which  will  fall  upon 
men  from  God  on  account  of  those  that  are  un- 
justly condemned,  they  avoid  such  unjust  judg- 
ments. 

THAT   CHRISTIANS    OUGHT   NOT   TO   BE    CONTEN- 
TIOUS   ONE    WITH    ANOTHER. 

Liii.  But  you  who  know  who  our  God  is,  and 
what  are  His  judgments,  how  can  you  bear  to 
pass  an  unjust  judgment,  since  your  sentence  will 
be  immediately  known  to  God?  And  if  you 
have  judged  righteously,  you  will  be  deemetl 
worthy  of  the  recompenses  of  righteousness,  both 
now  and  hereafter  ;  but  if  unrighteously,  you  will 
partake  of  the  like.  We  therefore  advise  you, 
brethren,  rather  to  deserve  commendation  from 
God  than  rebukes ;  for  the  commendation  of 
God  is  eternal  life  to  men,  as  is  His  rebuke  ever- 
lasting death.  Be  ye  therefore  righteous  judges, 
peacemakers,  and  without  anger.     For  "  he  that 

'  Prov.  xxvi   17. 
2  Susanna  48. 


is  angry  with  his  brother  without  a  cause  is  ob- 
noxious to  the  judgment."  3-  But  if  it  happens 
that  by  any  one's  contrivance  you  are  angry  at 
anybody,  "  let  not  the  sun  go  down  upon  your 
wrath  ;  "  *  for  says  David,  "  Be  angry  and  sin 
not ;  "  5  that  is,  be  soon  reconciled,  lest  your 
wrath  continue  so  long  that  it  turn  to  a  settled 
hatred,  and  work  sin.  "  For  the  souls  of  those 
that  bear  a  settled  hatred  are  to  death,"  ^  says 
Solomon.  But  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ  says  in  the  Gospels  :  "  If  thou  bring  thy 
gift  to  the  altar,  and  there  rememberest  that  thy 
brother  hath  ought  against  thee,  leave  there 
thy  gift  before  the  altar,  and  go  thy  way ;  first 
be  reconciled  to  thy  brother,  and  then  come  and 
offer  thy  gift  to  God."  ^  Now  the  gift  to  God  is 
every  one's  prayer  and  thanksgiving.  If,  there- 
fore, thou  hast  anything  against  thy  brother,  or 
he  has  anything  against  thee,  neither  will  thy 
prayers  be  heard,  nor  will  thy  thanksgivings  be 
accepted,  by  reason  of  that  hidden  anger.  But 
it  is  your  duty,  brethren,  to  pray  continually. 
Yet,  because  God  hears  not  those  which  are  at 
enmity  with  their  brethren  by  unjust  quarrels, 
even  though  they  should  pray  three  times  an 
hour,  it  is  our  duty  to  compose  all  our  enmity 
and  littleness  of  soul,  that  we  may  be  able  to 
pray  with  a  pure  and  unpolluted  heart.  For  the 
Lord  commanded  us  to  love  even  our  enemies, 
and  by  no  means  to  hate  our  friends.  And  the 
lawgiver  says  :  "  Thou  shalt  not  hate  any  man  ; 
thou  shalt  not  hate  thy  brother  in  thy  mind. 
Thou  shalt  certainly  reprove  thy  brother,  and  not 
incur  sin  on  his  account."  ^  "  Thou  shalt  not 
hate  an  Egyptian,  for  thou  wast  a  sojourner  with 
him.  Thou  shalt  not  hate  an  Iduma^an,  for  he 
is  thy  brother."  9  And  David  says  :  "  If  I  have 
repaid  those  that  requited  me  evil."  '°  Where- 
fore, if  thou  wilt  be  a  Christian,  follow  the  law  of 
the  Lord  :  "  Loose  every  band  of  wickedness  ; "  " 
for  the  Lord  has  given  thee  authority  to  remit 
those  sins  to  thy  brother  which  he  has  committed 
against  thee  as  far  as  "  seventy  times  seven,"  '^ 
that  is,  four  hundred  and  ninety  times.  How 
oft,  therefore,  hast  thou  remitted  to  thy  brother, 
that  thou  art  unwilling  to  do  it  now,  when  thou 
also  hast  heard  Jeremiah  saying,  "  Do  not  any 
of  you  impute  the  wickedness  of  his  neighbour 
in  your  hearts?" '3  But  thou  rememberest  in- 
juries, and  keepest  enmity,  and  comcst  into 
judgment,  and  art  suspicious  of  His  anger,  and 
thy  prayer  is  hindered.     Nay,  if  thou  hast  re- 


3  Matt.  V.  22. 

*  Eph.  iv.  26. 

5  Ps.  iv.  4. 

6  Prov.  xii.  28,  LXX. 

7  Matt.  V.  23,  24.     . 

*  Lev.  xix.  17. 
9  Deut.  xxiii.  7. 

'o  Ps.  vii.  4. 

n  Isa.  Iviii,  6. 

'-  Matt,  xviii.  22. 

'^  Zech.  viii.  17. 


420 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  II. 


mitted  to  thy  brother  four  hundred  and  ninety 
times,  do  thou  still  multiply  thy  acts  of  gentle- 
ness more,  to  do  good  for  thy  own  sake.  Al- 
though he  does  not  do  so,  yet,  however,  do  thou 
endeavour  to  forgive  thy  brother  for  God's  sake, 
"  that  thou  mayest  be  the  son  of  thy  Father 
which  is  in  heaven,"  '  and  when  thou  prayest, 
mayest  be  heard  as  a  friend  of  God. 

THAT  THE  BISHOPS  MUST  BY  THEIR  DEACON  PUT 
THE  PEOPLE  IN  MIND  OF  THE  OBLIGATION  THEY 
ARE    UNDER   TO   LIVE   PEACEABLY   TOGETHER. 

Liv.  Wherefore,  O  bishop,  when  you  are  to  go 
to  prayer  after  the  lessons,  and  the  psalmody, 
and  the  instruction  out  of  the  Scriptures,  let  the 
deacon  stand  nigh  you,  and  with  a  loud  voice 
say  :  Let  none  have  any  quarrel  with  another  ; 
let  none  come  in  hypocrisy ;  that  if  there  be 
any  controversy  found  among  any  of  you,  they 
may  be  affected  in  conscience,  and  may  pray  to 
God,  and  be  reconciled  to  their  brethren.  For 
if,  upon  coming  into  any  one's  house,  we  are  to 
say,  "  Peace  be  to  this  house,"  ^  like  sons  of 
peace  bestowing  peace  on  those  who  are  wor- 
thy, as  it  is  written,  "  He  came  and  preached 
peace  to  you  that  are  nigh,  and  them  that  are 
far  off,  whom  the  Lord  knows  to  be  His,"  ^  much 
more  is  it  incumbent  on  those  that  enter  into  the 
Church  of  God  before  all  things  to  pray  for  the 
peace  of  God.  But  if  he  prays  for  it  upon 
others,  much  more  let  himself  be  within  the 
same,  as  a  child  of  light ;  for  he  that  has  it  not 
within  himself  is  not  fit  to  bestow  it  upon  oth- 
ers. Wherefore,  before  all  things,  it  is  our  duty 
to  be  at  peace  in  our  own  minds  ;  for  he  that 
does  not  find  any  disorder  in  himself  will  not 
quarrel  with  another,  but  will  be  peaceable, 
friendly,  gathering  the  Lord's  people,  and  a  fel- 
low-worker with  him,  in  order  to  the  increasing 
the  number  of  those  that  shall  be  saved  in 
unanimity.  For  those  who  contrive  enmities, 
and  strifes,  and  contests,  and  lawsuits,  are 
wicked,  and  aliens  from  God. 

AN  ENUMERATION  OF  THE  SEVERAL  INSTANCES 
OF  DIVINE  PROVIDENCE,  AND  HOW  IN  EVERY 
AGE  FROM  THE  BEGINNING  OF  THE  WORLD  GOD 
HAS   INVITED   ALL   MEN    TO    REPENTANCE. 

Lv.  For  God,  being  a  God  of  mercy  from  the 
beginning,  called  every  generation  to  repentance 
by  righteous  men  and  proj)hets.  He  instructed 
those  before  the  flood  by  Abel,  and  Sem,  and 
Seth,  also  by  Enos,  and  by  Enoch  that  was 
translated  ;  those  at  the  flood  by  Noah  ;  the  in- 
habitants of  Sodom  by  hospitable  Lot ;  those 
after  the  flood  by  Melchizedek,  and  the  patri- 
archs, and  Job  the  beloved  of  God  ;   the  Egyp- 


'  Matt.  V.  45. 

2  Matt.  X.  12. 

3  Isa.  Ivii.  19;  Eph.  ii.  17;  2  Tim.  ii.  19. 


tians  by  Moses ;  the  Israelites  by  him,  and 
Joshua,  and  Caleb,  and  Phineas,  and  the  rest ; 
those  after  the  law  by  angels  and  prophets,  and 
the  same  by  His  own  incarnation  ^  of  the  Vir- 
gin ;  those  a  litde  before  His  bodily  appear- 
ance by  John  His  forerunner,  and  the  same  by 
the  same  person  after  Christ's  birth,  saying, 
"  Repent  ye,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at 
hand ;  "  5  those  after  His  passion  by  us,  the 
twelve  apostles,  and  Paul  the  chosen  vessel.  We 
therefore,  who  have  been  vouchsafed  the  favour 
of  being  the  witnesses  of  His  appearance,  to- 
gether with  James  the  brother  of  our  Lord,  and 
the  other  seventy-two  disciples,  and  his  seven 
deacons,  have  heard  from  the  mouth  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  by  exact  knowledge  de- 
clare "  what  is  the  will  of  God,  that  good,  and 
acceptable,  and  perfect  will  "  ^  which  is  made 
known  to  us  by  Jesus  ;  that  none  should  perish, 
but  that  all  men  with  one  accord  should  believe 
in  Him,  and  send  unanimously  praise  to  Him, 
and  thereby  Hve  for  ever. 

THAT  IT  IS  THE  WILL  OF  GOD  THAT  MEN  SHOULD 
BE  OF  ONE  MIND  IN  MATTERS  OF  RELIGION,  IN 
ACCORD   WITH    THE    HEAVENLY    POWERS. 

LVi.  For  this  is  that  which  our  Lord  taught  us 
when  we  pray  to  say  to  His  Father,  "  Thy  will 
be  done,  as  in  heaven,  so  upon  earth  ;  "  ?  that 
as  the  heavenly  natures  of  the  incorporeal  pow- 
ers do  all  glorify  God  with  one  consent,  so  also 
upon  earth  all  men  with  one  mouth  and  one 
purpose  may  glorify  the  only,  the  one,  and  the 
true  God,  by  Christ  His  only-begotten.  It  is 
therefore  His  will  that  men  should  praise  Him 
with  unanimity,  and  adore  Him  with  one  con- 
sent.^ For  this  is  His  will  in  Christ,  that  those 
who  are  saved  by  Him  may  be  many;  but  that 
you  do  not  occasion  any  loss  or  diminution  to 
Him,  nor  to  the  Church,  or  lessen  the  number 
by  one  soul  of  man,  as  destroyed  by  you,  which 
might  have  been  saved  by  repentance ;  and 
which  therefore  perishes  not  only  by  its  own  sin, 
but  also  by  your  treachery  besides,  whereby  you 
fulfil  that  which  is  written,  "  He  that  gathereth 
not  with  me,  scattereth."  ^  Such  a  one  is  a 
disperser  of  the  sheep,  an  adversary,  an  enemy 
of  God,  a  destroyer  of  those  lambs  whose  Shep- 
herd was  the  Lord,  and  we  were  the  collectors 
out  of  various  nations  and  tongues,  by  much 
pains  and  danger,  and  perpetual  labour,  by 
watchings,  by  fastings,  by  lyings  on  the  ground, 
by  persecutions,  by  stripes,  by  imprisonments, 
that  we  might  do  the  will  of  God,  and  fill  the 
feast-chamber  with  guests  to   sit   down  at  His 


*  One  V.  MS.  inserts,  "  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and." 
5   Matt.  iii.  2. 
•>  Rom.  xii.  2. 

7  Matt.  vi.  10. 

8  "  And  adore  him  with  one  consent "  is  omitted  in  one  V.  MS. 

9  Matt.  xii.  30. 


Sec.  VII.] 


COxNSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


421 


table,  that  is,  the  holy  and  Catholic  Church,  with 
joyful  and  chosen  people,  singing  hymns  and 
praises  to  God  that  has  called  them  by  us  to 
life.  And  you,  as  much  as  in  you  lies,  have  dis- 
persed them.  Do  you  also  of  the  laity  be  at 
peace  with  one  another,  endeavouring  like  wise 
men  to  increase  the  Church,  and  to  turn  back, 
and  tame,  and  restore  those  which  seem  wild. 
For  this  is  the  greatest  reward  by  His  promise 
from  God,  "  If  thou  fetch  out  the  worthy  and 
precious  from  the  unworthy,  thou  shalt  be  as  my 
mouth."  ' 

SEC.    VII. ON   ASSEMBLING   IN  THE   CHURCH. 

AN  EXACT  DESCRIPTION  OF  A  CHURCH  AND  THE 
CLERGY,  AND  WHAT  THINGS  IN  PARTICULAR 
EVERY  ONE  IS  TO  DO  IN  THE  SOLEMN  ASSE.M- 
BLIES  OF  THE  CLERGY  AND  LAITY  FOR  RELI- 
GIOUS   WORSHIP. 

Lvii.  But  be  thou,  O  bishop,  holy,  unblame- 
able,  no  striker,  not  soon  angry,  not  cruel ;  but 
a  builder  up,  a  converter,  apt  to  teach,  forbear- 
ing of  evil,  of  a  gentle  mind,  meek,  long-suffering, 
ready  to  exhort,  ready  to  comfort,  as  a  man  of 
God. 

When  thou  callest  an  assembly  of  the  Church 
as  one  that  is  the  commander  of  a  great  ship, 
appoint  the  assemblies  to  be  made  with  all  pos- 
sible skill,  charging  the  deacons  as  mariners  to 
prepare  places  for  the  brethren  as  for  passengers, 
with  all  due  care  and  decency.  And  first,  let 
the  building  be  long,  with  its  head  to  the  east, 
with  its  vestries  on  both  sides  at  the  east  end, 
and  so  it  will  be  like  a  ship.  In  the  middle  let 
the  bishop's  throne  be  placed,  and  on  each  side 
of  him  let  the  presbytery  sit  down ;  and  let  the 
deacons  stand  near  at  hand,  in  close  and  small 
girt  garments,  for  they  are  like  the  mariners  and 
managers  of  the  ship  :  with  regard  to  these,  let 
the  laity  sit  on  the  other  side,  with  all  quietness 
and  good  order.  And  let  the  women  sit  by 
themselves,  they  also  keeping  silence.  In  the 
middle,  let  the  reader  stand  upon  some  high 
place :  let  him  read  the  books  of  Moses,  of 
Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  of  the  Judges,  and  of 
the  Kings  and  of  the  Chronicles,  and  those  writ- 
ten after  the  return  from  the  captivity ;  and  be- 
sides these,  the  books  of  Job  and  of  Solomon, 
and  of  the  sixteen  j^rophets.  But  when  there 
have  been  two  lessons  severally  read,  let  some 
other  person  sing  the  hymns  of  David,  and  let 
the  people  join  at  the  conclusions  of  the  verses. 
Afterwards  let  our  Acts  be  read,  and  the  Epistles 
of  Paul  our  fellow-worker,  which  he  sent  to  the 
churches  under  the  conduct  of  the  Holy  Spirit ; 
and  afterwards  let  a  deacon  or  a  presbyter  read 
the  Gospels,  both  those  which  I  Matthew  and 
John  have  delivered  to  you,  and  those  which  the 

*  Jer.  XV.  19. 


fellow-workers  of  Paul  received  and  left  to  you, 
Luke  and  Mark.     And  while  the  Gospel  is  read, 
let  all  the  presbyters  and  deacons,  and  all  the 
people,  stand  up  in  great  silence  ;  for  it  is  writ- 
ten :   "Be  silent,  and  hear,   O   Israel."^     And 
again:  "But  do  thou  stand  there,  and  hear."  ^ 
In  the  next  place,  let  the  presbyters  one  by  one, 
not  all  together,  exhort  the  people,  and  the  bishop 
in  the  last  place,  as  being  the  commander.     Let 
the  porters  stand  at  the  entries  of  the  men,  and 
observe  them.     Let  the  deaconesses  also  stand 
at  those  of  the  women,  like  shipmen.     For  the 
same  description  and  pattern  was  both   in   the 
tabernacle  of  the  testimony  and  in  the  temple 
of  God. 4     But  if  any  one  be  found  sitting  out 
of  his  place,  let  him  be  rebuked  by  tlie  deacon, 
as  a  manager  of  the  foreship,  and  be  removed 
hito  the  place  proper  for  him  ;  for  the  Church 
is  not  only  like  a  ship,  but  also  like  a  sheepfold. 
For  as  the  shepherds  place  all  the  brute  crea- 
tures distinctly,  I  mean  goats  and  sheep,  accord- 
ing to  their  kind  and  age,  and  still  every  one 
runs  together,  like  to  his  like  ;  so  is  it  to  be  in 
the  Church.    Let  the  young  persons  sit  by  them- 
selves, if  there  be  a  place  for  them  ;  if  not,  let 
them   stand   upright.      But   let   those    that   are 
already  stricken  in  years  sit  in  order.     For  the 
children  which  stand,  let  their  fathers  and  moth- 
ers take  them  to  them.     Let  the  younger  women 
also  sit  by  themselves,  if  there  be  a  jjlace   for 
them  ;  but  if  there  be  not,  let  them  stand  Itehind 
the  women.     Let  those  women  which  are  mar- 
ried, and  have  children,  be  jilaced  by  themselves  ; 
but  let  tlie  virgins,  and  the  widows,  and  the  elder 
women,  stand  or  sit  before  all  the  rest ;  and  let 
the  deacon  be  the  disposer  of  the  places,  that 
every  one  of  those  that  comes  in  may  go  to  his 
proi)er  place,  and  may  not  sit  at  the  entrance. 
In  like  manner,  let  the  deacon  oversee  the  peo- 
ple, that  nobody  may  whisper,  nor  slumber,  nor 
laugh,  nor  nod ;  for  all  ought  in  the  church  to 
stand  wisely,  and  soberly,  and  attentively,  having 
their  attention  fixed  upon  the  word  of  the  Lord. 
After  this,  let  all  rise  up  with  one  consent,  and 
looking  towards  the  east,  after  the  catechumens 
and  i)enitents  are  gone  out,  pray  to  Ciod  east- 
ward, who  ascended  up  to  the  heaven  of  heavens 
to  the  east ;  remembering  also  the  ancient  situa- 
tion of  paradise  in  the   east,  from  whence   the 
first  man,  when  he  had  yielded  to  the  persuasion 
of  the  serpent,  and  tlisobeyed  the  command  of 
Gotl,  was  expelled.    As  to  the  deacons,  after  the 
prayer  is  over,  let  some  of  them  attend  upon 
the  oblation  of  the  Eucharist,  ministering  to  the 
Lord's  body  with  fear.     Let  others  of  them  watch 
the  multitude,  and  keep  them   silent.     But  let 


*  Deut.  xxvii.  g. 
3  Dcul.  V.  ji. 

*  Deut.  xxiii.  I. 

V.  MS. 


"  And  in  the  temple  of  God  "  is  omitted  in  one 


422 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


[Book  IL 


that  deacon  who  is  at  the  high  priest's  hand  say 
to  the  people,  Let  no  one. have  any  quarrel  against 
another ;  let  no  one  come  in  hypocrisy.  Then 
let  the  men  give  the  men,  and  the  women  give 
the  women,  the  Lord's  kiss.  But  let  no  one  do 
it  with  deceit,  as  Judas  betrayed  the  Lord  with 
a  kiss.  After  this  let  the  deacon  pray  for  the  j 
whole  Church,  for  the  whole  world,  and  the  sev- 
eral parts  of  it,  and  the  fruits  of  it ;  for  the  priests 
and  the  rulers,  for  the  high  priest  and  the  king, 
and  the  peace  of  the  universe.  After  this  let 
the  high  priest  pray  for  peace  upon  the  people, 
and  bless  them,  as  Moses  commanded  the  priests 
to  bless  the  people,  in  these  words  :  "  The  Lord 
bless  thee,  and  keep  thee  :  the  Lord  make  His 
face  to  shine  upon  thee,'  and  give  thee  peace."  ^ 
Let  the  bishop  pray  for  the  people,  and  say : 
"  Save  Thy  people,  O  Lord,  and  bless  Thine 
inheritance,  which  Thou  hast  obtained  with  the 
precious  blood  of  Thy  Christ,  and  hast  called  a 
royal  priesthood,  and  an  holy  nation."  ^  After 
this  let  the  sacrifice  follow,  the  people  standing, 
and  praying  silently ;  and  when  the  oblation  has 
been  made,  let  every  rank  by  itself  partake  of 
the  Lord's  body  and  precious  blood  in  order, 
and  approach  with  reverence  and  holy  fear,  as 
to  the  body  of  their  king.  Let  the  women  ap- 
proach with  their  heads  covered,  as  is  becoming 
the  order  of  women  ;  but  let  the  door  be  watched, 
lest  any  unbeliever,  or  one  not  yet  initiated,  come 
in.+ 

OF  COMMEXDATGRY  LETTERS  IN  FAVOUR  OF 
STRANGERS,  LAY  PERSONS,  CLERGYMEN,  AND 
BISHOPS  ;  AND  THAT  THOSE  WHO  COME  INTO 
THE  CHURCH  ASSEMBLIES  ARE  TO  BE  RECEIVED 
WITHOUT    REGARD    TO   THEIR   QUALITY. 

Lviii.  If  any  brother,  man  or  woman,  come  in 
from  another  parish,  bringing  recommendatory 
letters,  let  the  deacon  be  the  judge  of  that  affair, 
inquiring  whether  they  be  of  the  faithful,  and  of 
the  Church?  whether  they  be  not  defiled  by 
heresy?  and  besides,  whether  the  party  be  a 
married  woman  or  a  widow?  And  when  he  is 
satisfied  in  these  questions,  that  they  are  really 
of  the  faithful,  and  of  the  same  sentiments  in 
the  things  of  the  Lord,  let  him  conduct  every 
one  to  the  place  proper  for  him.  And  if  a  pres- 
byter comes  from  another  parish,  let  him  be 
received  to  communion  by  the  presbyters ;  if  a 
deacon,  by  the  deacons ;  if  a  bishop,  let  him 
sit  with  the  bishop,  and  be  allowed  the  same 
honour  with  himself;  and  thou,  O  bishop,  shalt 
desire  him  to  speak  to  the  people  words  of 
instruction  :  for  the  exhortation  and  admonition 
of  strangers  is  very  acceptable,  and  exceeding 


■  One  V.  MS.  inserts,  "  and  pity  thee:  the  Lord  lift  His  counte- 
nance upon  thee." 

^  Num.  vi.  24,  etc. 

3  Ps.  xxviii.  9;  Acts  xx.  28;   i  Pet.  i.  19,  ii.  9. 

*  [Note  all  this  as  bearing  upon  the  ceremonial  of  the  Latin  Mass, 
which  reverses  these  primitive  precepts  in  divers  points.] 


profitable.  For,  as  the  Scripture  says,  "  no 
prophet  is  accepted  in  his  own  country."  5 
Thou  shalt  also  permit  him  to  offer  the  Eucha- 
rist ;  but  if,  out  of  reverence  to  thee,  and  as  a 
wise  man,  to  preserve  the  honour  belonging  to 
thee,  he  will  not  offer,  at  least  thou  shalt  compel 
him  to  give  the  blessing  to  the  people.  But  if, 
after  the  congregation  is  sat  down,  any  other 
person  comes  upon  you  of  good  fashion  and 
character  in  the  world,  whether  he  be  a  stranger, 
or  one  of  your  own  country,  neither  do  thou,  O 
bishop,  if  thou  art  speaking  the  word  of  God, 
or  hearing  him  that  sings  or  reads,  accept  per- 
sons so  far  as  to  leave  the  ministry  of  the  word, 
that  thou  mayest  appoint  an  upper  place  for 
him  ;  but  continue  quiet,  not  interrupting  thy 
discourse,  nor  thy  attention.  But  let  the  breth- 
ren receive  him  by  the  deacons ;  and  if  there 
be  not  a  place,  let  the  deacon  by  speaking,  but 
not  in  anger,  raise  the  junior,  and  place  the 
stranger  there.  And  it  is  but  reasonable  that 
one  that  loves  the  brethren  should  do  so  of  his 
own  accord ;  but  if  he  refuse,  let  him  raise  him 
up  by  force,  and  set  him  behind  all,  that  the 
rest  may  be  taught  to  give  place  to  those  that 
are  more  honourable.  Nay,  if  a  poor  man,  or 
one  of  a  mean  family,  or  a  stranger,  comes  upon 
you,  whether  he  be  old  or  young,  and  there  be 
no  place,  the  deacon  shall  find  a  place  for  even 
these,  and  that  with  all  his  heart ;  that,  instead 
of  accepting  persons  before  men,  his  ministra- 
tion towards  God  may  be  well-pleasing.  The 
very  same  thing  let  the  deaconess  do  to  those 
women,  whether  poor  or  rich,  that  come  unto 
them. 

THAT  EVERY  CHRISTIAN  OUGHT  TO  FREQUENT 
THE  CHURCH  DILIGENTLY  BOTH  MORNING  AND 
EVENING. 

Lix.  When  thou  instructest  the  people,  O 
bishop,  command  and  exhort  them  to  come 
constantly  to  church  morning  and  evening  every 
day,  and  by  no  means  to  forsake  it  on  any 
account,  but  to  assemble  together  continually ; 
neither  to  diminish  the  Church  by  withdrawing 
themselves,  and  causing  'the  body  of  Christ  to 
be  without  its  member.  For  it  is  not  only 
spoken  concerning  the  priests,  but  let  every  one 
of  the  laity  hearken  to  it  as  concerning  himself, 
considering  that  it  is  said  by  the  Lord  :  "  He 
that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me,  and  he  that 
gathereth  not  with  me  scattereth  abroad."^  Do 
not  you  therefore  scatter  yourselves  abroad,  who 
are  the  members  of  Christ,  by  not  assembling 
together,  since  you  have  Christ  your  head,  ac- 
cording, to  His  promise,  present,  and  communi- 
cating to  you. 7     Be  not  careless  of  yourselves, 


5  Luke  iv.  24;  John  iv.  44. 

^  Matt.  xii.  30. 

'  Matt,  xxviii.  20.     [Compare  vol.  i.  pp.  185,  186,  this  series.] 


Sec.  VII.] 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


423 


neither  deprive  your  Saviour  of  His  own  mem- 
bers, neither  divide  His  body  nor  disperse  His 
members,  neither  prefer  the  occasions  of  this 
life  to  the  word  of  God ;  but  assemble  your- 
selves together  every  day,  morning  and  evening, 
singing  psalms  and  praying  in  the  Lord's  house  : 
in  the  morning  saying  the  sixty-second  Psalm, 
and  in  the  evening  the  hundred  and  fortieth, 
but  principally  on  the  Sabbath-day.  And  on 
the  day  of  our  Lord's  resurrection,  which  is  the 
Lord's  day,  meet  more  diligently,  sending  praise 
to  God  that  made  the  universe  by  Jesus,  and 
sent  Him  to  us,  and  condescended  to  let  Him 
suffer,  and  raised  Him  from  the  dead.  Other- 
wise what  apology  will  he  make  to  God  who 
does  not  assemble  on  that  day  to  hear  the  sav- 
ing word  concerning  the  resurrection,  on  which 
we  pray  thrice  standing  in  memory  of  Him  who 
arose  in  three  days,  in  which  is  performed  the 
reading  of  the  prophets,  the  preaching  of  the 
Gospel,  the  oblation  of  the  sacritice,  the  gift  of 
the  holy  food  ? 

THE  VAIN  ZEAL  WHICH  THE  HEATHENS  AND  JEWS 
SHOW  IN  FREQUENTING  THEIR  TEMPLES  AND 
SYNAGOGUES  IS  A  PROPER  EXAMPLE  AND 
MOTIVE  TO  EXCITE  CHRISTIANS  TO  FREQUENT 
THE  CHURCH. 

LX.  And  how  can  he  be  other  than  an  adver- 
sary to  God,  who  takes  pains  about  temporary 
things  night  and  day,  but  takes  no  care  of  things 
eternal?  who  takes  care  of  washings  and  tem- 
porary food  every  day,  but  does  not  take  care 
of  those  that  endure  for  ever?  How  can  such 
a  one  even  now  avoid  hearing  that  word  of  the 
Lord,  "  The  Gentiles  are  justified  more  than 
you?"'  as  He  says,  by  way  of  reproach,  to 
Jerusalem,  "Sodom  is  justified  rather  than  thou." 
For  if  the  Gentiles  every  day,  when  they  arise 
from  sleep,  run  to  their  idols  to  worship  them, 
and  before  all  their  work  and  all  their  labours 
do  first  of  all  pray  to  them,  and  in  their  feasts 
and  in  their  solemnities  do  not  keep  away,  but 
attend  upon  them  ;  and  not  only  those  upon  the 
place,  but  those  living  far  distant  do  the  same  ; 
and  in  their  public  shows  all  come  together,  as 
into  a  synagogue  :  in  the  same  manner  those 
which  are  vainly  called  Jews,  when  they  have 
worked  six  days,  on  the  seventh  day  rest,  and 
come  together  into  their  synagogue,  never  leav- 
ing nor  neglecting  either  rest  from  labour  or 
assembling  together,  while  yet  they  are  deprived 
of  the  efficacy  of  the  word  in  their  unbelief, 
nay,  and  of  the  force  of  that  name  Judah,  by 
which  they  call  themselves,  —  for  Judah  is  in- 
terpreted Confession,  —  but  these  do  not  con- 
fess to  God  (having  unjustly  occasioned  the 
suffering  on  the  cross),  so  as  to  be  saved  on  their 


'  Ezek.  xvi.  52. 


repentance ;  —  if,  therefore,  those  who  are  not 
saved  frequently  assemble  together  for  such  pur- 
poses as  do  not  profit  them,  what  apology  wilt 
thou  make  to  the  Lord  God  who  forsakest  His 
Church,  not  imitating  so  much  as  the  heathen, 
but  by  such  thy  absence  growest  slothful,  or 
turnest  apostate,  or  actest  wickedness?  To 
whom  the  Lord  says  by  Jeremiah  :  "  Ye  have 
not  kept  my  ordinances ;  nay,  ye  have  not 
walked  according  to  the  ordinances  of  the  hea- 
then, and  you  have  in  a  manner  exceeded 
them."  -  And  again  :  "  Israel  has  justified  his 
soul  more  than  treacherous  Judah."  3  And  after- 
wards :  "  Will  the  Gentiles  change  their  gods 
which  are  not  gods  ?  ■♦  Wherefore  pass  over  to 
the  isles  of  Chittim,  and  behold,  and  send  to 
Kedar,  and  observe  diligently  whether  such  things 
have  been  done.  For  those  nations  have  not 
changed  their  ordinances  ;  but,"  says  He,  "  my 
people  has  changed  its  glory  for  that  which  will 
not  profit."  s  How,  therefore,  will  any  one 
make  his  apology  who  has  despised  or  absented 
himself  from  the  church  of  God? 

THAT  WE  MUST  NOT  PREFER  THE  AFFAIRS  OF 
THIS  LIFE  TO  THOSE  WHICH  CONCERN  THE 
WORSHIP   OF   GOD. 

LXi.  But  if  any  one  allege  the  pretence  of  his 
own  work,  and  so  is  a  despiser,  "  offering  pre- 
tences for  his  sins,"  let  such  a  one  know  that 
the  trades  of  the  faithful  are  works  by  the  by, 
but  the  worship  of  God  is  their  great  work. 
Follow  therefore  your  trades  as  by  the  by,  for 
your  maintenance,  but  make  the  worship  of  God 
your  main  business ;  as  also  our  Lord  said  : 
"  Labour  not  for  the  meat  which  perishes,  but 
for  that  which  endureth  unto  everlasting  life."  ^ 
And  again  :  "  This  is  the  work  of  God,  that  ye 
believe  on  Him  whom  He  hath  sent."  7  En- 
deavour therefore  never  to  leave  the  Church  of 
God  ;  but  if  any  one  overlooks  it,  and  goes 
either  into  a  polluted  temple  of  the  heathens, 
or  into  a  synagogue  of  the  Jews  or  heretics,  what 
apology  will  such  a  one  make  to  God  in  the 
day  of  judgment,  who  has  forsaken  the  oracles 
of  the  living  God,  and  the  living  and  quickening 
oracles,  such  as  are  able  to  deliver  from  eternal 
punishment,  and  has  gone  into  an  house  of 
demons,  or  into  a  synagogue  of  the  murderers 
of  Christ,  or  the  congregation  of  the  wicked  ?  — 
not  hearkening  unto  him  that  says :  "  I  have 
hated  the  congregation  of  the  wicked,  and  I  will 
not  enter  with  the  ungodly.  I  have  not  sat  with 
the  assembly  of  vanity,  neither  will  I  sit  with 
the    ungodly."  **     And  again  :    "  Blessed   is    the 


^  Ezek.  V.  7,  xvi.  47. 
3  Jer.  ili.  11. 

*  One  v.  MS.  inserts  here,  "  and  elsewhere  through  another." 
5  Jer.  ii.  11,  10. 

^  John  vi.  27. 
7    [ohn  vi.  29. 

*  Ps.  xxvi.  5,  4. 


424 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  II. 


man  that  hath  not  walked  in  the  counsel  of 
the  ungodly,  nor  stood  in  the  way  of  sinners, 
and  hath  not  sat  in  the  seat  of  the  scornful ;  but 
his  delight  is  in  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  in  His 
law  will  he  meditate  day  and  night."  '  But  thou, 
forsaking  the  gathering  together  of  the  faithful, 
the  Church  of  God,  and  His  laws,  hast  respect  to 
those  "  dens  of  thieves,"  calling  those  things  holy 
which  He  has  called  profane,  and  making  such 
things  unclean  which  He  has  sanctified.  And  not 
only  so,  but  thou  already  runnest  after  the  pomps 
of  the  Gentiles,  and  hastenest  to  their  theatres, 
being  desirous  to  be  reckoned  one  of  those  that 
enter  into  them,  and  to  partake  of  unseemly, 
not  to  say  abominable  words  ;  not  hearkening  to 
Jeremiah,  who  says,  "  O  Lord,  I  have  not  sat  in 
their  assemblies,  for  they  are  scorners  ;  but  I 
was  afraid  because  of  Thy  hand  ;  "  ^  nor  to  Job, 
who  speaks  in  like  manner,  "  If  I  have  gone  at 
any  time  with  the  scornful ;  for  I  shall  be  weighed 
in  a  just  balance."  ^  But  why  wilt  thou  be  a  par- 
taker of  the  heathen  oracles,  which  are  nothing 
but  dead  men  declaring  by  the  inspiration  of  the 
devil  deadly  things,  and  such  as  tend  to  subvert 
the  faith,  and  to  draw  those  that  attend  to  them 
to  polytheism?  Do  you  therefore,  who  attend 
to  the  laws  of  God,  esteem  those  laws  more 
honourable  than  the  necessities  of  this  life,  and 
pay  a  greater  respect  to  them,  and  run  together 
to  the  Church  of  the  Lord,  "  which  He  has  pur- 
chased with  the  blood  of  Christ,  the  beloved, 
the  first-born  of  every  creature."  "♦  For  this 
Church  is  the  daughter  of  the  Highest,  which 
has  been  in  travail  of  you  by  the  word  of  grace, 
and  has  "  formed  Christ  in  you,"  of  whom  you 
are  made  partakers,  and  thereby  become  His 
holy  and  chosen  members,  "  not  having  spot  or 
wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing  ;  but  as  being  holy 
and  unspotted  in  the  faith,  ye  are  complete  in 
Him,  after  the  image  of  God  that  created  you."  s 

THAT   CHRISTIANS    MUST   ABSTAIN   FROM  ALL   THE 
IMPIOUS   PRACTICES   OF   THE   HEATHENS. 

LXii.  Take  heed,  therefore,  not  to  join  your- 
selves in  your  worship  with  those  that  perish, 
which  is  the  assembly  of  the  Gentiles,  to  your 
deceit  and  destruction.  For  there  is  no  fellow- 
ship between  God  and  the  devil ;  for  he  that 
assembles  himself  with  those  that  favour  the 
things  of  the  devil,  will  be  esteemed  one  of 
them,  and  will  inherit  a  woe.  Avoid  also  inde- 
cent spectacles  :  I  mean  the  theatres  and  the 
pomps  of  the  heathens ;  their  enchantments, 
observations  of  omens,  soothsayings,  purgations, 
divinations,  observations  of  birds  ;  their  necro- 
mancies  and    invocations.     For   it   is  written : 


«   Ps.  i.  I,  2. 

2  Jer.  XV.   17. 

3  Job  xxxi.  5,  6. 

*   I' id.  Acts  XX.  28;  Col.  i.  15. 
5  Eph.  V.  27. 


"  There  is  no  divination  in  Jacob,  nor  soothsay- 
ing in  Israel."  ^  And  again  :  "  Divination  is 
iniquity."  ^  And  elsewhere  :  "  Ye  shall  not  be 
soothsayers,  and  follow  observers  of  omens,  nor 
diviners,  nor  dealers  with  familiar  spirits.  Ye 
shall  not  preserve  alive  wizards."**  Wherefore 
Jeremiah  exhorts,  saying :  "  Walk  ye  not  ac- 
cording to  the  ways  of  the  heathen,  and  be  not 
afraid  of  the  signs  of  heaven."  9  So  that  it  is 
the  duty  of  a  believer  to  avoid  the  assemblies  of 
the  ungodly,  of  the  heathen,  and  of  the  Jews, 
and  of  the  rest  of  the  heretics,  lest  by  uniting 
ourselves  to  them  we  bring  snares  upon  our  own 
souls  ;  that  we  may  not  by  joining  in  their  feasts, 
which  are  celebrated  in  honour  of  demons,  be 
partakers  with  them  in  their  impiety.  You  are 
also  to  avoid  their  public  meetings,  and  those 
sports  which  are  celebrated  in  them.  For  a 
believer  ought  not  to  go  to  any  of  those  public 
meetings,  unless  to  purchase  a  slave,  and  save  a 
soul,9  and  at  the  same  time  to  buy  such  other 
things  as  suit  their  necessities.  Abstain,  there- 
fore, from  all  idolatrous  pomp  and  state,  all  their 
public  meetings,  banquets,  duels,  and  all  shows 
belonging  to  demons. 

SEC,    VIII. — ON    THE    DUTY    OF    WORKING    FOR    A 
LIVELIHOOD. 

THAT  A  CHRISTIAN  WHO  WILL  NOT  WORK  MUST 
NOT  EAT,  AS  PETER  AND  THE  REST  OF  THE 
APOSTLES  WERE  FISHERMEN,  BUT  PAUL  AND 
AQUILA  TENTMAKERS,  JUDE  THE  SON  OF  JAMES 
AN    HUSBANDMAN. 

LXiii.  Let  the  young  persons  of  the  Church 
endeavour  to  minister  diligently  in  all  necessa- 
ries :  mind  your  business  with  all  becoming  seri- 
ousness, that  so  you  may  always  have  sufficient 
to  support  yourselves  and  those  that  are  needy, 
and  not  burden  the  Church  of  God.  For  we 
ourselves,  besides  our  attention  to  the  word  of 
the  Gospel,  do  not  neglect  our  inferior  employ- 
ments. For  some  of  us  are  fishermen,  some 
tentmakers,  some  husbandmen,  that  so  we  may 
never  be  idle.  So  says  Solomon  somewhere  : 
"  Go  to  the  ant,  thou  sluggard ;  consider  her 
ways  diligently,  and  become  wiser  than  she. 
For  she,  having  neither  field,  overseer,  nor  ruler, 
prepareth  her  food  in  the  summer,  and  layeth 
up  a  great  store  in  the  harvest.  Or  else  go  to 
the  bee,  and  learn  how  laborious  she  is,  and  her 
work  how  valuable  it  is,  whose  labours  both 
kings  and  mean  men  make  use  of  for  their 
health.  She  is  desirable  and  glorious,  though 
she  be  weak  in  strength,  yet  by  honouring  wis- 
dom she  is  improved,  etc.  How  long  wilt  thou 
lie  on  thy  bed,  O  sluggard?     When  wilt  thou 

*>  Num.  xxiii.  23. 

^  I  Sam.  XV.  23,  LXX. 

*  Lev.  xix.  26;    Deut.  xviii.  10. 

9  Jer.  X.  2.    [Slaves  were  bought  to  be  baptized.    Elucid.,  p.  425.  ] 


Sec.  VIII.] 


ELUCIDATION. 


425 


awake  out  of  thy  sleep  ?  Thou  sleepest  awhile, 
thou  liest  down  awhile,  thou  slumberest  awhile, 
thou  foldest  thy  hands  on  thy  breast  to  sleep 
awhile.  Then  poverty  comes  on  thee  like  an 
evil  traveller,  and  want  as  a  swift  racer.  But  if 
thou  beest  diligent,  thy  harvest  shall  come  as 
a  fountain,  and  want  shall  fly  from  thee  as  an 
evil  runagate."  '  And  again  :  "  He  that  mana- 
geth  his  own  land  shall  be  filled  with  bread."  ^ 
And  elsewhere  he  says  :  "The  slothful  has  folded 
his  own  hands  together,  and  has  eaten  his  own 


I  Prov.  vi.  6,  etc.,  LXX. 
*  Prov.  xii.  II. 


flesh."  3  And  afterwards:  "  The  sluggard  hides 
his  hand  ;  he  will  not  be  able  to  bring  it  to  his 
mouth."  •♦  And  again  :  "  By  slothfulness  of  the 
hands  a  floor  will  be  brought  low."  5  Labour 
therefore  continually  ;  for  the  blot  of  the  slothful 
is  not  to  be  healed.  But  "  if  any  one  does  not 
work,  let  not  such  a  one  eat "  ^  among  you. 
For  the  Lord  our  God  hates  the  slothful.  For 
no  one  of  those  who  are  dedicated  to  God  ought 
to  be  idle. 


3  Eccles.  iv.  5. 
*  Prov.  xix.  24. 
5  Eccles.  X.  18. 
f"  2  Thess.  iii.  lo. 


ELUCIDATION. 


(To  purchase  a  slave,  and  save  a  soul,  p.  424.) 

The  calm  and  patient  course  of  the  Church  in  gradually  obliterating  slavery  has  been  well 
defended  by  the  pious  Spanish  Ultramontane  writer  Jacques  Balmes.'  Of  course,  he  imagines 
that  "  the  Catholic  Church,"  which  wrought  the  change,  was  his  own  Tridentine  Communion.^ 
Lecky's  remarks  on  the  gladiators  and  slavery  as  the  product  of  famines  and  distress  are  worthy 
of  note,  and  even  he  is  forced  to  recognise  the  ameliorating  influences  of  Christianity  from  the 
beginning.3     He  says  :  — 

"  Christianity  for  the  first  time  made  charity  a  rudimentary  virtue,  giving  it  a  foremost  place 
in  the  moral  type  and  in  the  exhortations  of  its  teachers.  Besides  its  general  influence  in  stimu- 
lating the  affections,  it  effected  a  complete  revolution  in  this  sphere,  by  representing  the  poor  as 
the  special  representatives  of  the  Christian  founder,  and  thus  making  the  love  of  Christ  rather 
than  the  love  of  man  the  principle  of  charity.  Even  in  the  days  of  persecution,  collections  for 
the  relief  of  the  poor  were  made  at  the  Sunday  meetings.  The  agapcB,  or  feasts  of  love,  were 
intended  mainly  for  the  poor ;  and  food  that  was  saved  by  the  fasts  was  devoted  to  their  benefit. 
A  vast  organization  of  charity,  presided  over  by  the  bishops,  and  actively  directed  by  the  deacons, 
soon  ramified  over  Christendom,  till  the  bond  of  charity  became  the  bond  of  unity,  and  the  most 
distant  sections  of  the  Christian  Church  corresponded  by  the  interchange  of  mercy.*  Long  before 
the  era  of  Constantine  it  was  observed  that  the  charities  of  the  Christians  were  so  extensive  —  it 
may  perhaps  be  said  so  excessive  —  that  they  drew  very  many  impostors  to  the  Church  ;  and,  when 
the  victory  of  Christianity  was  achieved,  the  enthusiasm  for  charity  displayed  itself  in  the  erection 
of  numerous  institutions  that  were  altogether  unknown  to  the  pagan  world." 

'  See  his  chapter  (xvii.)  Moyens  employes  par  I'eglise  pour  ajfranchir  les  esclaves.  Civilisation  Europ'^ene,  vol.  i.  p.  222,  Paris, 


1851. 


2  The  countrymen  of  Balmfes,  on  the  contrary,  were  the  authors  of  the  negro  slavery  of  modern  times. 
^  History  0/ European  Morals,  vol.  ii.  p.  84. 
*  See  also  Elucidation  XII.  vol.  v.  p.  563. 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 

BOOK    III. 


SEC.    I. CONCERNING  WIDOWS. 

THE  AGE  AT  WHICH  WIDOWS   SHOULD   BE   CHOSEN. 

I.  Choose  your  "  widows  not  under  sixty  years 
of  age,"  '  that  in  some  measure  the  suspicion  of 
a  second  marriage  may  be  prevented  by  their 
age.  But  if  you  admit  one  younger  into  the 
order  of  widows,  and  she  cannot  bear  her  widow- 
hood in  her  youth,  and  marries,  she  will  procure 
indecent  reflections  on  the  glory  of  the  order  of 
the  widows,  and  shall  give  an  account  to  God  ; 
not  because  she  married  a  second  time,  but  be- 
cause she  has  "  waxed  wanton  against  Christ,"  ^ 
and  not  kept  her  promise,  because  she  did  not 
come  and  keep  her  projnise  with  faith  and  the 
fear  of  God?  Wherefore  such  a  promise  ought 
not  to  be  rashly  made,  but  with  great  caution  : 
"  for  it  is  better  for  her  not  to  vow,  than  to  vow 
and  not  to  pay."  *  But  if  any  younger  woman, 
who  has  lived  but  a  while  with  her  husband,  and 
has  lost  him  by  death  or  some  other  occasion, 
and  remains  by  herself,  having  the  gift  of  widow- 
hood, she  will  be  found  to  be  blessed,  and  to  be 
like  the  widow  of  Sarepta,  belonging  to  Sidon, 
with  whom  the  holy  prophet  of  God,  Elijah, 5 
lodged.  Such  a  one  may  also  be  compared  to 
"  Anna,  the  daughter  of  Phanuel,  of  the  tribe  of 
Aser,  which  departed  not  from  the  temple,  but 
continued  in  supplications  and  prayers  night  and 
day,  who  was  fourscore  years  old,  and  had  lived 
with  an  husband  seven  years  from  her  virginity, 
who  glorified  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  gave 
thanks  to  the  Lord,  and  spake  concerning  Him 
to  all  those  who  looked  for  redemption  in  Is- 
rael." ^  Such  a  widow  will  have  a  good  report, 
and  will  be  honoured,  having  both  glory  with 
men  upon  earth,  and  eternal  praise  with  God  in 
heaven. 


•  V'id.  I  Tim.  v.  9. 

2  I  Tim.  V.  II. 

3  Not  in  one  V.  MS. 

*  Eccles.  V.  5. 

s  I  Kmgs  xvii.  9. 
6  Luke  ii.  36,  etc. 


THAT  WE   MUST  AVOID   THE   CHOICE   OF   YOUNGER 
WIDOWS,   BECAUSE   OF   SUSPICION. 

II.  But  let  not  the  younger  widows  be  placed 
in  the  order  of  widows,  lest,  under  pretence  of 
inability  to  contain  in  the  flower  of  their  age, 
they  come  to  a  second  marriage,  and  become 
subject  to  imputation.  But  let  them  be  assisted 
and  supported,  that  so  they  may  not,  under 
pretence  of  being  deserted,  come  to  a  second 
marriage,  and  so  be  ensnared  in  an  unseemly 
imputation.  For  you  ought  to  know  this,  that 
once  marrying  according  to  the  law  is  righteous, 
as  being  according  to  the  will  of  God ;  but  sec- 
ond marriages,  after  the  promise,  are  wicked, 
not  on  account  of  the  marriage  itself,  but  because 
of  the  falsehood.  Third,  marriages  are  indica- 
tions of  incontinency.  But  such  marriages  as 
are  beyond  the  third  are  manifest  fornication, 
and  unquestionable  uncleanness.  For  God  in 
the  creation  gave  one  woman  to  one  man ;  for 
"  they  two  shall  be  one  flesh."  ^  But  to  the 
younger  women  let  a  second  marriage  be  allowed 
after  the  death  of  their  first  husband,  lest  they 
fail  into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil,  and 
many  snares,  and  foolish  lusts,  which  are  hurtful 
to  souls,  and  which  bring  upon  them  punishment 
rather  than  rest. 


WHAT  CHARACTER  THE  WIDOWS  OUGHT  TO  BE  OF, 
AND  HOW  THEY  OUGHT  TO  BE  SUPPORTED  BY 
THE   BISHOP. 

III.  But  the  true  widows  are  those  which  have 
had  only  one  husband,  having  a  good  report 
among  the  generality  for  good  works ;  widows 
indeed,  sober,  chaste,  faithful,  pious,  who  have 
brought  up  their  children  well,  and  have  enter- 
tained strangers  unblameably,  which  are  to  be 
supported  as  devoted  to  God.  Besides,  do  thou, 
O  bishop,  be  mindful  of  the  needy,  both  reach- 
ing out  thy  helping  hand  and  making  provision 


7  Gen.  ii.  24. 


426 


Sec.  I.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


427 


for  them  as  the  steward  of  God,  distributing  sea- 
sonably the  oblations  to  every  one  of  them,  to 
the  widows,  the  orphans,  the  friendless,  and 
those  tried  with  affliction. 

THAT    WE    OUGHT    TO    BE     CHARITABLE     TO    ALL 
SORTS   OF   PERSONS   IN    WANT. 

IV.  For  what  if  some  are  neither  widows  nor 
widowers,  but  stand  in  need  of  assistance,  either 
through  poverty  or  some  disease,  or  the  mainte- 
nance of  a  great  number  of  children  ?     It  is  thy 
duty  to  oversee  all  people,  and  to  take  care  of 
them  all.     For  they  that  give  gifts  do   not   of 
their  own  head  give  them  to   the  widows,  but 
barely  bring  them  in,  calling  them  free-will  offer- 
ings, that  so  thou  that  knowest  those  that  are  in 
affliction  mayest  as  a  good  steward  give  them 
their  portion  of  the  gift.     For  God  knows  the 
giver,  though  thou  distributest  it  to  those  in  want 
when  he  is  absent.     And  he  has  the  reward  of 
well-doing,  but  thou  the  blessedness  of  having 
dispensed  it  with  a  good  conscience.     But  do 
thou  tell  them  who  was  the  giver,  that  they  may 
pray  for  him  by  name.     For  it  is  our  duty  to  do 
good  to  all  men,  not  fondly  preferring  one  or 
another,  whoever  they  be.     For  the  Lord  says  : 
"  Give  to  every  one  that  asketh  of  thee."  '     It 
is  evident  that  it  is  meant  of  every  one  that  is 
really  in  want,  whether  he   be   friend   or  foe, 
whether  he  be  a  kinsman  or  a  stranger,  whether 
he  be  single  or  married.    For  in  all  the  Scripture 
the  Lord  gives  us  exhortations  about  the  needy, 
saying  first  by  Isaiah  :  "  Deal  thy  bread  to  the 
hungry,  and  bring  the  poor  which  have  no  cov- 
ering into  thine  house.     If  thou  seest  the  naked, 
do  thou  cover  him  ;  and  thou  shalt  not  overlook 
those  which  are  of  thine  own  family  and  seed."  ^ 
And  then  by  Daniel  He  says  to  the  potentate  : 
"  Wherefore,  O  king,  let  my  counsel  please  thee, 
and  purge  thy  sins  by  acts  of  mercy,  and  thine 
iniijuities    by    bowels    of    compassion    to    the 
needy."  ^     And  He  says  by  Solomon  :  "  By  acts 
of  mercy  and  of  faith  iniquities  are  purged."  ■♦ 
And  He  says  again  by  David  :  "  Blessed  is  he 
that  has  regard  to  the  poor  and  needy  ;  the  Lord 
shall  deliver  him  in  the  evil  day."  s     And  again  : 
"  He  hath  dispersed  abroad,  he  hath  given  to 
the  needy,  his  righteousness  remaineth  for  ever."'' 
And  Solomon  says  :    "  He  that  hath  mercy  on 
the  poor  lendeth  to  the  Lord  ;''  according  to  his 
gift  it  shall  be  repaid  him  again."  **     And  after- 
wards :  "  He  that  stoppeth  his  ear,  that  he  may 
not  hear  him  that  is  in  want,  he  also  shall  call 
himself,  and  there  shall  be  none  to  hear  him."  9 

'  Luke  vi.  30. 

2  Isa.  Iviii.  7. 

3  Dan.  iv.  27. 
*  Prov.  xvi.  6. 

5    Ps.  Xll.   I. 

*>  Ps.  cxii.  g.  ^   J  » 

7  Instead  of"  Lord,"  one  V.  MS.  reads  "  God. 

8  Prov.  xix    17. 

9  Prov.  xxi.  13. 


THAT    THE   WIDOWS    ARE    TO    BE   VERY    CAREFUL 
OF   THEIR   BEHAVIOR. 

V.  Let   every  widow  be  meek,  quiet,  gentle, 
sincere,  free  from  anger,  not  talkative,  not  clam- 
orous, not  hasty  of  speech,  not  given   to  evil- 
speaking,  not  captious,  not  double-tongued,  not 
a  busybody.     If  she  see  or  hear  anything  that  is 
not  right,  let  her  be  as  one  that  does  not  see, 
and  as  one  that  does  not  hear.     And   let   the 
widow  mind  nothing  but  to  pray  for  those  that 
give,  and  for  the  whole  Church ;  and  when  she 
is  asked  anything  by  any  one,  let  her  not  easily 
answer,  excepting  questions  concerning  the  faith, 
and  righteousness,  and  hope  in  God,  remitting 
those  that  desire  to  be  instructed  in  the  doctrines 
of  godliness   to   the  governors.     Let   her  only 
answer  so  as  may  tend  to  the  subversion  of  the 
error  of  polytheism,  and    let    her  demonstrate 
the  assertion  concerning  the  monarchy  of  God. 
But    of   the    remaining    doctrines    let    her   not 
answer  anything  rashly,  lest  by  saying  anything 
unlearnedly  she   should   make   the   word   to  be 
blasphemed.     For  the  Lord  has  taught  us  that 
the  word  is  like  "  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,"  '° 
which  is  of  a  fiery  nature,  which  if  any  one  uses 
unskilfully,   he   will  find    it  bitter.     For  in   the 
mystical  points  we  ought  not  to    be    rash,  but 
cautious  ;  for  the  Lord  exhorts  us,  saying  :  "  Cast 
not  your  pearls  before  swine,  lest  they  trample 
them  with  their  feet,  and  turn  again  and  rend 
you."  "     For  unbelievers,  when  they  hear  the 
doctrine  concerning  Christ  not  explained  as  it 
ought  to  be,  but  defectively,  and  especially  that 
concerning  His  incarnation  or  His  passion,  will 
rather  reject  it  with  scorn,  and  laugh   at  it  as 
false,  than  praise  God  for  it.     And  so  the  aged 
women  will  be  guilty  of  rashness,  and  of  causing 
blasphemy,  and  will  inherit  a  woe.    For  says  He, 
"Woe  to  him  by  whom  my  name  is  blasphemed 
among  the  Gentiles."  '^ 

THAT  WOMEN  OUGHT  NOT  TO  TEACH,  BECAUSE 
IT  IS  UNSEEMLY  :  AND  WHAT  WOMEN  FOL- 
LOWED  OUR   LORD. 

VI.  We  do  not  permit  our  "  women  to  teach 
in  the  Church,"  '^  but  only  to  pray  and  hear 
those  that  teach  ;  for  our  Master  and  Lord,  Jesus 
Himself,  when  He  sent  us  the  twelve  to  make 
disciples  of  the  people  and  of  the  nations,  did 
nowhere  send  out  women  to  preach,  although  He 
did  not  want  such.  For  there  were  with  us  the 
mother  of  our  Lord  and  His  sisters ;  also  Mary 
Magdalene,  and  Mary  the  mother  of  James,  and 
Martha  and  Mary  the  sisters  of  Lazarus  ;  Salome, 
and  certain  others.  For,  had  it  been  necessary 
for  women  to  teach,  He  Himself  had  first  com- 


>o  Matt.  xiii.  31. 
"  Matt.  vii.  6. 
'-  Isa.  lii.  5. 
'3  I  Cor.  XIV.  34. 


428 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


[Book  III. 


manded  these  also  to  instruct  the  people  with  us. 
For  "  if  the  head  of  the  wife  be  the  man,"  '  it  is 
not  reasonable  that  the  rest  of  the  body  should 
govern  the  head.  Let  the  widow  therefore  own 
herself  to  be  the  "  altar  of  God,"  and  let  her  sit 
in  her  house,  and  not  enter  into  the  houses  of  the 
faithful,  under  any  pretence,  to  receive  anything  ; 
for  the  altar  of  God  never  runs  about,  but  is 
fixed  in  one  place.  Let,  therefore,  the  virgin 
and  the  widow  be  such  as  do  not  run  about,  or 
gad  to  the  houses  of  those  who  are  alien  from 
the  faith.  For  such  as  these  are  gadders  and 
impudent :  they  do  not  make  their  feet  to  rest 
in  one  place,  because  they  are  not  widows,  but 
purses  ready  to  receive,  triflers,  evil-speakers, 
counsellors  of  strife,  without  shame,  impudent, 
who  being  such,  are  not  worthy  of  Him  that  called 
them.  For  they  do  not  come  to  the  common 
station  of  the  congregation  on  the  Lord's  day,^ 
as  those  that  are  watchful ;  but  either  they  slum- 
ber, or  trifle,  or  allure  men,  or  beg,  or  ensnare 
others,  bringing  them  to  the  evil  one  ;  not  suffer- 
ing them  to  be  watchful  in  the  Lord,  but  taking 
care  that  they  go  out  as  vain  as  they  came  in, 
because  they  do  not  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord 
either  taught  or  read.  For  of  such  as  these  the 
prophet  Isaiah  says :  "  Hearing  ye  shall  hear, 
and  shall  not  understand  ;  and  seeing  ye  shall 
see;  and  not  perceive :  for  the  heart  of  this 
people  is  waxen  gross,^  and  they  hear  heavily 
■with  their  ears.'"'^ 

WHAT   ARE   THE    CHARACTERS    OF   WIDOWS    FALSELY 
SO    CALLED. 

vn.  In  the  same  manner,  therefore,  the  ears 
of  the  hearts  of  such  widows  as  these  are  stopped, 
that  they  will  not  sit  within  in  their  cottages  to 
speak  to  the  Lord,  but  will  run  about  with  the 
design  of  getting,  and  by  their  foolish  prattling 
fulfil  the  desires  of  the  adversary.  Such  widows, 
therefore,  are  not  affixed  to  the  altar  of  Christ : 
for  there  are  some  widows  which  esteem  gain 
their  business  ;  and  since  they  ask  without  shame, 
and  receive  without  being  satisfied,  render  the 
generality  more  backward  in  giving.  For  when 
they  ought  to  be  content  with  their  subsistence 
from  the  Church,  as  having  moderate  desires,  on 
the  contrary,  they  run  from  one  of  their  neigh- 
bours' houses  5  to  another,  and  disturb  them,  heap- 
ing up  to  themselves  plenty  of  money,  and  lend 
at  bitter  usury,  and  are  only  solicitous  about  mam- 
mon, whose  bag  is  their  god  ;  who  prefer  eating 
and  drinking  before  all  virtue,  saying,  "  Let  us 
eat  and  drink,  for  to-morrow  we   die  ;  "  ^   who 

'  I  Cor.  xi   3. 

^  "  On  the  Lord's  day  "  not  in  one  V.  MS. 
3  Isa.  vi.  g.  lo. 
■♦  Inserted  from  one  V.  ms. 

5  Probably  the  reading  should  be,  "  they  go  round  the  houses  of 
the  rich." 

'i  Isa.  xxii.  13;  I  Cor.  xv.  ^a. 


esteem  these  things  as  if  they  were  durable  and 
not  perishing  things.  For  she  that  uses  herself 
to  nothing  but  talking  of  money,  worships  mam- 
mon instead  of  God,  —  that  is,  is  a  servant  to 
gain,  but  cannot  be  pleasing  to  God,  nor  re- 
signed to  His  worship  ;  not  being  able  to  inter- 
cede with  Him  continuously  on  account  that 
her  mind  and  disposition  run  after  money  :  for 
"where  the  treasure  is,  there  will  the  heart  be 
also."  7  For  she  is  thinking  in  her  mind  whither 
she  may  go  to  receive,  or  that  a  certain  woman 
her  friend  has  forgot  her,  and  she  has  somewhat 
to  say  to  her.  She  that  thinks  of  such  things  as 
these  will  no  longer  attend  to  her  prayers,  but  to 
that  thought  which  offers  itself;  so  that  though 
sometimes  she  would  pray  for  anybody,  she  will 
not  be  heard,  because  she  does  not  offer  her 
petition  to  the  Lord  with  her  whole  heart,  but 
with  a  divided  mind.  But  she  that  will  attend 
to  God  will  sit  within,  and  mind  the  things  of 
the  Lord  day  and  night,  offering  her  sincere 
petition  with  a  mouth  ready  to  utter  the  same 
without  ceasing.  As  therefore  Judith,  most  fa- 
mous for  her  wisdom,  and  of  a  good  report  for 
her  modesty,  "  prayed  to  God  night  and  day 
for  Israel ;  "  ^  so  also  the  widow  who  is  like  to 
her  will  offer  her  intercession  without  ceasing  for 
the  Church  to  God.  And  He  will  hear  her,  be- 
cause her  mind  is  fixed  on  this  thing  alone,  and 
is  not  disposed  to  be  either  insatiable,  or  covet- 
ous, or  expensive  ;  when  her  eye  is  pure,  and 
her  hearing  clean,  and  her  hands  undefiled, 
and  her  feet  quiet,  and  her  mouth  prepared  for 
neither  gluttony  nor  trifling,  but  speaking  the 
things  that  are  fit,  and  partaking  of  only  such 
things  as  are  necessary  for  her  maintenance.  So, 
being  grave,  and  giving  no  disturbance,  she  will 
be  pleasing  to  God ;  and  as  soon  as  she  asks 
anything,  the  gift  will  come  to  her  :  as  He  says, 
"  While  thou  art  speaking,  I  will  say,  Behold,  I 
am  here."  9  Let  such  a  one  also  be  free  from 
the  love  of  money,  free  from  arrogance,  not 
given  to  filthy  lucre,  not  insatiable,  not  glutton- 
ous, but  continent,  meek,  giving  nobody  disturb- 
ance, pious,  modest,  sitting  at  home,  singing, 
and  praying,  and  reading,  and  watching,  and 
fasting ;  speaking  to  God  continually  in  songs 
and  hymns.  And  let  her  take  wool,  and  rather 
assist  others  than  herself  want  from  them  ;  being 
mindful  of  that  widow  who  is  honoured  in  the 
Gospel  with  the  Lord's  testimony,  who,  coming 
into  the  temple,  "  cast  into  the  treasury  two 
mites,  which  make  a  farthing.  And  Christ  our 
Lord  and  Master,  and  Searcher  of  hearts,  saw 
her,  and  said.  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  that  this 
widow  hath  cast  into  the  treasury  more  than 
they   all :    for   all   they   have   cast   in   of  their 


7  Matt.  vi.  21. 

8  Judith  ix.  I,  etc. 

9  Isa.  Iviii.  9. 


Sec.  I.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


429 


abundance,  but  this  woman  of  her  penury  hath 
cast  in  all  the  living  that  she  had."  ' 

The  widows  therefore  ought  to  be  grave, 
obedient  to  their  bishops,  and  their  presbyters, 
and  their  deacons,  and  besides  these  to  the  dea- 
conesses, with  piety,  reverence,  and  fear ;  not 
usurping  authority,  nor  desiring  to  do  anything 
beyond  the  constitution  without  the  consent  of 
the  deacon  :  as,  suppose,  the  going  to  any  one 
to  eat  or  drink  with  him,  or  to  receive  anything 
from  anybody.  But  if  without  direction  she 
does  any  one  of  these  things,  let  her  be  pun- 
ished with  fasting,  or  else  let  her  be  separated 
on  account  of  her  rashness. 

THAT  THE  WIDOWS  OUGHT  NOT  TO  ACCEPT  OF 
ALMS  FROM  THE  UNWORTHY  NO  MORE  THAN 
THE  BISHOP,  OR  ANY  OTHER  OF  THE  FAITHFUL. 

VIII.  For  how  does  such  a  one  know  of  what 
character  the  person  is  from  whom  she  receives? 
or  from  what  sort  of  ministration  he  supplies 
her  with  food,  whether  it  does  not  arise  from 
rapine  or  some  other  ill  course  of  life?  while 
the  widow  does  not  remember  that  if  she  re- 
ceives in  a  way  unworthy  of  God,  she  must  give 
an  account  for  every  one  of  these  things.  For 
neither  will  the  priests  at  any  time  receive  a 
free-will  offering  from  such  a  one,  as,  suppose, 
from  a  rapacious  person  or  from  a  harlot.  For 
it  is  written,  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet  the  goods 
that  are  thy  neighbour's ;  "  ^  and,  "  Thou  shalt 
not  offer  the  hire  of  an  harlot  to  the  Lord 
God."  3  From  such  as  these  no  offerings  ought 
to  be  accepted,  nor  indeed  from  those  that  are 
separated  from  the  Church.  Let  the  widows 
also  be  ready  to  obey  the  commands  given  them 
by  their  superiors,  and  let  them  do  according 
to  the  appointment  of  the  bishop,  being  obedi- 
ent to  him  as  to  God  ;  for  he  that  receives  from 
such  a  one  who  is  worthy  of  blame,  or  from 
one  excommunicated,  and  prays  for  him,  while 
he  purposes  to  go  on  in  a  wicked  course,  and 
while  he  is  not  willing  at  any  time  to  repent, 
holds  communion  with  him  in  prayer,  and  grieves 
Christ,  who  rejects  the  unrighteous,  and  con- 
firms them  by  means  of  the  unworthy  gift,  and 
is  defiled  with  them,  not  suffering  them  to  come 
to  repentance,  so  as  to  fall  down  before  God 
with  lamentation,  and  pray  to  Him. 

THAT  WOMEN  OUGHT  NOT  TO  BAPTIZE,  BECAUSE  IT 
IS  IMPIOUS,  AND  CONTRARY  TO  THE  DOCTRINE 
OF   CHRIST. 

IX.  Now,  as  to  women's  baptizing,  we  let  you 
know  that  there  is  no  small  peril  to  those  that 
undertake  it.     Therefore  we  do  not  advise  you 


'  Mark  xii.  42 ;   Luke  xxi.  3,  4. 
2  Ex.  XX.  17. 
^  Deut.  xxiii.  18. 


to  it ;  for  it  is  dangerous,  or  rather  wicked  and 
impious.  For  if  the  "  man  be  the  head  of  the 
woman,"  •♦  and  he  be  originally  ordained  for  the 
priesthood,  it  is  not  just  to  abrogate  the  order 
of  the  creation,  and  leave  the  principal  to  come 
to  the  extreme  part  of  the  body.  For  the 
woman  is  the  body  of  the  man,  taken  from  his 
side,  and  subject  to  him,  from  whom  she  was 
separated  for  the  procreation  of  children.  For 
says  He,  "  He  shall  rule  over  thee."  s  For  the 
principal  part  of  the  woman  is  the  man,  as  being 
her  head.  But  if  in  the  foregoing  constitutions 
we  have  not  permitted  them  to  teach,  how  will 
any  one  allow  them,  contrary  to  nature,  to  per- 
form the  office  of  a  priest  ?  For  this  is  one  of 
the  ignorant  practices  of  the  Gentile  atheism,  to 
ordain  women  priests  to  the  female  deities,  not 
one  of  the  constitutions  of  Christ.  For  if  bap- 
tism were  to  be  administered  by  women,  certain- 
ly our  Lord  would  have  been  baptized  by  His 
own  mother,  and  not  by  John  ;  or  when  He  sent 
us  to  baptize,  He  would  have  sent  along  with  us 
women  also  for  this  purpose.  But  now  He  has 
nowhere,  either  by  constitution  or  by  writing, 
delivered  to  us  any  such  thing ;  as  knowing  the 
order  of  nature,  and  the  decency  of  the  action  ;  ^ 
as  being  the  Creator  of  nature,  and  the  Legislator 
of  the  constitution. 

THAT  A  LAYMAN  OUGHT  NOT  TO  DO  ANY  OFFICE 
OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD  :  HE  OUGHT  NEITHER  TO 
BAPTIZE,  NOR  OFFER,  NOR  LAY  ON  HANDS,  NOR 
GIVE   THE    BLESSING. 

X.  Neither  do  we  permit  the  laity  to  perform 
any  of  the  offices  belonging  to  the  priesthood ; 
as,  for  instance,  neither  the  sacrifice,  nor  bap- 
tism, nor  the  laying  on  of  hands,  nor  the  bless- 
ing, whether  the  smaller  or  the  greater  :  for  "no 
one  taketh  this  honour  to  himself,  but  he  that 
is  called  of  God."  ^  For  such  sacred  offices  are 
conferred  by  the  laying  on  of  the  hands  of  the 
bishop.  But  a  person  to  whom  such  an  office  is 
not  committed,  but  he  seizes  upon  it  for  himself, 
he  shall  undergo  the  punishment  of  Uzziah.^ 

THAT  NONE  BUT  A  BISHOP  AND  PRESBYTER,  NONE 
EVEN  OF  THE  INFERIOR  RANKS  OF  THE  CLERGY, 
ARE  PERMITTED  TO  DO  THE  OFFICES  OF  THE 
PRIE.STS  ;  THAT  ORDINATION  BELONGS  WHOLLY 
TO   THE    BISHOP,    AND   TO    NOBODY    ELSE. 

XI.  Nay,  further,  we  do  not  permit  to  the  rest 
of  the  clergy  to  baptize,  —  as,  for  instance,  neither 
to  readers,  nor  singers,  nor  porters,  nor  ministers, 
—  but  to  the  bishops  and  presbyters  alone,  yet 
so  that  the  deacons   are  to   minister  to  them 


<  I  Cor.  xi.  3. 

S  Gen.  iii.  16. 

•j  ["  The  eternal  fitness  of  things."] 

'  Heb.  V.  4. 

8  2  Chron.  xxvi. 


430 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  III. 


therein.  But  those  who  venture  upon  it  shall 
undergo  the  punishment  of  the  companions  of 
Corah.'  We  do  not  permit  presbyters  to  ordain 
deacons,  or  deaconesses,  or  readers,  or  ministers, 
or  singers,  or  porters,  but  only  bishops ;  for  this 
is  the  ecclesiastical  order  and  harmony. 

THE   REJECTION   OF  ALL  UNCHARITABLE   ACTIONS. 

XII.  Now,  as  concerning  envy,  or  jealousy,  or 
evil-speaking,  or  strife,  or  the  love  of  contention, 
we  have  said  already  to  you,  that  these  are  alien 
from  a  Christian,  and  chiefly  in  the  case  of 
widows.  But  because  the  devil,  who  works  in 
men,  is  in  his  conduct  cunning,  and  full  of  vari- 
ous devices,  he  goes  to  those  that  are  not  truly 
widows,  as  formerly  to  Cain  (for  some  say  they 
are  widows,  but  do  not  perform  the  injunctions 
agreeable  to  the  widowhood  ;  as  neither  did  Cain 
discharge  the  duties  due  to  a  brother :  for  they 
do  not  consider  how  it  is  not  the  name  of  widow- 
hood that  will  bring  them  to  the  kingdom  of 
God,  but  true  faith  and  holy^  works).  But  if 
any  one  possesses  the  name  of  widowhood,  but 
does  the  works  of  the  adversary,  her  widowhood 
will  not  be  imputed,  but  she  will  be  thrust  out 
of  the  kingdom,  and  delivered  to  eternal  punish- 
ment. For  we  hear  that  some  widows  are  jeal- 
ous, envious  calumniators,  and  envious  at  the 
quiet  of  others.  Such  widows  as  these  are  not 
the  disciples  of  Christ,  nor  of  His  doctrine  ;  for 
it  becomes  them,  when  one  of  their  fellow-widows 
is  clothed  by  any  one,  or  receives  money,  or 
meat,  or  drink,  or  shoes,  at  the  sight  of  the  re- 
freshment of  their  sister  to  say  :  — 

HOW  THE  WIDOWS   ARE   TO    PRAY    FOR   THOSE   THAT 
SUPPLY   THEIR    NECESSITIES. 

xni.  Thou  art  blessed,  O  God,  who  hast  re- 
freshed my  fellow-widow.  Bless,  O  Lord,  and 
glorify  him  that  has  bestowed  these  things  upon 
her,  and  let  his  good  work  ascend  in  truth  to 
Thee,  and  remember  him  for  good  in  the  day  of 
his  visitation.  And  as  for  my  bishop,  who  has 
so  well  perfor7ned  his  duty  to  Thee,  and'^  has 
ordered  such  a  seasonable  alms  to  be  bestowed 
on  my  fellow-widow,  who  was  naked,  do  Thou 
increase  his  glory,  and  give  him  a  ^  crown  of  re- 
joicing in  the  day  of  the  revelation  of  Thy  visi- 
tation. In  the  same  manner,  let  the  widow  who 
has  received  the  alms  join  with  the  other  in 
praying  for  him  who  ministered  to  her. 

THAT  SHE  WHO  HAS  BEEN  KIND  TO  THE  POOR 
OUGHT  NOT  TO  MAKE  A  STIR  AMD  TELL  ABROAD 
HER  NAME,  ACCORDING  TO  THE  CONSTITUTION 
OF   THE   LORD. 

XIV.  But  if  any  woman  has  been  good,  let  her, 
as  a  prudent  person,  conceal  her  own  name,  not 

'  Num.  xvi. 

^  Instead  of  "  holy,"  one  V.  MS.  reads  "  divine." 

3  Not  in  one  V.  MS. 


sounding  a  trumpet  before  her,  that  her  alms 
may  be  with  God  in  secret,  as  the  Lord  says  : 
"  Thou,  when  thou  doest  thine  alms,  let  not  thy 
left  hand  know  what  thy  right  hand  doth,  that 
thine  alms  may  be  in  secret."  ^  And  let  the 
widow  pray  for  him  that  gave  her  the  alms,  who- 
soever he  be,  as  being  the  holy  altar  of  Christ ;  5 
and  "  the  Father,  who  seeth  in  secret,  will  render 
to  him  that  did  good  openly."  But  those  widows 
which  will  not  live  according  to  the  command  of 
God,  are  solicitous  and  inquisitive  what  deacon- 
ess it  is  that  gives  the  charity,  and  what  widows 
receive  it.  And  when  she  has  learned  those 
things,  she  murmurs  at  the  deaconess  who  dis- 
tributed the  charity,  saying.  Dost  not  thou  see 
that  I  am  in  more  distress,  and  want  of  thy 
charity?  Why,  therefore,  hast  thou  preferred 
her  before  me  ?  She  says  these  things  foolishly, 
not  understanding  that  this  does  not  depend  on 
the  will  of  man,  but  the  appointment  of  God. 
For  if  she  is  herself  a  witness  that  she  was  nearer, 
and,  upon  inquiry,  was  in  greater  want,  and  more 
naked  than  the  other,  she  ought  to  understand 
who  it  is  that  made  this  constitution,  and  to 
hold  her  peace,  and  not  to  murmur  at  the  dea- 
coness who  distributed  the  charity,  but  to  enter 
into  her  own  house,  and  to  cast  herself  prostrate 
on  her  face  to  make  supplication  to  God  that 
her  sin  may  be  forgiven  her.  For  God  com- 
manded the  deaconess  who  brought  the  charity 
not  to  proclaim  the  same,  and  this  widow  mur- 
mured because  she  did  not  publish  her  name, 
that  so  she  might  know  it,  and  run  to  receive ; 
nay,  did  not  only  murmur,  but  also  cursed  her, 
forgetting  Him  that  said  :  "  He  that  blesseth 
thee  is  blessed,  and  he  that  curseth  thee  is 
cursed."  ^  But  the  Lord  says  :  "  When  ye  enter 
into  an  house,  say,  Peace  be  to  this  house.  And 
if  the  son  of  peace  be  there,  your  peace  shall 
rest  upon  it ;  but  if  it  be  not  worthy,  your  peace 
shall  return  to  you."  7 

THAT  IT  DOES  NOT  BECOME  US  TO  REVILE  OUR 
NEIGHBOURS,  BECAUSE  CURSING  IS  CONTR.4RY  TO 
CHRISTIANITY. 

XV.  If,  therefore,  peace  returns  upon  those 
that  sent  it,  nay,  upon  those  that  before  had 
actually  given  it,  because  it  did  not  find  persons 
fit  to  receive  it,  much  rather  will  a  curse  return 
upon  the  head  of  him  that  unjustly  sent  it, 
because  he  to  whom  it  was  sent  was  not  worthy 
to  receive  it :  for  all  those  who  abuse  others 
without  a  cause  curse  themselves,  as  Solomon 
says  :  "  As  birds  and  sparrows  fly  away,  so  the 
curse  causeless  shall  not  come  upon  any  one."  ^ 
And   again    he    says :     "  Those    that    bring    re- 


*  Matt.  vi.  3,  4. 

5  Instead  of  "  Christ,"  one  V.  MS.  reads  "of  God." 

^  Gen.  xxvii.  29. 

7  Luke  X.  5,  6;   Matt.  x.  12,  13. 

8  Prov.  xxvi.  2. 


Sec.  II.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


431 


proaches  are  exceeding  foolish."  '  But  as  the 
bee,  a  creature  as  to  its  strength  feeble,  if  she 
stings  any  one,  loses  her  sting,  and  becomes  a 
drone  ;  in  the  same  manner  you  also,  whatsoever 
injustice  you  do  to  others,  will  bring  it  upon 
yourselves.  "  He  hath  graven  and  digged  a  pit, 
and  he  shall  fall  into  the  same  ditch  that  he  has 
made."^  And  again:  "He  that  diggeth  a  pit 
for  his  neighbour,  shall  fall  into  it."^  Where- 
fore he  that  avoids  a  curse,  let  him  not  curse 
another ;  for  "  what  thou  hatest  should  be  done 
to  thee,  do  not  thou  to  another."  •*  Wherefore 
admonish  the  widows  that  are  feeble-minded, 
strengthen  those  of  them  that  are  weak,  and 
praise  such  of  them  as  walk  in  holiness.  Let 
them  rather  bless,  and  not  calumniate.  Let 
them  make  peace,  and  not  stir  up  contention. 

SEC.    II. ON     DEACONS     AND     DEACONESSES,     THE 

REST    OF   THE    CLERGY,    AND    ON    BAPTISM. 

Let  not  therefore  either  a  bishop,  or  a  pres- 
byter, or  a  deacon,  or  any  one  else  of  the  sacer- 
dotal catalogue,  defile  his  tongue  with  calumny, 
lest  he  inherit  a  curse  instead  of  a  blessing  ;  and 
let  it  also  be  the  bishop's  business  and  care  that 
no  lay  person  utter  any  curse  :  for  he  ought  to 
take  care  of  all,  —  of  the  clergy,  of  the  virgins, 
of  the  widows,  of  the  laity.  For  which  reason, 
O  bishop,  do  thou  ordain  thy  fellow-workers, 
the  labourers  for  life  and  for  righteousness,  such 
deacons  as  are  pleasing  to  God,  such  whom  thou 
provest  to  be  worthy  among  all  the  people,  and 
such  as  shall  be  ready  for  the  necessities  of  their 
ministration.  Ordain  also  a  deaconess  who  is 
faithful  and  holy,  for  the  ministrations  towards 
women.  For  sometimes  he  cannot  send  a  dea- 
con, who  is  a  man,  to  the  women,  on  account 
of  unbelievers.  Thou  shalt  therefore  send  a 
woman,  a  deaconess,  on  account  of  the  imagina- 
tions of  the  bad.  For  we  stand  in  need  of  a 
woman,  a  deaconess,  for  many  xiecessities  ;  and 
first  in  the  baptism  of  women,  the  deacon  shall 
anoint  only  their  forehead  with  the  holy  oil,  and 
after  him  the  deaconess  shall  anoint  them  :  s  for 
there  is  no  necessity  that  the  women  should  be 
seen  by  the  men  ;  but  only  in  the  laying  on  of 
hands  the  bishop  shall  anoint  her  head,  as 
the  priests  and  kings  were  formerly  anointed, 
not  because  those  which  are  now  baptized  are 
ordained  priests,  but  as  being  Christians,  or 
anointed,  from  Christ  the  Anointed,  "a  royal 
priesthood,  and  an  holy  nation,  the  Church  of 
God,  the  pillar  and  ground  of  the  marriage- 
chamber,"  ^  who  formerly  were  not  a  people, 
but  now  are  beloved  and  chosen,  upon  whom  is 

'  Prov.  X.  18. 

2  Ps.  Vii.   13. 

3  Prov.  xxvi.  27. 

*  Tob.  iv.  16. 

S   [Compare  Jas.  v.  14.] 

*  I  Pet.  ii.  9;   I  Tim.  ill.  15. 


called  His  new  name,^  as  Isaiah  the  prophet 
witnesses,  saying  :  "  And  they  shall  call  the  peo- 
ple by  His  new  name,  which  the  Lord  shall 
name  for  them."  ^ 

CONCERNING    THE     SACRED     INITIATION     OF     HOLY 
BAPTISM, 

XVI.  Thou  therefore,  O  bishop,  according  to 
that  type,  shalt  anoint  the  head  of  those  that  are 
to  be  baptized,  whether  they  be  men  or  women, 
with  the  holy  oil,  for  a  type  of  the  spiritual  bap- 
tism. After  that,  either  thou,  O  bishop,  or  a 
presbyter  that  is  under  thee,  shall  in  the  solemn 
form  name  over  them  the  Father,  and  Son,  and 
Holy  Spirit,  and  shall  dip  them  in  the  water.; 
and  let  a  deacon  receive  the  man,  and  a  deacon- 
ess the  woman,  that  so  the  conferring  of  this  in- 
violable seal  may  take  place  with  a  becoming 
decency.  And  after  that,  let  the  bishop  anoint 
those  that  are  baptized  with  ointment. 

WHAT  IS  THE  MEANING  OF  BAPTISM  INTO  CHRIST, 
AND  ON  WHAT  ACCOUNT  EVERYTHING  IS  THERE 
SAID   OR    DONE. 

XVII.  This  baptism,  therefore,  is  given  into 
the  death  of  Jesus  :  9  the  water  is  instead  of  the 
burial,  and  the  oil  instead  of  the  Holy  Ghost ; 
the  seal  instead  of  the  cross ;  the  ointment  is 
the  confirmation  of  the  confession  ;  the  mention 
of  the  Father  as  of  the  Author  and  Sender ;  the 
joint  mention  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  of  the  wit- 
ness ;  the  descent  into  the  water  the  dying  to- 
gether with  Christ ;  the  ascent  out  of  the  water 
the  rising  again  with  Him.  The  Father  is  the 
God  over  all ;  Christ  is  the  only-begotten  God, 
the  beloved  Son,  the  Lord  of  glory  ;  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  the  Comforter,  who  is  sent  by  Christ, 
and  taught  by  Him,  and  proclaims  Him. 

OF   WH.\T   CHAR.ACTER    HE    OUGHT    TO     BE   WHO     IS 
INITIATED. 

XVIII.  But  let  him  that  is  to  be  baptized  be 
free  from  all  ini(iuity;  one  that  has  left  off  to 
work  sin,  the  friend  of  God,  the  enemy  of  the 
devil,  the  heir  of  God  the  Father,  the  fellow- 
heir  of  His  Son  ;  one  that  has  renounced  Satan, 
and  the  demons,  and  Satan's  deceits ;  chaste, 
pure,  holy,  beloved  of  God,  the  son  of  God, 
praying  as  a  son  to  his  father,  and  saying,  as 
from  the  common  congregation  of  the  faithfiil, 
thus  :  "  Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven,  hal- 
lowed be  Thy  name  ;  Thy  kingdom  come  ;  Thy 
will  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven  ;  give 
us  this  day  our  daily  bread  ;  and  forgive  us  our 
debts,  as  we  forgive  our  debtors ;  and  lead  us 
not  into  temptation,  but  deliver  us  from  the  evil 


7  The  words  from  "  upon  whom  "  to  the  end  of  the  chapter  are 
omitted  in  one  V.  Ms. 

8  Isa.  Ixii.  2. 

9  /  iJ.  Rom.  vi.  3. 


432 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  III. 


one  :  for  Thine  is  the  kingdom,  and  the  power, 
and  the  glory,  for  ever.     Amen."  ' 

WHAT   ARE   THE   CHARACTERS   OF   A    DEACON. 

XIX.  Let  the  deacons  be  in  all  things  unspot- 
ted, as  the  bishop  himself  is  to  be,  only  more 
active ;  in  number  according  to  the  largeness 
of  the  Church,  that  they  may  minister  to  the 
infirm  as  workmen  that  are  not  ashamed.  And 
let  the  deaconess  be  diligent  in  taking  care  of 
the  women ;  but  both  of  them  ready  to  carry 
messages,  to  travel  about,  to  minister,  and  to 
serve,  as  spake  Isaiah  concerning  the  Lord, 
saying:  "To  justify  the  righteous,  who  serves 
many  faithfully."  ^  Let  every  one  therefore 
know  his  proper  place,  and  discharge  it  dili- 
gently with  one  consent,  with  one  mind,  as 
knowing  the  reward  of  their  ministration  ;  but 
let  them  not  be  ashamed  to  minister  to  those 
that  are  in  want,  as  even  our  "  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister, 
and  to  give  His  life  a  ransom  for  many."  ^  So 
therefore  ought  they  also  to  do,  and  not  to  scru- 
ple it,  if  they  should  be  obliged  to  lay  down 
their  life  for  a  brother.  For  the  Lord  and  our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ  did  not  scruple  to  "  lay 
down  His  life,"  as  Himself  says,  "  for  His 
friends."'*  If,  therefore,  the  Lord  of  heaven 
and  earth  underwent  all  His  sufferings  for  us, 
how  then  do  you  make  a  difficulty  to  minister 
to  such  as  are  in  want,  who  ought  to  imitate 
Him  who  underwent  servitude,  and  want,  and 
stripes,  and  the  cross  for  us  ?  We  ought  there- 
fore also  to  serve  the  brethren,  in  imitation  of 
Christ.  For  says  He  :  "  He  that  will  be  great 
among  you,  let  him  be  your  minister ;  and  he 
that  will  be  first  among  you,  let  him  be  your 
servant."  5  For  so  did  He  really,  and  not  in 
word   only,   fulfil    the    prediction    of,    "  serving 


'  Matt.  vi.  9,  etc. 

2  Isa.  liii.  II,  LXX. 

3  Matt.  XX.  28. 
*  John  XV.  13. 

5  Matt.  XX.  26,  27. 


many  faithfully."^  For  "when  He  had  taken  a 
towel,  He  girded  Himself.  Afterward  He  puts 
water  into  a  bason ;  and  as  we  were  sitting  at 
meat.  He  came  and  washed  the  feet  of  us  all, 
and  wiped  them  with  the  towel."  ^  By  doing 
this  He  demonstrated  to  us  His  kindness  and 
brotherly  affection,  that  so  we  also  might  do  the 
same  to  one  another.  If,  therefore,  our  Lord 
and  Master  so  humbled  Himself,  how  can  you, 
the  labourers  of  the  truth,  and  administrators 
of  piety,  be  ashamed  to  do  the  same  to  such  of 
the  brethren  as  are  weak  and  infirm  ?  Minister 
therefore  with  a  kind  mind,  not  murmuring  nor 
mutinying ;  for  ye  do  not  do  it  on  the  account 
of  man,  but  on  the  account  of  God,  and  shall 
receive  from  Him  the  reward  of  your  ministry 
in  the  day  of  your  visitation.  It  is  your  duty 
who  are  deacons  to  visit  all  those  who  stand  in 
need  of  visitation.  And  tell  your  bishop  of  all 
those  that  are  in  affliction ;  for  you  ought  to  be 
like  his  soul  and  senses  —  active  and  attentive 
in  all  things  to  him  ^  as  to  your  bishop,  and 
father^  and  master. 

THAT  A  BISHOP  OUGHT  TO  BE  ORDAINED  BY  THREE 
OR  BY  TWO  BISHOPS,  BUT  NOT  BY  ONE;  FOR 
THAT    WOULD    BE    INVALID. 

XX.  We  command  that  a  bishop  be  ordained 
by  three  bishops,  or  at  least  by  two  ;  but  it  is 
not  lawful  that  he  be  set  over  you  by  one ;  for 
the  testimony  of  two  or  three  witnesses  is  more 
firm  and  secure.  But  a  presbyter  and  a  deacon 
are  to  be  ordained  by  one  bishop  and  the  rest 
of  the  clergy.  Nor  must  either  a  presbyter  or 
a  deacon  ordain  from  the  laity  into  the  clergy ; 
but  the  presbyter  is  only  to  teach,  to  offer,  to 
baptize,  to  bless  the  people,  and  the  deacon  is 
to  minister  to  the  bishop,  and  to  the  presbyters, 
that  is,  to  do  the  office  of  a  ministering  deacon, 
but  not  to  meddle  with  the  other  offices. 


6  Isa.  liii.  II. 

7  John  -xiii.  4,  5. 

8  The  portions  in  italics  are  not  in  one  V.  MS. 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 

BOOK    IV. 


SEC.    I.  —  ON   HELPING   THE   POOR. 

THOSE  WHO  HAVE  NO  CHILDREN  SHOULD  ADOPT 
ORPHANS,  AND  TREAT  THEM  AS  THEIR  OWN 
CHILDREN. 

I.  When  any  Christian  becomes  an  orphan, 
whether  it  be  a  young  man  or  a  maid,  it  is  good 
that  some  one  of  the  brethren  who  is  without  a 
child  should  take  the  young  man,  and  esteem 
him  in  the  place  of  a  son ;  and  he  that  has  a 
son  about  the  same  age,  and  that  is  marriage- 
able, should  marry  the  maid  to  him  :  for  they 
which  do  so  perform  a  great  work,  and  become 
fathers  to  the  orphans,  and  shall  receive  the 
reward  of  this  charity  from  the  Lord  God.  But 
if  any  one  that  walks  in  the  way  of  man-pleasing 
is  rich,  and  therefore  is  ashamed  of  orphans,  the 
Father  of  orphans  and  Judge  of  widows  will 
make  provision  for  the  orphans,  but  himself 
shall  have  such  an  heir  as  will  spend  what  he 
has  spared  ;  and  it  shall  happen  to  him  accord- 
ing as  it  is  said  :  "  What  things  the  holy  people 
have  not  eaten,  those  shall  the  Assyrians  eat." 
As  also  Isaiah  says  :  "  Your  land,  strangers  de- 
vour it  in  your  presence."  ' 

HOW    the     bishop    ought    TO     PROVIDE     FOR    THE 
ORPHANS. 

II.  Do  you  therefore,  O  bishops,  be  solicitous 
about  their  maintenance,  being  in  nothing  want- 
ing to  them  ;  exhibiting  to  the  orphans  the  care 
of  parents  ;  to  the  widows  the  care  of  husbands  ; 
to  those  of  suitable  age,  marriage  ;  to  the  artifi- 
cer, work  ;  to  the  unable,  commiseration  ;  to  the 
strangers,  an  house ;  to  the  hungry,  food ;  to 
the  thirsty,  drink  ;  to  the  naked,  clothing ;  to 
the  sick,  visitation  ;  to  the  prisoners,  assistance. 
Besides  these,  have  a  greater  care  of  the  orphans, 
that  nothing  may  be  wanting  to  them  ;  and  that 
as  to  the  maiden,  till  she  arrives  at  the  age  of 
marriage,  and  ye  give  her  in  marriage  to  a 
brother :  to  the  young  man  assistance,  that  he 
may  learn  a  trade,  and  may  be  maintained  by 
the  advantage  arising  from  it ;  that  so,  when  he 

'  Isa.  i.  7. 


is  dextrous  in  the  management  of  it,  he  may 
thereby  be  enabled  to  buy  himself  the  tools  of 
his  trade,  that  so  he  may  no  longer  burden  any 
of  the  brethren,  or  their  sincere  love  to  him,  but 
may  support  himself:  for  certainly  he  is  a  happy 
man  who  is  able  to  support  himself,  and  does 
not  take  up  the  place  of  the  orphan,  the  stran- 
ger, and  the  widow. 

WHO  OUGHT  TO  BE  SUPPORTED  ACCORDING   TO    THE 
lord's   CONSTITUTION. 

III.  Since  even  the  Lord  said  :  "  The  giver 
was  happier  than  the  receiver."  -  For  it  is 
again  said  by  Him  :  "  Woe  to  those  that  have, 
and  receive  in  hypocrisy ;  or  who  are  able  to 
support  themselves,  yet  will  receive  of  others  : 
for  both  of  them  shall  give  an  account  to  the 
Lord  God  in  the  day  of  judgment."  But  an 
orphan  who,  by  reason  of  his  youth,  or  he  that 
by  the  feebleness  of  old  age,  or  the  incidence 
of  a  disease,  or  the  bringing  up  of  many  chil- 
dren, receives  alms,  such  a  one  shall  not  only 
not  be  blamed,  but  shall  be  commended  :  for 
he  shall  be  esteemed  an  altar  to  God,  and  be 
honoured  by  God,  because  of  his  zealous  and 
constant  prayers  for  those  that  give  to  him  ;  not 
receiving  idly,  but  to  the  uttermost  of  his  power 
recompensing  what  is  given  him  by  his  prayer. 
Such  a  one  therefore  shall  be  blessed  by  God 
in  eternal  life.  But  he  that  hath,  and  receives 
in  hypocrisy  or  through  idleness,  instead ^  of 
working  and  assisting  others,  shall  be  obnoxious 
to  punishment  before  God,  because  he  has 
snatched  away  the  morsel  of  the  needy.^ 

OF   THE    LOVE    OF    MONEY. 

IV.  For  he  that  has  money  and  does  not  be- 
stow it  upon  others,  nor  use  it  himself,  is  like  the 
serpent,  which  they  say  sleeps  over  the  treasures  ; 
and  of  him  is  that  scripture  true  which  says, 
"  He  has  gathered  riches  of  which  he  shall  not 


^  Acts  XX.  ■^S- 

3  |lhe  early  Church  had  a  constant  struggle  with  professional 
paupers.  This  entire  book  is  a  valuable  contribution  to  social  ethics. 
The  problems  of  to-day  confronted  the  Church  then.  Few  wiser  coun- 
sels have  been  recorded.  —  R.J 

433 


434 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  IV. 


taste  ;  "  '  and  they  will  be  of  no  use  to  him  when 
he  perishes  justly.  For  it  says,  "  Riches  will  not 
profit  in  the  day  of  wrath."  For  such  a  one 
has  not  believed  in  God,  but  in  his  own  gold ; 
esteeming  that  his  God,  and  trusting  therein. 
Such  a  one  is  a  dissembler  of  the  truth,  an  ac- 
cepter of  persons,  unfaithful,  cheating,  fearful, 
unmanly,  light,  of  no  value,  a  complainer,  ever 
in  pain,  his  own  enemy,  and  nobody's  friend. 
Such  a  one's  money  shall  perish,  and  a  man 
that  is  a  stranger  shall  consume  it,  either  by  theft 
while  he  is  alive,  or  by  inheritance  when  he  is 
dead.  "  For  riches  unjustly  gotten  shall  be 
vomited  up."  ^ 

WITH    WHAT     FEAR     MEN     OUGHT    TO     PARTAKE     OF 
THE    lord's    oblations. 

V.  We  exhort,  therefore,  the  widows  and  or- 1 
phans  to  partake  of  those  things  that  are  bestowed 
upon  them  with  all  fear,  and  all  pious  reverence, 
and  to  return  thanks  to  God  who  gives  food  to 
the  needy,  and  to  lift  up  their  eyes  to  Him.  For, 
says  He,  "  Which  of  you  shall  eat,  or  who  shall 
drink  without  Him  ?  For  He  openeth  His  hand, 
and  filleth  every  living  thing  with  His  kindness  : 
giving  wheat  to  the  young  men,  and  wine  to  the 
maidens,  and  oil  for  the  joy  of  the  living,  grass 
for  the  cattle,  and  green  herb  for  the  service  of 
men,  flesh  for  the  wild  beasts,  seeds  for  the  birds, 
and  suitable  food  for  all  creatures."  ^  Wherefore 
the  Lord  says  :  •♦  "  Consider  the  fowls  of  heaven,'' 
that  they  sow  not,  neither  do  they  reap  nor  gather 
into  barns,  and  your  Father  feedeth  them.  Are 
not  ye  much  better  than  they?  Be  not  therefore 
solicitous,  saying.  What  shall  we  eat?  or  what 
shall  we  drink?  For  your  Father  knoweth  that 
ye  have  need  of  all  these  things."^  Since  ye 
therefore  enjoy  such  a  providential  care  from 
Him,  and  are  partakers  of  the  good  things  that 
are  derived  from  Him,  you  ought  to  return  praise 
to  Him  that  receives  the  orphan  and  the  widow, 
to  Almighty  God,  through  His  beloved  Son  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord  \  through  whom ''  glory  be  to 
God  in  spirit  and  truth  for  ever.     Amen. 

WHOSE     OBLATIONS     ARE     TO     BE     RECEIVED,     AND 
WHOSE   NOT   TO    BE   RECEIVED. 

VI.  Now  the  bishop  ought  to  know  whose  ob- 
lations he  ought  to  receive,  and  whose  he  ought 
not.  For  he  is  to  avoid  corrupt  dealers,  and  not 
receive  their  gifts.  "  For  a  corrupt  dealer  shall 
not  be  justified  from  sin."  ^     For  of  them  it  was 

1  Job  XX.  18,  LXX.;   Prov.  xi.  4. 

2  Job  XX.  15,  LXX. 

3  Eccles.  ii.  25,  LXX.;  Ps.  cxlv.  16;  Zech.  ix.  17,  LXX.;  Ps. 
civ.  14,  15. 

*  One  V.  MS.  reads,  "  Thus  also  did  the  Lord  exhort  His  disci- 
ples, saying." 

i  The  words  in  italics  are  not  in  one  V.  ms. 

*  Matt.  vi.  26,  31,  32. 

'  One  V.  MS.  reads,  "  with  whom  be  glory  to  Him,  with  the 
Spirit." 

*  Ecclus.  xxvi.  29. 


that  Isaiah  reproached  Israel,  and  said,  "Thy 
corrupt  dealers  mingle  wine  with  water."  9  He 
is  also  to  avoid  fornicators,  for  "  thou  shalt  not 
offer  the  hire  of  an  harlot  to  the  Lord."  '°  He  is 
also  to  avoid  extortioners,  and  such  as  covet 
other  men's  goods,  and  adulterers ;  for  the  sac- 
rifices of  such  as  these  are  abominable  with  God. 
Also  those  that  oppress  the  widow  and  overbear 
the  orphan,  and  fill  prisons  with  the  innocent, 
and  abuse  their  own  servants  wickedly,  I  mean 
with  stripes,  and  hunger,  and  hard  service,  nay, 
destroy  whole  cities ;  do  thou,  O  bishop,  avoid 
such  as  these,  and  their  odious  oblations.  Thou 
shalt  also  refuse  rogues,  and  such  pleaders  that 
plead  on  the  side  of  injustice,  and  idol-makers, 
and  thieves,  and  unjust  publicans,  and  those  that 
deceive  by  false  balances  and  deceitful  measures, 
and  a  soldier  who  is  a  false  accuser  and  not  con- 
tent with  his  wages,  but  does  violence  to  the 
needy,  a  murderer,  a  cut-throat,  and  an  unjust 
judge,  a  subverter  of  causes,  him  that  lies  in  wait 
for  men,  a  worker  of  abominable  wickedness,  a 
drunkard,  a  blasphemer,  a  sodomite,  an  usurer, 
and  every  one  that  is  wicked  and  opposes  the 
will  of  God.  For  the  Scripture  says  that  all  such 
as  these  are  abominable  with  God.  For  those 
that  receive  from  such  persons,  and  thereby  sup- 
port the  widows  and  orphans,  shall  be  obno.xious 
to  the  judgment-seat  of  God ;  as  Adonias  the 
prophet,  in  the  book  of  Kings,  when  he  dis- 
obeyed God,  and  both  "  eat  bread  and  drank 
water  in  the  place  which  the  Lord  had  forbid 
him,"  "  because  of  the  impiety  of  Jeroboam,  was 
slain  by  a  lion.  For  the  bread  which  is  distrib- 
uted to  the  widows  from  labour  is  better,  though 
it  be  short  and  little,  than  that  from  injustice 
and  false  accusation,  though  it  be  much  and  fine. 
For  the  Scripture  says  :  "  Better  is  a  little  to  the 
righteous,  than  much  riches  of  the  sinners."  '^ 
Now,  although  a  widow,  who  eats  and  is  filled 
from  the  impious,  pray  for  them,  she  shall  not 
be  heard.  For  God,  who  knows  the  heart,  with 
judgment  has  declared  concerning  the  impious, 
saying,  "  If  Moses  and  Samuel  stand  before  my 
face  in  their  behalf,  I  will  not  hear  them  ; "  '^  and, 
"  Pray  thou  not  for  this  people,  and  do  not  ask 
mercy  for  them,  and  do  not  intercede  wuth  me 
for  them,  for  I  will  not  hear  thee."  "^ 

THAT  THE  OBLATIONS  OF  THE  UNWORTHY,  WHILE 
THEY  ARE  SUCH,  DO  NOT  ONLY  NOT  PROPITIATE 
GOD,  BUT,  ON  THE  CONTRARY,  PROVOKE  HIM  TO 
INDIGNATION. 

VII.  And  not  these  only,  but  those  that  are  in 
sin  and  have  not  repented,  will  not  only  not  be 


9  Isa.  i.  22. 
'°  Deut.  xxiii.  i8. 
"  I  Kings  xiii. 
'^  Ps.  xxxvii.  i6. 
'3  Jer.  XV.  I. 
'^  Jer.  vii.  16. 


Sec.  II.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


435 


heard  when  they  pray,  but  will  provoke  God  to 
anger,  as  putting  Him  in  mind  of  their  own 
wickedness.  Avoid  therefore  such  ministrations, 
as  you  would  the  price  of  a  dog  and  the  hire  of 
an  harlot ;  for  both  of  them  are  forbidden  by 
the  laws'.  For  neither  did  Elisha  receive  the 
presents  which  were  brought  by  Hazael,"  nor 
Ahijah  those  from  Jeroboam  ;  ^  but  if  the  proph- 
ets of  God  did  not  admit  of  presents  from  the 
impious,  it  is  reasonable,  O  bishops,  that  neither  i 
should  you.  Nay,  when  Simon  the  magician 
offered  money  to  me  Peter  and  John,^  and  tried 
to  obtain  the  invaluable  grace  by  purchase,  we 
did  not  admit  it,  but  bound  him  with  ever- 
lasting maledictions,  because  he  thought  to 
possess  the  gift  of  God,  not  by  a  pious  mind 
towards  God,  but  by  the  price  of  money. 
Avoid  therefore  such  oblations  to  God's  altar 
as  are  not  from  a  good  conscience.  For  says 
He  :  "  Abstain  from  all  injustice,  and  thou  shalt  | 
not  fear,  and  trembling  shall  not  come  nigh 
thee."  ■♦ 


THAT  IT  IS  BETTER  TO  .AFFORD,  THOUGH  IT  BE 
INCONSIDERABLE  AND  FEW,  CONTRIBUTIONS  TO 
THE  WIDOWS  FROM  OUR  OWN  LABOURS,  THAN 
THOSE  WHICH  ARE  MANY  AND  LARGE  RECEIVED 
FROM  THE  UNGODLY  ;  FOR  IT  IS  BETTER  TO 
PERISH  BY  FAMINE  THAN  TO  RECEIVE  AN  OB- 
LATION   FROM    THE    UNGODLY. 

viii.  But  if  ye  say  that  those  who  give  alms 
are  such  as  these,  and  if  we  do  not  receive  from 
them,  whence  shall  we  administer  to  the  widows? 
And  whence  shall  the  poor  among  the  people 
be  maintained?  Ye  shall  hear  from  us,  that 
therefore  have  ye  received  the  gift  of  the  Le- 
vites,  the  oblations  of  your  people,  that  ye  might 
have  enough  for  yourselves,  and  for  those  that 
are  in  want ;  and  that  ye  might  not  be  so  strait- 
ened as  to  receive  from  the  wicked.  But  if  the 
churches  be  so  straitened,  it  is  better  to  perish 
than  to  receive  anything  from  the  enemies  of 
God,  to  the  reproach  and  abuse  of  His  friends. 
For  of  such  as  these  the  prophet  speaks  :  "  Let 
not  the  oil  of  a  sinner  moisten  my  head."  5  Do 
ye  therefore  examine  such  persons,  and  receive 
from  such  as  walk  holily,  and  supply  the  af- 
flicted. But  receive  not  from  those  that  are 
excommunicated,  until  they  are  thought  worthy 
to  become  the  members  of  the  Church.  But  if 
a  gift  be  wanting,  inform  the  brethren,  and 
make  a  collection  from  them,  and  thence 
minister  to  the  orphans  and  widows  in  right- 
eousness. 


'  2  Kings  viii.     [Offerings  to  God  are  privileges  of  saints.] 
'  I  Kings  xiv. 
3  Acts  viii. 
*  Isa.  liv.  14. 
5  Ps.  cxli.  5. 


THAT  THE  PEOPLE  OUGHT  TO  BE  EXHORTED  BY 
THE  PRIEST  TO  DO  GOOD  TO  THE  NEEDY,  AS 
SAYS    SOLOMON   THE    WISE. 

IX.  Say  unto  the  people  under  thee  what  Solo- 
mon the  wise  says  :  "  Honour  the  Lord  out  of 
thy  just  labours,  and  pay  thy  first-fruits  to  Him 
out  of  thy  fruits  of  righteousness,  that  thy  gar- 
ners may  be  filled  with  fulness  of  wheat,  and  thy 
presses  may  burst  out  with  wine."  ^  Therefore 
maintain  and  clothe  those  that  are  in  want  from 
the  righteous  labour  of  the  faithful.  And  such 
sums  of  money  as  are  collected  from  them  in 
the  manner  aforesaid,  appoint  to  be  laid  out  in 
the  redemption  of  the  saints,  the  deliverance 
of  slaves,  and  of  captives,  and  of  prisoners,  and 
of  those  that  have  been  abused,  and  of  those 
that  have  been  condemned  by  tyrants  to  single 
combat  and  death  on  account  of  the  name  of 
Christ.  For  the  Scripture  says  :  "  Deliver  those 
that  are  led  to  death,  and  redeem  those  that  are 
ready  to  be  slain,  do  not  spare."  ? 

A  CONSTITUTION,  THAT  IF  ANY  ONE  OF  THE  UN- 
GODLY BY  FORCE  WILL  CAST  MONEY  TO  THE 
PRIESTS,  THEY  SPEND  IT  IN  WOOD  AND  COALS, 
BUT   NOT    IN    FOOD. 

X.  But  if  at  any  time  you  be  forced  unwilling- 
ly to  receive  money  from  any  ungodly  person, 
lay  it  out  in  wood  and  coals,  that  so  neither  the 
widow  nor  the  orphan  may  receive  any  of  it.  or 
be  forced  to  buy  with  it  either  meat  or  drink, 
which  it  is  unfit  to  do.  For  it  is  reasonable  that 
such  gifts  of  the  ungodly  should  be  fuel  for  the 
fire,  and  not  food  for  the  pious.  And  this 
method  is  plainly  appointed  by  the  law,*^  when 
it  calls  a  sacrifice  kept  too  long  a  thing  not  fit 
to  be  eaten,  and  commands  it  to  be  consumed 
with  fire.  For  such  oblations  are  not  evil  in 
their  nature,  but  on  account  of  the  mind  of 
those  that  bring  them.  And  this  we  ordain, 
that  we  may  not  reject  those  that  come  to  us,  as 
knowing  that  the  common  conversation  of  the 
pious  has  often  been  very  profitable  to  the  un- 
godly, but  religious  communion  with  them  is 
alone  hurtful.  And  so  much,  beloved,  shall 
suffice  to  have  spoken  to  you  in  order  to  your 
security. 

SEC.    II. ON    DOMESTIC   AND    SOCIAL    LIFE. 

OF    PARENTS   AND    CHILDREN. 

XI.  Ye  fathers,  educate  your  children  in  the 
Lord,  bringing  them  up  in  the  nurture  and  admo- 
nition of  the  Lord  ;  and  teach  them  such  trades 
as  are  agreeable  and  suitable  to  the  word,  lest 


6  Prov.  lit.  9,  etc. 
'  Prov.  xxiv.  II, 
*  Lev.  xix.  6. 


436 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  IV. 


they  by  such  opportunity  become  extravagant, 
and  continue  without  punishment  from  their 
parents,  and  so  get  relaxation  before  their  time, 
and  go  astray  from  that  which  is  good.  Where- 
fore be  not  afraid  to  reprove  them,  and  to  teach 
them  wisdom  with  severity.  For  your  correc- 
tions will  not  kill  them,  but  rather  preserve  them. 
As  Solomon  says  somewhere  in  the  book  of  Wis- 
dom :  "  Chasten  thy  son,  and  he  will  refresh 
thee ;  so  wilt  thou  have  good  hope  of  him. 
Thou  verily  shalt  smite  him  with  the  rod,  and 
shalt  deliver  his  soul  from  death."  '  And  again, 
says  the  same  Solomon  thus,  "  He  that  spareth 
his  rod.  hateth  his  son  ; "  ^  and  afterwards,  "  Beat 
his  sides  whilst  he  is  an  infant,  lest  he  be  hard- 
ened and  disobey  thee."  ^  He,  therefore,  that 
neglects  to  admonish  and  instruct  his  own  son, 
hates  his  own  child.  Do  you  therefore  teach 
your  children  the  word  of  the  Lord.  Bring  them 
under  with  cutting  stripes,  and  make  them  sub- 
ject from  their  infancy,  teaching  them  the  Holy 
Scriptures,  which  are  Christian  and  divine,  and 
delivering  to  them  every  sacred  writing,  "  not 
giving  them  such  liberty  that  they  get  the  mas- 
tery,"'' and  act  against  your  opinion,  not  per- 
mitting them  to  club  together  for  a  treat  with 
their  equals.  For  so  they  will  be  turned  to  dis- 
orderly courses,  and  will  fall  into  fornication  ; 
and  if  this  happen  by  the  carelessness  of  their 
parents,  those  that  begat  them  will  be  guilty  of 
their  souls.  For  if  the  offending  children  get 
into  the  company  of  debauched  persons  by  the 
negligence  of  those  that  begat  them,  they  will 
not  be  punished  alone  by  themselves  ;  but  their 
parents  also  will  be  condemned  on  their  account. 
For  this  cause  endeavour,  at  the  time  when  they 
are  of  an  age  fit  for  marriage,  to  join  them  in 
wedlock,  and  settle  them  together,  lest  in  the 
heat  and  fervour  of  their  age  their  course  of  life 
become  dissolute,  and  you  be  required  to  give 
an  account  by  the  Lord  God  in  the  day  of 
judgment. 

OF  SERVANTS  AND  MASTERS. 

XII.  But  as  to  servants,  what  can  we  say  more 
than  that  the  slave  bring  a  good  will  to  his  mas- 
ter, with  the  fear  of  God,  although  he  be  impious 
and  wicked, 5  but  yet  not  to  yield  any  compliance 
as  to  his  worship?     And  let  the  master  love  his 


'  Prov.  xxix.  17,  xix.  18,  xxiii.  14. 

*  Prov.  xiil.  24. 

3  Ecclus.  XXX.  12. 

*  Ecclus.  XXX.  II. 

S  See  Eph.  vi.  5;  i  Pet.  ii.  18. 


servant,  although  he  be  his  superior.  Let  him 
consider  wherein  they  are  equal,  even  as  he  is  a 
man.  And  let  him  that  has  a  believing  master^ 
love  him  both  as  his  master,  and  as  of  the  same 
faith,  and  as  a  father,  but  still  with  the  preserva- 
tion of  his  authority  as  his  master :  "  not  as  an 
eye-servant,  but  as  a  lover  of  his  master ;  as 
knowing  that  God  will  recompense  to  him  for 
his  subjection."  ?  In  like  manner,  let  a  master 
who  has  a  believing  servant  love  him  as  a  son  or 
as  a  brother,  on  account  of  their  communion  in 
the  faith,  but  still  preserving  the  difference  of  a 
servant. 

IN   WHAT  THINGS   WE   OUGHT    TO    BE    SUBJECT    TO 
THE    RULERS   OF   THIS   WORLD. 

XIIL  Be  ye  subject  to  all  royal  power  and 
dominion  in  things  which  are  pleasing  to  God, 
as  to  the  ministers  of  God,  and  the  punishers  of 
the  ungodly.*^  Render  all  the  fear  that  is  due  to 
them,  all  offerings,  all  customs,  all  honour,  gifts, 
and  taxes.9  For  this  is  God's  command,  that 
you  owe  nothing  to  any  one  but  the  pledge  of 
love,  which  God  has  commanded  by  Christ. '° 

OF   VIRGINS. 

XIV.  Concerning  virginity  we  have  received  no 
commandment ; ' '  but  we  leave  it  to  the  power 
of  those  that  are  willing,  as  a  vow  :  exhorting 
them  so  far  in  this  matter  that  they  do  not  prom- 
ise anything  rashly  ;  since  Solomon  says,  "  It  is 
better  not  to  vow,  than  to  vow  and  not  pay."  '^ 
Let  such  a  virgin,  therefore,  be  holy  in  body 
and  soul,  as  the  temple  of  God,'^  as  the  house  of 
Christ,  as  the  habitation  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  For 
she  that  vows  ought  to  do  such  works  as  are 
suitable  to  her  vow ;  and  to  show  that  her  vow 
is  real,  and  made  on  account  of  leisure  for  piety, 
not  to  cast  a  reproach  on  marriage.  Let  her 
not  be  a  gadder  abroad,  nor  one  that  rambles 
about  unseasonably ;  not  double-minded,  but 
grave,  continent,  sober,  pure,  avoiding  the  con- 
versation of  many,  and  especially  of  those  that 
are  of  ill  reputation.*'* 


6  Col.  iv.  I.     See  1  Tim.  vi.  2. 

7  Eph.  vi.  6;  Col.  iii.  22,  24. 

8  See  I  Pet.  ii.  13;   Tit.  iii.  i. 

9  Rom.  xiii.  i,  4,  7. 
'"  Rom.  xiii.  8. 

"  See  1  Cor.  vii.  25. 

'^  Eccles.  V.  5. 

■3  I  Cor.  vii.  34. 

•■•  [The  absence  of  any  marked  ascetic  tone  in  this  passage  is  in 
sharp  contrast  with  the  pseudo-Clementine  Epistles  concerning  vir- 
ginity.    See  vol.  viii.  —  R.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 

BOOK    V. 


SEC.   I.  —  CONCERNING  THE   MARTYRS. 

THAT  IT  IS  REASONABLE  FOR  THE  FAITHFUL  TO 
SUPPLY  THE  WANTS  OF  THOSE  WHO  ARE  AF- 
FLICTED FOR  THE  SAKE  OF  CHRIST  BY  THE 
UNBELIEVERS,  ACCORDING  TO  THE  CONSTITUTION 
OF   THE    LORD. 

L  If  any  Christian,  on  account  of  the  name 
of  Christ,  and  love  and  faith  towards  God,  be 
condemned  by  the  ungodly  to  the  games,  to  the 
beasts,  or  to  the  mines,  do  not  ye  overlook  him  ; 
but  send  to  him  from  your  labour  and  your  very 
sweat  for  his  sustenance,  and  for  a  reward  to  the 
soldiers,  that  he  may  be  eased  and  be  taken  care 
of;  that,  as  far  as  lies  in  your  power,  your  blessed 
brother  may  not  be  afflicted  :  for  he  that  is  con- 
demned for  the  name  of  the  Lord  God  is  an  holy 
martyr,  a  brother  of  the  Lord,  the  son  of  the 
Highest,  a  receptacle  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  by 
whom  every  one  of  the  faithful  has  received  the 
illumination  of  the  glory  of  the  holy  Gospel,  by 
being  vouchsafed  the  incorruptible  crown,  and 
the  testimony  of  Christ's  sufferings,  and  the  fel- 
lowship of  His  blood,  to  be  made  conformable 
to  the  death  of  Christ  for  the  adoption  of  chil- 
dren. For  this  cause  do  you,  all  ye  of  the  faith- 
ful, by  your  bishop,  minister  to  the  saints  of  your 
substance  and  of  your  labour.  But  if  any  one 
has  not,  let  him  fast  a  day,  and  set  apart  that, 
and  order  it  for  the  saints.  But  if  any  one  has 
superfluities,  let  him  minister  more  to  them  ac- 
cording to  the  proportion  of  his  ability.  But  if 
he  can  possibly  sell  all  his  livelihood,  and  redeem 
them  out  of  prison,  he  will  be  blessed,  and  a 
friend  of  Christ.  For  if  he  that  gives  his  goods 
to  the  poor  be  perfect,  supposing  his  knowledge 
of  divine  things,  much  more  is  he  so  that  does 
it  on  account  of  the  martyrs.  For  such  a  one 
is  worthy  of  God,  and  will  fulfil  His  will  by  sup- 
plying those  who  have  confessed  Him  before 
nations  and  kings,  and  the  children  of  Israel ; 
concerning  whom  our  Lord  declared,  saying : 
"  Whosoever  shall  confess  me  before  men,  him 
will  I  also  confess  before  my  Father."  '     And  if 

'  Matt.  X.  32. 


these  be  such  as  to  be  attested  to  by  Christ 
before  His  Father,  you  ought  not  to  be  ashamed 
to  go  to  them  in  the  prisons.  For  if  you  do 
this,  it  will  be  esteemed  to  you  for  a  testimony, 
because  the  real  trial  was  to  them  a  testimony ; 
and  your  readiness  will  be  so  to  you,  as  being 
partakers  of  their  combat :  for  the  Lord  speaks 
somewhere  to  such  as  these,  saying :  "  Come, 
ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom 
prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world.  For  I  was  an  hungry,  and  ye  gave  me 
meat ;  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  drink ;  I 
was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  me  in ;  naked,  and 
ye  clothed  me  ;  I  was  sick,  and  ye  visited  me ; 
I  was  in  prison,  and  ye  came  unto  me.  Then 
shall  the  righteous  answer,  and  say,  Lord,  when 
saw  we  Thee  an  hungered,  and  fed  Thee?  or 
thirsty,  and  gave  Thee  drink?  When  saw  we 
Thee  naked,  and  clothed  Thee?  or  sick,  and 
visited  Thee  ?  When  saw  we  Thee  a  stranger, 
and  took  Thee  in  ?  or  in  prison,  and  came  unto 
Thee  ?  And  He  will  answer  and  say  unto  them, 
Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  unto  one  of  the 
least  of  these  my  brethren,  ye  have  done  it  unto 
me.  And  these  shall  go  away  into  life  everlast- 
ing. Then  shall  He  say  unto  them  on  His  left 
hand.  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlast- 
ing fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels. 
For  I  was  hungry,  and  ye  gave  me  no  meat ;  I 
was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  no  drink  ;  I  was 
a  stranger,  and  ye  took  me  not  in ;  naked,  and 
ye  clothed  me  not ;  sick,  and  in  prison,  and  ye 
visited  me  not.  Then  shall  they  also  answer  and 
say.  Lord  when  saw  we  Thee  hungry,  or  thirsty, 
or  a  stranger,  or  naked,  or  sick,  or  in  prison,  and 
did  not  minister  unto  Thee?  Then  shall  He 
answer  and  say  unto  them,  Verily  I  say  unto  you, 
Inasmuch  as  ye  have  not  done  it  unto  one  of  the 
least  of  these,  neither  have  ye  done  it  unto  me. 
And  these  shall  go  away  unto  everlasting  pun- 
ishment." * 


2  Matt.  XXV.  34,  etc.  Portions  of  the  passage  from  M.itthew  are 
omitled  in  one  V.  MS.;  and  the  conclusion,  beginning  with  "  Then 
shall  thty  also,"  is  entirely  omitted.  [The  citation  is  quite  accurate; 
vcr.  46  is  divided,  doubtless  for  the  sake  of  emphasis,  and  slightly 
modified.  —  R.J 

437 


438 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


[Book  V. 


THAT  WE  ARE  TO  AVOID  IXIERCOURSE  WITH  FALSE 
BRETHREN  WHEN  THEY  CONTINUE  IN  THEIR 
WICKEDNESS. 

II.  But  if  any  one  who  calls  himself  a  brother 
is  seduced  by  the  evil  one,  and  acts  wickedness, 
and  is  convicted  and  condemned  to  death  as  an 
adulterer,  or  a  murderer,  depart  from  him,  that 
ve  may  be  secure,  and  none  of  you  may  be  sus- 
pected as  a  partner  in  such  an  abominable  prac- 
tice ;  and  that  no  evil  report  may  be  spread 
abroad,  as  if  all  Christians  took  a  pleasure  in 
unlawful  actions.  Wherefore  keep  far  from  them. 
But  do  you  assist  with  all  diligence  those  that 
for  the  sake  of  Christ  are  abused  by  the  ungodly 
and  shut  up  in  prison,  or  who  are  given  over  to 
death,  or  bonds,  or  banishment,  in  order  to  de- 
liver your  fellow-members  from  wicked  hands. 
And  if  any  one  who  accompanies  with  them  is 
caught,  and  falls  into  misfortune,  he  is  blessed, 
because  he  is  partaker  with  the  martyr,  and  is 
one  that  imitates  the  sufferings  of  Christ ;  for 
we  ourselves  also,  when  we  oftentimes  received 
stripes  from  Caiaphas,  and  Alexander,  and  Annas, 
for  Christ's  sake,  "went  out  rejoicing  that  we 
were  counted  worthy  to  suffer  such  things  for 
our  Saviour."  '  Do  you  also  rejoice  when  ye 
suffer  such  things,  for  ye  shall  be  blessed  in  that 
day.^ 

THAT  WE  OUGHT  TO  AFFORD  AN  HELPING  HAND 
TO  SUCH  AS  ARE  SPOILED  FOR  THE  SAKE  OF 
CHRIST,  ALTHOUGH  WE  SHOULD  INCUR  DANGER 
OURSELVES. 

III.  Receive  also  those  that  are  persecuted  on 
account  of  the  faith,  and  who  "  fly  from  city  to 
city  "  3  on  account  of  the  Lord's  commandment ; 
and  assist  them  as  martyrs,  rejoicing  that  ye  are 
made  partakers  of  their  persecution,  as  knowing 
that  they  are  esteemed  blessed  by  the  Lord ;  for 
Himself  says:  "Blessed  are  ye  when  men  shall 
reproach  you,  and  persecute  you,  and  say  all 
manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely,  for  my  sake. 
Rejoice,  and  be  exceeding  glad,  because  your 
reward  is  great  in  heaven  :  for  so  persecuted 
they  the  prophets  which  were  before  us."  ■*  And 
again  :  "  If  they  have  persecuted  me,  they  will 
also  persecute  you."  s  And  afterwards  :  "  If  they 
persecute  you  in  this  city,  flee  ye  to  another. 
For  in  the  world  ye  have  tribulation  :  for  they 
shall  deliver  you  into  the  synagogues  ;  and  ye 
shall  be  brought  before  rulers  and  kings  for 
my  sake,  and  for  a  testimony  to  them."  ^  And, 
"  He  that  endureth  unto  the  end,  the  same  shall 
be  saved."  7     For  he  that  is  persecuted  for  the 


'  Acts  iv.  6,  V.  40,  41. 

2  Vid.  Luke  vi.  22,  23. 

3  Matt.  X.  23. 

*  Matt.  V.  II,  12. 

5  John  XV.  20. 

6  Matt.  X.  23,  17;  John  xvi.  33. 

7  Matt.  X.  22. 


sake  of  the  faith,  and  bears  witness  in  regard  to 
Him,  Christ,  and  endures,  is  truly  a  man  of 
God. 

THAT  IT    IS  AN    HORRIBLE  AND    DESTRUCTIVE   THING 
TO    DENY    CHRIST. 

IV.  But  he  that  denies  himself  to  be  a  Christian, 
that  he  may  not  be  hated  of  men,  and  so  loves 
his  own  life  more  than  he  does  the   Lord,  in 
whose  hand  his  breath  is,  is  wretched  and  miser- 
able, as  being  detestable  and  abominable,  who 
desires  to  be  the  friend  of  men,  but  is  the  enemy 
of  God,  having  no  longer  his  portion  with  the 
saints,  but  with  those  that  are  accursed  ;  choos- 
ing instead  of  the  kingdom  of  the  blessed,  that 
eternal  fire  which  is  prepared  for  the  devil  and 
his  angels  :  not  being  any  longer  hated  by  men, 
but  rejected  by  God,  and  cast  out  from  His  pres- 
ence.     For  of  such  a  one  our  Lord  declared, 
saying  :  "  Whosoever  shall  deny  me  before  men, 
and  shall  be  ashamed  of  my  name,  I  also  will 
deny  and  be  ashamed  of  him  before  my  Father 
which  is  in  heaven."^      And  again   He  speaks 
thus  to  us  ourselves.  His  disciples:   "He  that 
loveth  father  or  mother  more  than  me,  is  not 
worthy  of  me  ;  and  he  that  loveth  son  or  daughter 
more  than  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me  ;  and  he  that 
taketh  not  his  cross,  and  followeth  after  me,  is 
not  worthy  of  me.      He  that  findeth  his  life, 
shall  lose  it ;  and  he  that  loseth  his  life  for  my 
sake,  shall  find  it.     For  what  is  a  man  profited, 
if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own 
soul?  or  what  shall  a  man  give  in  exchange  for 
his  soul?  "  9     And  afterwards  :  "  Fear  not  them 
that  kill  the  body,  but  are  not  able  to  kill  the 
soul ;  but  rather  fear  Him  who  is  able  to  destroy 
both  soul  and  body  in  hell."  '° 

THAT   WE    OUGHT   TO    IMITATE    CHRIST     IN     SUFFER- 
ING,   AND    WITH    ZEAL   TO    FOLLOW    HIS   PATIENCE. 

v.  Every  one  therefore  who  learns  any  art, 
when  he  sees  his  master  by  his  diligence  and 
skill  perfecting  his  art,  does  himself  earnestly 
endeavour  to  make  what  he  takes  in  hand  like 
to  it.  If  he  is  not  able,  he  is  not  perfected  in 
his  work.  We  therefore  who  have  a  Master, 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  why  do  we  not  follow 
His  doctrine?  —  since  He  renounced  repose, 
pleasure,  glory,  riches,  pride,  the  power  of  re- 
venge. His  mother  and  brethren,  nay,  and  more- 
over His  own  life,  on  account  of  His  piety 
towards  His  Father,  and  His  love  to  us  the  race 
of  mankind  ;  and  sufi"ered  not  only  persecution 
and  stripes,  reproach  and  mockery,  but  also 
crucifixion,  that  He  might  save  the  penitent, 
both  Jews  and  Gentiles.  If  therefore  He  for  our 
sakes  renounced  His  repose,  was  not  ashamed 


8  Matt.  X.  33;  Luke  ix.  26. 

9  Malt.  X.  37,  xvi.  26. 
«o  Matt.  X.  28. 


Sec.  I.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


439 


of  the  cross,  and  did  not  esteem  death  inglori- 
ous, why  do  not  we  imitate  His  sufferings,  and 
renounce  on  His  account  even  our  own  life,  with 
that  patience  which  He  gives  us  ?  For  He  did 
all  for  our  sakes,  but  we  do  it  for  our  own  sakes  :  | 
for  He  does  not  stand  in  need  of  us,  but  we 
stand  in  need  of  His  mercy.  He  only  requires 
the  sincerity  and  readiness  of  our  faith,  as  the 
Scripture  says  :  "  If  thou  beest  righteous,  what 
doest  thou  give  to  Him?  or  what  will  He  re- - 
ceive  at  thy  hand?  Thy  wickedness  is  to  a 
man  like  thyself,  and  thy  righteousness  to  a  son 
of  man."  ' 

THAT  A  BELIEVER  OUGHT  NEITHER  RASHLY  TO  RUN 
INTO  DANGER  THROUGH  SECURITY,  NOR  TO  BE 
OVER-TIMOROUS  THROUGH  PUSILLANIMITY,  BUT 
TO  FLY  AWAY  FOR  FEAR  ;  YET  THAT  IF  HE 
DOES  FALL  INTO  THE  ENEMY'S  HAND,  TO  STRIVE 
EARNESTLY,  UPON  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  CROWN  THAT 
IS    LAID    UP    FOR    HIM. 

VI.  Let  US  therefore  renounce  our  parents,  and 
kinsmen,  and  friends,  and  wife,  and  children,  and 
possessions,  and  all  the  enjoyments  of  life,  when 
any  of  these  things  become  an  impediment  to 
piety.  For  we  ought  to  pray  that  we  may  not 
enter  into  temptation ;  but  if  we  be  called  to 
martyrdom,  with  constancy  to  confess  His  pre- 
cious name,  and  if  on  this  account  we  be  pun- 
ished, let  us  rejoice,  as  hastening  to  immortality. 
When  we  are  persecuted,  let  us  not  think  it 
strange ;  let  us  not  love  the  present  world,  nor 
the  praises  which  come  from  men,  nor  the  glory 
and  honour  of  rulers,  according  as  some  of  the 
Jews  wondered  at  the  mighty  works  of  our  Lord, 
yet  did  not  believe  on  Him,  for  fear  of  the  high 
priests  and  the  rest  of  the  rulers  :  "  For  they 
loved  the  praise  of  men  more  than  the  praise  of 
God."  ^  But  now,  by  confessing  a  good  confes- 
sion, we  not  only  save  ourselves,  but  we  confirm 
those  who  are  newly  illuminated,  and  strengthen 
the  faith  of  the  catechumens.  But  if  we  remit 
any  part  of  our  confession,  and  deny  godliness 
by  the  faintness  of  our  persuasion,  and  the  fear 
.  of  a  very  short  punisliment,  we  not  only  deprive 
ourselves  of  everlasting  glory,  but  we  shall  also 
become  the  causes  of  the  perdition  of  others  ; 
and  shall  suffer  double  punishment,  as  affording 
suspicion,  by  our  denial  that  that  truth  which 
we  gloried  in  so  much  before  is  an  erroneous 
doctrine.  Wherefore  neither  let  us  be  rash  and 
hasty  to  thrust  ourselves  into  dangers,  for  the 
Lord  says  :  "  Pray  that  ye  fall  not  into  tempta- 
tion :  the  spirit  indeed  is  willing,  but  the  flesh 
is  weak."  ^  Nor  let  us,  when  we  do  fall  into 
dangers,  be  fearful  or  ashamed  of  our  profession. 


For  if  a  person,  by  the  denial  of  his  own  hope, 
which  is  Jesus  the  Son  of  God,  should  be  deliv- 
ered from  a  temporary  death,  and  the  next  day 
should  fall  dangerously  sick  upon  his  bed,  with 
a  distemper  in  his  bowels,  his  stomach,  or  his 
head,  or  any  of  the  incurable  diseases,  as  a 
consumption,  or  gangrene,  or  looseness,  or  iliac 
passion,  or  dropsy,  or  colic,  and  has  a  sudden 
catastrophe,  and  departs  this  life ;  is  not  he  de- 
prived of  the  things  present,  and  loses  those 
eternal?  Or  rather,  he  is  within  the  verge  of 
eternal  punishment,  "  and  goes  into  outer  dark- 
ness, where  is  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth."  •♦ 
But  let  him  who  is  vouchsafed  the  honour  of 
martyrdom  rejoice  with  joy  in  the  Lord,  as  ob- 
taining thereby  so  great  a  crown,  and  departing 
out  of  this  life  by  his  confession.  Nay,  though 
he  be  but  a  catechumen,  let  him  depart  without 
trouble  ;  for  his  suffering  for  Christ  will  be  to 
him  a  more  genuine  baptism,  because  he  does 
really  die  with  Christ,  but  the  rest  only  in  a  fig- 
ure. Let  him  therefore  rejoice  in  the  imitation 
of  his  Master,  since  is  it  thus  ordained  :  "  Let 
every  one  be  perfect,  as  his  Master  is."  5  Now 
his  and  our  Master,  Jesus  the  Lord,  was  smitten 
for  our  sake :  He  underwent  reproaches  and 
revilings  with  long-suffering.  He  was  spit  upon, 
He  was  smitten  on  the  face.  He  was  buffeted  ; 
and  when  He  had  been  scourged.  He  was  nailed 
to  the  cross.  He  had  vinegar  and  gall  to  drink  ; 
and  when  He  had  fulfilled  all  things  that  were 
written.  He  said  to  His  God  and  Father,  "  Into 
Thy  hands  I  commend  my  spirit."  ^  Wherefore 
let  him  that  desires  to  be  His  disciple  earnestly 
follow  His  conflicts :  let  him  imitate  His  pa- 
tience, knowing  that,  although  he  be  burned  in 
the  fire  by  men,  he  will  suffer  nothing,  like  the 
three  children  ;  7  or  if  he  does  suffer  anything, 
he  shall  receive  a  reward  from  the  Lord,  believ- 
ing in  the  one  and  the  only  true  God  and  Father, 
through  Jesus  Christ,  the  great  High  Priest,  and 
Redeemer  of  our  souls,  and  rewarder  of  our 
sufferings.     To  whom  be  glory  for  ever.     Amen. 

SEVERAL  DEMONSTRATIONS  CONCERNING  THE  RES- 
URRECTION, CONCERNING  THE  SIBYL,  AND  WHAT 
THE    STOICS   SAY  CONCERNING   THE    BIRD    CALLED 

THE  phct;nix. 

VII.  For  the  Almighty  God  Himself  will  raise 
us  up  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  according 
to  His  infallible  promise,  and  grant  us  a  resur- 
rection with  all  those  that  have  slept  from  the 
beginning  of  the  world  ;  and  we  shall  then  be 
such  as  we  now  are  in  our  present  form,  without 
any  defect  or  corruption.  For  we  shall  rise  in- 
corruptible :  whether  we  die  at  sea,  or  are  scat- 


«  Job  XXXV.  7,  8.     One  V.  MS.  reads  "  piety,"  instead  of  "  wicked- 
ness," in  the  last  sentence. 
*  John  xii.  43. 
3  Matt.  xxvi.  41.     [See  De  Fuga,  vol.  iv.  p.  119.] 


♦  Matt.  viii.  12. 
5  Luke  vi.  .^o. 
<>  Luke  xxiii.  46. 
^  Dan.  iii. 


440 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  V. 


tered  on  the  earth,  or  are  torn  to  pieces  by  wild 
beasts  and  birds,  He  will  raise  us  by  His  own 
power ;  for  the  whole  world  is  held  together  by 
the  hand  of  God.  Now  He  says  :  "  An  hair  of 
your  head  shall  not  perish."  '  Wherefore  He 
exhorts  us,  saying :  "  In  your  patience  possess 
ye  your  souls."  -  But  as  concerning  the  resur- 
rection of  the  dead,  and  the  recompense  of  re- 
ward for  the  martyrs,  Gabriel  speaks  to  Daniel : 
"  And  many  of  them  that  sleep  shall  arise  out 
of  the  dust  of  the  earth,  some  to  everlasting  lite, 
and  some  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt. 
And  they  that  understand  shall  shine  as  the  sun, 
and  as  the  firmament,  and  as  the  stars."  -5  There- 
fore the  most  holy  Gabriel  foretold  that  the 
saints  should  shine  like  the  stars  :  for  His  sacred 
name  did  witness  to  them,  that  they  might 
understand  the  truth.  Nor  is  a  resurrection 
only  declared  for  the  martyrs,  but  for  all  men, 
righteous  and  unrighteous,  godly  and  ungodly, 
that  every  one  may  receive  according  to  his 
desert.  For  God,  says  the  Scripture,  "  will 
bring  every  work  into  judgment,  with  every  se- 
cret thing,  whether  it  be  good  or  whether  it  be 
evil."  •♦  This  resurrection  was  not  believed  by 
the  Jews,  when  of  old  they  said,  "  Our  bones 
are  withered,  and  we  are  gone."  5  To  whom 
God  answered,  and  said :  "  Behold,  I  open 
your  graves,  and  will  bring  you  out  of  them  ; 
and  I  will  put  my  Spirit  into  you,  and  ye  shall 
live  :  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  have 
spoken  it,  and  will  do  it."  And  He  says  by 
Isaiah  :  "  The  dead  shall  rise,  and  those  that  are 
in  the  graves  shall  be  raised  up.  And  those 
that  rest  in  the  earth  shall  rejoice,  for  the  dew 
which  is  from  Thee  shall  be  healing  to  them."  ^ 
There  are  indeed  many  and  various  things  said 
concerning  the  resurrection,  and  concerning  the 
continuance  of  the  righteous  in  glory,  and  con- 
cerning the  punishment  of  the  ungodly,  their 
fall,  rejection,  condemnation,  shame,  "  eternal 
fire,  and  endless  worm."  ^  Now  that,  if  it  had 
pleased  Him  that  all  men  should  be  immortal, 
it  was  in  His  power.  He  showed  in  the  examples 
of  Enoch  and  F^lijah,  while  He  did  not  suffer 
them  to  have  any  experience  of  death.  Or  if 
it  had  pleased  Him  in  every  generation  to  raise 
those  that  died,  that  this  also  He  was  able  to  do 
He  hath  made  manifest  both  by  Himself  and  by 
others ;  as  when  He  raised  the  widow's  son  ^ 
by  Elijah,  and  the  Shunammite's  son  9  by  Elisha. 
But  we  are  persuaded  that  death  is  not  a  retri- 
bution of  punishment,  because  even  the  saints 


*  Luke  xxi.  i8. 
^  Luke  xxi.  19. 
3  Dan.  xii.  2,  3. 

*  Eccles.  xii.  14. 

5  Ezek.  xxxvii.  11,  etc. 
'  Isa.  xxvi.  19. 
7  Isa.  Ixvi.  24. 

*  I  Kings  xvii. 
9  2  Kings  iv. 


have  undergone  it ;  nay,  even  the  Lord  of  the 
saints,  Jesus  Christ,  the  life  of  them  that  believe, 
and  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  Upon  this 
account,  therefore,  according  to  the  ancient 
practice,  for  those  who  live  in  the  great  city, 
after  the  combats  He  brings  a  dissolution  for  a 
while,  that,  when  He  raises  up  every  one.  He 
may  either  reject  him  or  crown  him.  For  He 
that  made  the  body  of  Adam  out  of  the  earth 
will  raise  up  the  bodies  of  the  rest,  and  that  of 
the  first  man,  after  their  dissolution,  (to  pay 
what  is  owing  to  the  rational  nature  of  man  ; 
we  mean  the  continuance  in  being  through  all 
ages.  He,  therefore,  who  brings  on  the  disso- 
lution, will  Himself  procure  the  resurrection. 
And  He  that  said,  "  The  Lord  took  dust  from 
the  ground,  and  formed  man,  and  breathed  into 
his  face  the  breath  of  life,  and  man  became  a 
hving  soul,"  '°  added  after  the  disobedience, 
"  Earth  thou  art,  and  unto  earth  shalt  thou  re- 
turn;"  "  the  same  promised  us  a  resurrection 
afterwards.'^)  For  says  He:  "All  that  are  in 
the  graves  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of 
God,  and  they  that  hear  shall  live."  '^  Besides 
these  arguments,  we  believe  there  is  to  be  a 
resurrection  also  from  the  resurrection  of  our 
Lord.  For  it  is  He  that  raised  Lazarus,  when 
he  had  been  in  the  grave  four  days,'''  and  Jairus' 
daughter,'5  and  the  widow's  son.'''  It  is  He  that 
raised  Himself  by  the  command  of  the  Father 
in  the  space  of  three  days,  who  is  the  pledge 
of  our  resurrection.  For  says  He  :  "  I  am  the 
resurrection  and  the  life."  '^  Now  He  that 
brought  Jonas  '^  in  the  space  of  three  days, 
alive  and  unhurt,  out  of  the  belly  of  the  whale, 
and  the  three  children  out  of  the  furnace  of 
Babylon,  and  Daniel  out  of  the  mouth  of  the 
lions, '9  does  not  want  power  to  raise  us  up  also. 
But  if  the  Gentiles  laugh  at  us,  and  disbelieve 
our  Scriptures,  let  at  least  their  own  prophetess 
Sibylla''"  oblige  them  to  believe,  who  says  thus  to 
them  in  express  words  :  — 

"  But  when  all  things  shall  be  reduced  to  dust  and  ashes, 
And  the  immortal   God  who   kindled  the  fire   shall 

have  quenched  it, 
God  shall  form  those  bones  and  that  ashes  into  a  man 

again, 
And  shall  place  mortal  men  again  as  they  were  before. 
And  then  shall  be  the  judgment,  wherein  God  will  do 

justice, 
And  judge  the  world  again.     But  as  many  mortals  as 

have  sinned  through  impiety 
Shall  again  be  covered  under  the  earth; 
But  so  many  as  have   been  pious  shall  live  again  in 

the  world. 


'°  Gen.  ii.  7. 

"  Gen.  iii.  \q. 

'2  The  part  within  parentheses  is  not  in  one  of  the  V.  MSS. 

'^  John  V.  25. 

'*  John  xi. 

■5  Mark  v. 

">  Luke  vii. 

"  John  xi.  25. 

"  Jonah  ii. 

'9  Dan.  iii.,  vi. 

^°  [Compare  pp.  256,  257,  j«/ra.] 


Sec.  I.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


441 


When  God  puts  His  Spirit  into  them,  and  gives  those 

at  once  that  are  godly  both  life  and  favour, 
Then  shall  all  see  themselves.'" 

If,  therefore,  this  prophetess  confesses  the  resur- 
rection, and  does  not  deny  the  restoration  of  all 
things,  and  distinguishes  the  godly  from  the  un- 
godly, it  is  in  vain  for  them  to  deny  our  doctrine. 
Nay,  indeed,  they  say  they  can  show  a  resem- 
blance  of  the   resurrection,  while   they  do   not 
themselves  believe  the  things  they  declare  :   for 
they  say  that  there  is  a  bird  single  in  its  kind 
which  affords  a  copious  demonstration  of  the 
resurrection,  which  they  say  is  without  a  mate, 
and  the  only  one  in  the  creation.     They  call  it 
a  phoenix,  and  relate  that  every  five  hundred 
years  it  comes  into  Egypt,  to  that  which  is  called 
the  altar  of  the  sun,  and  brings  with  it  a  great 
quantity  of  cinnamon,  and  cassia,  and  balsam- 
wood,  and  standing  towards  the  east,  as  they 
say,  and  praying  to  the  sun,  of  its  own  accord  is 
burnt,  and  becomes  dust ;  but  that  a  worm  arises 
again  out  of  those  ashes,  and  that  when  the  same 
is  warmed  it  is  formed  into  a  new-born  phoenix ; 
and  when  it  is  able  to  fly,  it  goes  to  Arabia, 
which  is  beyond  the   Egyptian  countries.      If, 
therefore,  as  even  themselves  say,  a  resurrection 
is  exhibited  by  the  means  of  an  irrational  bird, 
wherefore  do  they  vainly  disparage  our  accounts, 
when  we  profess   that   He  who  by  His  power 
brings  that  into  being  which  was  not  in  being 
before,  is  able  to  restore  this  body,  and  raise  it 
up  again  after  its  dissolution?     For  on  account 
of  this  full  assurance  of  hope  we  undergo  stripes, 
and   persecutions,  and  deaths.      Otherwise  we 
should  to  no  purpose  undergo  such  things  if  we 
had  not  a  full  assurance  of  these  promises,  where- 
of we  profess  ourselves  to  be  the  preachers.    As, 
therefore,  we  believe  Moses  when  he  says,  "  In 
the  beginning  God  made   the  heaven  and  the 
earth ; "  -  and  we  know  that  He  did  not  want 
matter,  but  by  His  will  alone  brought  those  things 
into  being  which  Christ  was  commanded  to  make  ; 
we  mean  the  heaven,  the  earth,  the  sea,  the  light, 
the  night,  the  day,  the  luminaries,  the  stars,  the 
fowls,  the  fishes,  and  four-footed  beasts,  the  creep- 
ing things,  the  plants,  and   the  herbs  ;  so  also 
will  He  raise  all  men  up  by  His  will,  as  not  want- 
ing any  assistance.     For  it  is  the  work  of  the 
same    power  to   create   the  world  and  to  raise 
the  dead.    And  then  He  made  man,  who  was  not 
a  man  before,  of  different  parts,  giving  to  him  a 
soul  made  out  of  nothing.     But  now  He  will  re- 
store the  bodies,  which  have  been  dissolved,  to 
the  souls  that  are  still  in  being  :   for  the  rising 
again  belongs  to  things  laid  down,  not  to  things 
which  have  no  being.     He  therefore  that  made 
the  original  bodies  out  of  nothing,  and  fashioned 
\z.no\\?,  forms  of  them,  will  also  again  revive  and 


raise  up  those    that   are  dead.     For  He   that 
formed  man  in  the  womb  out  of  a  little  seed, 
and  created  in  him  a  soul  which  was  not  in  being 
before,  —  as  He  Himself  somewhere  speaks  to 
Jeremiah,  "  Before  I  formed  thee  in  the  womb  I 
knew  thee  ;  "  ^  and  elsewhere,  "  I  am  the  Lord 
who  established  the  heaven,  and  laid  the  founda- 
tions of  the  earth,  and  formed  the  spirit  of  man 
in  him,"'*  —  will  also  raise  up  all  men,  as  being 
His  workmanship  ;  as  also  the  divine  Scripture 
testifies  that  God  said  to  Christ,  His  only-begot- 
ten, "  Let  us  make  man  after  our  image,  and 
after  our  likeness.     And  God  made  man  :  after 
the  image  of  God  made   He  him ;    male  and 
female  made  He  them."  5     And  the  most  divine 
and  patient  Job,  of  whom  the  Scripture  says  that 
it  is  written,  that  "he  was  to  rise  again  with 
those  whom  the  Lord  raises  up,"  ^  speaks  to  God 
thus  :  "  Hast  not  Thou  milked  me  like  milk,  and 
curdled  me  like  cheese  ?    Thou  hast  clothed  me 
with  skin  and  flesh,  and  hast  fenced  me  with 
bones  and  sinews.     Thou  hast  granted  me  life 
and  favour,  and  Thy  visitation  hath  preserved  my 
spirit.     Having  these  things  within  me,  I  know 
that  Thou  canst  do  all  things,  and  that  nothing 
is  impossible  with  Thee."?    Wherefore  also'^  our 
Saviour  and  Master  Jesus  Christ  says,  that  "what 
is  impossible  with  men  is  possible  with  God."^ 
And  David,  the  beloved  of  God,  says  :  "  Thine 
hands  have  made  me,  and  fashioned  me."  '°    And 
again  :  "Thou  knowest  my  frame."  "    And  after- 
ward :  "  Thou  hast  fashioned  me,  and  laid  Thine 
hand  upon  me.     The  knowledge  of  Thee  is  de- 
clared to  be  too  wonderfiil  for  me;  it  is  very 
great,  I  cannot  attain  unto  it."  '^     "  Thine  eyes 
did  see  my  substance,  being  yet  imperfect ;  and 
all  men  shall  be  written  in  Thy  book."  '^     Nay, 
and  Isaiah  says  in  his  prayer  to  Him  :  "  We  are 
the  clay,  and  Thou  art  the  framer  of  us."  "*     If, 
therefore,  man   be  His  workmanship,  made  by 
Christ,  by  Him  most  certainly  will  he  after  he  is 
dead  be  raised  again,  with  intention  either  of 
being  crowned  for  his  good  actions  or  punished 
for  his  transgressions.    But  if  He,  being  the  legis- 
lator, judges  with  righteousness  ;  as  He  punishes 
the  ungodly,  so  does  He  do  good  to  and  saves 
the  fiiithful.     And  those  saints  who  for  His  sake 
have  been  slain  by  men,  "  some  of  them  He  will 
make  light  as  the  stars,  and  make  others  bright 
as  the  luminaries,"  '5  as  Gabriel  said  to  Daniel. 


'   Orac.  Sibyl.,  I.  iv.  in  Jin. 
*  Gen.  i.  i. 


[See  p.  324,  supra.\ 


3  Jer.  i.  s. 
<  Zuch.  xii. 


5  (len.  i.  26,  27. 

*  In  Jin.  Job  in  LXX. 

7  Job  X.  10.  •,  1        •  L  /-     1 " 

8  The  words  from  "  Wherefore  also'   to     possible  with  Ood     are 
omitted  in  one  V.  ms.,  and  noticed  as  spurious  in  the  other. 

9  I/uke  xviii.  27. 
10  Ps.  cxix.  73. 

"  Ps.  ciii.  14. 
'2  Ps.  cxxxix.  5,  6. 
'3  Ps.  cxxxix.  16. 
'4  Isa.  Ixiy.  8. 
'5  Dan.  xii.  3. 


442 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


[Book  V. 


All  we  of  the  faithful,  therefore,  who  are  the  dis- 
ciples of  Christ,  believe  His  promises.  For  He 
that  has  promised  it  cannot  lie ;  as  says  the 
blessed  prophet  David  :  "The  Lord  is  faithful  in 
all  His  words,  and  holy  in  all  His  works."  '  For 
He  that  framed  for  Himself  a  body  out  of  a 
virgin,  is  also  the  Former  of  other  men.  And  He 
that  raised  Himself  from  the  dead,  will  also  raise 
again  all  that  are  laid  down.  He  wlio  raises 
wheat  out  of  the  ground  with  many  stalks  from 
one  grain.  He  who  makes  the  tree  that  is  cut 
down  send  forth  fresh  branches,  He  that  made 
Aaron's  dry  rod  put  forth  buds,^  will  raise  us  up 
in  glory ;  He  that  raised  Him  up  that  had  the 
palsy  whole,3  and  healed  him  that  had  the  with- 
ered hand,-*  He  that  supplied  a  defective  part  to 
him  that  was  born  blind  from  clay  and  spittle, s 
will  raise  us  up  ;  He  that  satisfied  five  thousand 
men  with  five  loaves  and  two  fishes,  and  caused 
a  remainder  of  twelve  baskets,''  and  out  of  water 
made  wine,^  and  sent  a  piece  of  money  out  of  a 
fish's  mouth**  by  me  Peter  to  those  that  de- 
manded tribute,  will  raise  the  dead.  For  we 
testify  all  these  things  concerning  Him,  and  the 
prophets  testify  the  other.  We  who  have  eaten 
and  drunk  with  Him,  and  have  been  spectators 
of  His  wonderful  works,  and  of  His  life,  and  of 
His  conduct,  and  of  His  words,  and  of  His  suf- 
ferings, and  of  His  death,  and  of  His  resurrec- 
tion from  the  dead,  and  who  associated  with 'Him 
forty  days  after  His  resurrection,"^  and  who  re- 
ceived a  command  from  Him  to  preach  the  Gos- 
pel to  all  the  world,  and  to  make  disciples  of  all 
nations,'"  and  to  baptize  them  into  His  death  by 
the  authority  of  the  God  of  the  universe,  who  is 
His  Father,  and  by  the  testimony  of  the  Spirit, 
who  is  His  Comforter,  —  we  teach  you  all  these 
things  which  He  appointed  us  by  His  constitu- 
tions, before  "  He  was  received  up  in  our  sight 
into  heaven,"  "  to  Him  that  sent  Him.  And  if 
you  will  believe,  you  shall  be  happy ;  but  if  you 
will  not  believe,  we  shall  be  found  innocent,  and 
clear  from  your  increduhty. 

CONCERNING    JAMES   THE    BROTHER   OF  THE    LORD, 
AND    STEPHEN    THE    FIRST    MARTYR. 

VIII.  Now  concerning  the  martyrs,  we  say  to 
you  that  they  are  to  be  had  in  all  honour  with 
you,  as  we  honour  the  blessed  James  the  bishop, 
and  the  holy  Stephen  our  fellow- servant.  For 
these  are  reckoned  blessed  by  God,  and  are 
honoured  by  holy  men,  who  were  pure  from  all 


■  Ps.  cxlv.  17. 

*  Num   xvii.  8. 

3  Matt.  ix.  2,  etc. 

*  Mark  iii.  i,  etc. 
5  John  ix.  I,  etc. 

'>  Matt.  xiv.  17,  etc. 
'  John  ii.  3,  etc. 

*  Matt.  xvii.  24,  etc. 
9  Acts  i.  3. 

'°  Matt,  xxviii.  19. 
"  Acts  i.  9. 


transgressions,  immoveable  when  tempted  to  sin, 
or  persuaded  from  good  works,  without  dispute 
deserving  encomiums :  of  whom  also  David 
speaks,  "  Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is 
the  death  of  His  holy  ones  ;  "  '-  and  Solomon 
says,  "  The  memory  of  the  just  is  with  encomi- 
ums :  "  '^  of  whom  also  the  prophet  speaks, 
"  Righteous  men  are  taken  away."  ^'^ 

CONCERNING    FALSE    MARTYRS. 

IX.  These  things  we  have  said  concerning 
those  that  in  truth  have  been  martyrs  for  Christ, 
but  not  concerning  false  martyrs,  concerning 
whom  the  oracle  speaks,  "The  name  of  the 
ungodly  is  extinguished."  '3  For  "  a  faithful 
witness  will  not  lie,  but  an  unjust  witness  inflames 
lies."  '5  For  he  that  departs  this  life  in  his  testi- 
mony without  lying,  for  the  sake  of  the  truth,  is 
a  faithful  martyr,  worthy  to  be  believed  in  such 
things  wherein  he  strove  for  the  word  of  piety  by 
his  own  blood. 

SEC.  II.  —  ALL  ASSOCIATION  WITH  IDOLS  IS  TO  BE 
AVOIDED. 

A  MORAL  ADMONITION,  THAT  WE  ARE  TO  ABSTAIN 
FROM  VAIN  TALKING,  OBSCENE  TALKING,  JESTING, 
DRUNKENNESS,    L.ASCIVIOUSNESS,   AND   LUXURY. 

X.  Now  we  exhort  you,  brethren  and  fellow- 
servants,  to  avoid  vain  talk  and  obscene  dis- 
courses, and  jestings,  drunkenness,  lasciviousness, 
luxury,  unbounded  passions,  with  foolish  dis- 
courses, since  we  do  not  permit  you  so  much  as 
on  the  Lord's  days,  which  are  days  of  joy,  to 
speak  or  act  anything  unseemly ;  for  the  Scrip- 
ture somewhere  says :  "  Serve  the  Lord  with 
fear,  and  rejoice  unto  Him  with  trembling."  '^ 
Even  your  very  rejoicings  therefore  ought  to  be 
done  with  fear  and  trembling :  for  a  Christian 
who  is  faithful  ought  neither  to  repeat  an  heathen 
hymn  nor  an  obscene  song,  because  he  will  be 
obliged  by  that  hymn  to  make  mention  of  the 
idolatrous  names  of  demons  ;  and  instead  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  the  wicked  one  will  enter  into 
him. 

AN    ADMONITION    INSTRUCTING    MEN   TO    AVOID    THE 
ABOMINABLE    SIN    OF    IDOLATRY. 

XI.  You  are  also  forbidden  to  swear  by  them, 
or  to  utter  their  abominable  names  through  your 
mouth,  and  to  worship  them,  or  fear  them  as 
gods  ;  for  they  are  not  gods,  but  either  wicked 
demons  or  the  ridiculous  contrivances  of  men. 
For  somewhere  God  says  concerning  the  Israel- 
ites :  "  They  have  forsaken  me,  and  sworn  by 
them  that  are  no  gods."  '^     And  afterwards  :  "  I 


12  Ps.  cxvi.  15. 

'3  Prov.  X.  7. 

><  Isa.  Ivii.  I,  LXX. 

's  Prov.  xiv.  5. 

'6  Ps.  ii.  II. 

'7  Jer.  V.  7. 


Sec.  hi.] 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


443 


will  take  away  the  names  of  your  idols  out  of 
their  mouth."  '  And  elsewhere  :  "  They  have 
provoked  me  to  jealousy  with  them  that  are  no 
gods ;  they  have  provoked  me  to  anger  with 
their  idols."  ^  And  in  all  the  Scriptures  these 
things  are  forbidden  by  the  Lord  God. 

THAT  WE  OUGHT  NOT  TO  SING  AN  HEATHEN  OR 
AN  OBSCENE  SONG,  NOR  TO  SWEAR  BY  AN  IDOL  ; 
BECAUSE  IT  IS  AN  IMPIOUS  THING,  AND  CON- 
TRARY  TO   THE    KNOWLEDGE    OF    GOD. 

XII.  Nor  do  the  legislators  give  us  only  pro- 
hibitions concerning  idols,  but  also  warn  us  con- 
cerning the  luminaries,  not  to  swear  by  them, 
nor  to  serve  them.  For  they  say  :  "  Lest,  when 
thou  seest  the  sun,  and  the  moon,  and  the  stars, 
thou  shouldest  be  seduced  to  worship  them."  ^ 
And  elsewhere  :  "  Do  not  ye  learn  to  walk  after 
the  ways  of  the  heathen,  and  be  not  afraid  of 
the  signs  of  heaven."  ■♦  For  the  stars  and  the 
luminaries  were  given  to  men  to  shine  upon 
them,  but  not  for  worship ;  although  the  Israel- 
ites, by  the  perverseness  of  their  temper,  "  wor- 
shipped the  creature  instead  of  the  Creator,"  s 
and  acted  insultingly  to  their  Maker,  and  admired 
the  creature  more  than  is  fit.  And  sometimes 
they  made  a  calf,  as  in  the  wilderness  ;^  some- 
times they  worshipped  Baalpeor  ;  i  another  time 
Baal,*^  and  Thamuz,''  and  Astarte  of  Sidon  ; '°  and 
again  Moloch  and  Chamos  ;  "  another  time  the 
sun,'^  as  it  is  written  in  Ezekiel ;  nay,  and  besides, 
brute  creatures,  as  among  the  Egyptians  Apis,  and 
the  Mendesian  goat,  and  gods  of  silver  and  gold, 
as  in  Judea.  On  account  of  all  which  things 
He  threatened  them,  and  said  by  the  prophet : 
"  Is  it  a  small  thing  to  the  house  of  Judah  to  do 
these  abominations  which  they  have  done  ?  For 
they  have  filled  the  land  with  their  wickedness, 
to  provoke  me  to  anger :  and,  behold,  they  are 
as  those  that  mock.  And  I  will  act  with  anger. 
Mine  eye  shall  not  spare,  neither  will  I  have 
mercy ;  and  they  shall  cry  in  mine  ears  with  a 
great  voice,  and  I  will  not  hearken  unto  them."  '^ 
Consider,  beloved,  how  many  things  the  Lord 
declares  against  idolaters,  and  the  worshippers 
of  the  sun  and  moon.  Wherefore  it  is  the  duty 
of  a  man  of  God,  as  he  is  a  Christian,  not  to 
swear  by  the  sun,  or  by  the  moon,  or  by  the 
stars ;  nor  by  the  heaven,  nor  by  the  earth,  nor 
by  any  of  the  elements,  whether  small  or  great. 
For  if  our  Master  charged  us  not  to  swear  by 


■  Zech.  xiii.  2. 
^  Deut.  xxxii.  21. 
3  Deut.  iv.  19. 
^  Jer.  X.  2. 
5   kom.  i.  25. 
''   Kx.  xxxii.  4. 
7  Num.  XXV.  3. 
*  Judg.  it.  13. 
9   Ezek.  viii    14. 
■°  I  Kings  xi.  5. 
"  I  Kings  xi.  7. 
'-   Ezek.  viii.  16. 
'3  Ezek.  viii.  17,  18 


the  true  God,  that  our  word  might  be  firmer 
than  an  oath,  nor  by  heaven  itself,  for  that  is  a 
piece  of  heathen  wickedness,  nor  by  Jerusalem, 
nor  by  the  sanctuary  of  God,  nor  the  altar,  nor 
the  gift,  nor  the  gilding  of  the  altar,  nor  one's 
own  head,'-*  for  this  custom  is  a  piece  of  Judaic 
corruption,  and  on  that  account  was  forbidden  ; 
and  if  He  exhorts  the  faithful  that  their  yea  be 
yea,  and  their  nay,  nay,  and  says  that  "  what  is 
more  than  these  is  of  the  evil  one,"  how  much 
more  blameable  are  those  who  appeal  to  deities 
falsely  so  called  as  the  objects  of  an  oath,  and 
who  glorify  imaginary  beings  instead  of  those 
that  are  real,  whom  God  for  their  perverseness 
"  delivered  over  to  foolishness,  to  do  those  things 
that  are  not  convenient !  "  's 

SEC.    III. — ON   FEAST   DAYS   AND   FAST   DAYS. 

A  CATALOGUE  OF  THE  FEA.STS  OF  THE  LORD  WHICH 
ARE  TO  BE  KEPr,  AND  WHEN  EACH  OF  THEM 
OUGHT   TO    BE   OBSERVED. 

XIII.  Brethren,  observe  the  festival  days ;  and 
first  of  all  the  birthday  which  you  are  to  cele- 
brate on  the  twenty- fifth  of  the  ninth  month ; 
after  which  let  the  Epiphany  be  to  you  the  most 
honoured,  in  which  the  Lord  made  to  you  a  dis- 
play of  His  own  Godhead,  and  let  it  take  place 
on  the  sixth  of  the  tenth  month  ;  after  which  the 
fast  of  Lent  is  to  be  observed  by  you  as  contain- 
ing a  memorial  of  our  Lord's  mode  of  life  and 
legislation.  But  let  this  solemnity  be  observed 
before  the  fast  of  the  passover,  beginning  from 
the  second  day  of  the  week,  and  ending  at  the 
day  of  the  preparation.  After  which  solemnities, 
breaking  off  your  fast,  begin  the  holy  week  of  the 
passover,  fasting  in  the  same  all  of  you  with  fear 
and  trembling,  praying  in  them  for  those  that  are 
about  to  perish. 

CONCERNING  THE  PASSION  OF  OUR  LORD,  AND  WHAT 
WAS  DONE  ON  EACH  DAY  OF  HIS  SUFFERINGS  ; 
AND  CONCERNING  JUDAS,  AND  THAT  JUDAS  WAS 
NOT  PRESENT  WHEN  THE  LORD  DELIVERED  THE 
MYSTERIES   TO    HIS    DISCIPLES. 

XIV.  For  they  began  to  hold  a  council  against 
the  Lord  on  the  second  day  of  the  week,  in  the 
first  month,  which  is  Xanthicus ;  and  the  delib- 
eration continued  on  the  third  day  of  the  week ; 
but  on  the  fourth  day  they  determined  to  take 
away  His  life  by  crucifixion.  And  Judas  know- 
ing this,  who  for  a  long  time  had  been  perverted, 
but  was  then  smitten  by  the  devil  himself  with 
the  love  of  money,  although  he  had  been  long 
entrusted  with  the  purse, "^  and  used  to  steal  what 
was  set  apart  for  the  needy,  yet  was  he  not  cast 
off  by  the  Lord,  through  much  long-suffering; 

'■«  Matt.  V.  34,  xxiii.  16. 

"  Rom.  i.  28. 
"■  John  xii.  6. 


444 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


[Book  V. 


nay,  and  when  we  were  once  feasting  with  Him, 
being  wilHng  both  to  reduce  him  to  his  duty  and 
instruct  us  in  His  own  foreknowledge,  He  said  : 
"  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,  that  one  of  you 
will  betray  me ; "  and  every  one  of  us  saying, 
"  Is  it  I?"'  And  the  Lord  being  silent,  I,  who 
was  one  of  the  twelve,  and  more  beloved  by  Him 
than  the  rest,  arose  up  from  lying  in  His  bosom, 
and  besought  Him  to  tell  who  it  should  be  that 
should  betray  Him.  Yet  neither  then  did  our 
good  Lord  declare  His  name,  but  gave  two  signs 
of  the  betrayer  :  one  by  saying,  "he  that  dippeth 
with  me  in  the  dish ; "  a  second,  "  to  whom  I 
shall  give  the  sop  when  I  have  dipped  it."  Nay, 
although  he  himself  said,  "  Master,  is  it  I  ?  "  the 
Lord  did  not  say  Yes,  but,  "  Thou  hast  said." 
And  being  willing  to  affright  him  in  the  matter, 
He  said  :  "  Woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the  Son 
of  man  is  betrayed  !  good  were  it  for  him  if  he 
had  never  been  born.  Who,  when  he  had  heard 
that,  went  his  way,  and  said  to  the  priests.  What 
will  ye  give  me,  and  I  will  deliver  Him  unto  you? 
And  they  bargained  with  him  for  thirty  pieces 
of  silver."  ^  And  the  scripture  was  fulfilled, 
which  said,  "  And  they  took  ^  the  thirty  pieces 
of  silver,  the  price  of  Him  that  was  valued,  whom 
they  of  the  children  of  Israel  did  value,  and  gave 
them  for  the  house  of  the  potter."  •♦  And  on  the 
fifth  day  of  the  week,  when  we  had  eaten  the 
passover  with  Him,  and  when  Judas  had  dipped 
his  hand  into  the  dish,  and  received  the  sop,  and 
was  gone  out  by  night,  the  Lord  said  to  us  : 
"  The  hour  is  come  that  ye  shall  be  dispersed, 
and  shall  leave  me  alone ; "  s  and  every  one 
vehemently  affirming  that  they  would  not  forsake 
Him,  I  Peter  adding  this  promise,  that  I  would 
even  die  with  Him,  He  said,  "  Verily  I  say  unto 
thee,  Before  the  cock  crows,  thou  shalt  thrice 
deny  that  thou  knowest  me."^  And  when  He 
had  delivered  to  us  the  representative  mysteries 
of  His  precious  body  and  blood,  Judas  not  being 
present  with  us,  He  went  out  to  the  Mount  of 
Olives,  near  the  brook  Cedron,  where  there  was 
a  garden  ;  ^  and  we  were  with  Him,  and  sang 
an  hymn  according  to  the  custom.^  And  being 
separated  not  far'^  from  us.  He  prayed  to  His 
Father,  saying  :  "  Father,  remove  this  cup  away 
from  me  ;  yet  not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done."  '° 
And  when  He  had  done  this  thrice,  while  we  out 
of  despondency  of  mind  were  fallen  asleep.  He 
came  and  said  :    "  The  hour  is  come,  and  the 


'  Matt.  xxvi.  21,  22;  John  xiii.  21,  etc. 

2  Matt.  xxvi.  15. 

3  The  words  from  "  And  they  took  "  to  "  house  of  the  potter  "  are 
wanting  in  one  V.  MS.  The  other  reads  "  field  "  of  the  potter,  instead 
of  "  house." 

*  Matt   xxvii.  9,  10. 

5  John  xvi.  32;  Matt.  xxvi.  31. 

*  Luke  xxii.  34. 
'  John  xviii.  i. 

8  Matt.  xxvi.  30. 

9  "  Not  far,"  the  reading  of  the  V.  MSS.  The  others  read:  "  And 
being  separated  from  us,  He  prayed  earnestly." 

'°  Luke  xxii.  42;  Matt.  xxvi.  39,  42. 


Son  of  man  is  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  sinners. 
And  behold  Judas,  and  with  him  a  multitude  of 
ungodly  men,"  "  to  whom  he  shows  the  signal  by 
which  he  was  to  betray  Him  —  a  deceitful  kiss. 
But  they,  when  they  had  received  the  signal 
agreed  on,  took  hold  of  the  Lord ;  and  having 
bound  Him,  they  led  Him  to  the  house  of  Caia- 
phas  the  high  priest,  wherein  were  assembled 
many,  not  the  people,  but  a  great  rout,  not  an 
holy  council,  but  an  assembly  of  the  wicked  and 
council  of  the  ungodly,  who  did  many  things 
against  Him,  and  left  no  kind  of  injury  untried, 
spitting  upon  Him,  cavilling  at  Him,  beating 
Him,  smiting  Him  on  the  face,  reviling  Him, 
tempting  Him,  seeking  vain  divination  instead 
of  true  prophecies  from  Him,  calling  Him  a  de- 
ceiver, a  blasphemer,  a  transgressor  of  Moses,  a 
destroyer  of  the  temple,  a  taker  away  of  sacri- 
fices, an  enemy  to  the  Romans,  an  adversary  to 
Ceesar.  And  these  reproaches  did  these  bulls 
and  dogs  '^  in  their  madness  cast  upon  Him,  till 
it  was  very  early  in  the  morning,  and  then  they 
lead  Him  away  to  Annas,  who  was  father-in-law 
to  Caiaphas ;  and  when  they  had  done  the  like 
things  to  Him  there,  it  being  the  day  of  the 
preparation,  they  delivered  Him  to  Pilate  the 
Roman  governor,  accusing  Him  of  many  and 
great  things,  none  of  which  they  could  prove. 
Whereupon  the  governor,  as  out  of  patience  with 
them,  said  :  "  I  find  no  cause  against  Him."  '^ 
But  they  bringing  two  lying  witnesses,  wished  to 
accuse  the  Lord  falsely  ;  but  they  being  found 
to  disagree,  and  so  their  testimony  not  conspir- 
ing together,  they  altered  the  accusation  to  that 
of  treason,  saying,  "  This  fellow  says  that  He  is  a 
king,  and  forbids  to  give  tribute  to  Caesar."  '* 
And  themselves  became  accusers,  and  witnesses, 
and  judges,  and  authors  of  the  sentence,  saying, 
"  Crucify  Him,  crucify  Him  ;  "  '5  that  it  might 
be  fulfilled  which  is  written  by  the  prophets  con- 
cerning Him,  "  Unjust  witnesses  were  gathered 
together  against  me,  and  injustice  lied  to  itself; "  '^ 
and  again,  "  Many  dogs  compassed  me  about, 
the  assembly  of  the  wicked  laid  siege  against 
me  ;  "  '?  and  elsewhere,  "  My  inheritance  became 
to  me  as  a  lion  in  a  wood,  and  has  sent  forth  her 
voice  against  me."  '*  Pihate  therefore,  disgracing 
his  authority  by  his  pusillanimity,  convicts  him- 
self of  wickedness  by  regarding  the  multitude 
more  than  this  just  person,  and  bearing  witness 
to  Him  that  He  was  innocent,  yet  as  guilty  de- 
livering Him  up  to  the  punishment  of  the  cross, 
although  the  Romans  had  made  laws  that  no 
man  unconvicted  should  be  put  to  death.     But 


"  Luke  xxii.  47;  Matt.  xxvi.  47. 

■^  Ps.  xxii.  12,  16. 

'3  Luke  xxiii.  14;  John  xviii.  38. 

'■*  Luke  xxiii.  2. 

's  Luke  xxiii.  21. 

'<'  Ps.  xxvii.  12. 

"  Ps.  xxii.  16. 

•8  Jer.  xii.  8. 


Sec.  III.] 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


445 


the   executioners  took  the    Lord   of  glory  and 
nailed  Him  to  the  cross,  crucifying  Him  indeed 
at  the  sixth  hour,  but  having  received  the  sen- 
tence of  His  condemnation  at  the  third  hour. 
After  this  they  gave  to  Him  vinegar  to  drink, 
mingled  with  gall.     Then  they  divided  His  gar- 
ments by  lot.     Then  they  crucified  two  male- 
factors with  Him,  on  each  side  one,  that  it  might 
be  fulfilled  which  was  written  :  "  They  gave  me 
gall  to  eat,  and  when  I  was  thirsty  they  gave  me 
vinegar  to  drink."  '     And  again  :  "  They  divided 
my  garment   among  themselves,  and  upon  my 
vesture  have  they  cast  lots."  ^     And  in  another 
place  :    "  And  I  was  reckoned  with  the  trans- 
gressors." 3     Then  there  was  darkness  for  three 
hours,  from   the  sixth  to  the  ninth,  and  again 
light  in  the  evening  ;  as  it  is  written  :  "  It  shall 
not  be  day  nor  night,  and  at  the  evening  there 
shall  be  light."  •♦     All  which  things,5  when  those 
malefactors  saw  that  were  crucified  with  Him, 
the  one  of  them  reproached  Him  as  though  He 
was  weak   and  unable  to  deliver  Himself;  but 
the  other  rebuked  the  ignorance  of  his  fellow, 
and  turning  to  the  Lord,  as  being  enlightened 
by  Him,  and  acknowledging  who  He  was  that 
suffered,  he    prayed    that  He  would  remember 
him  in  His  kingdom  hereafter.^     He  then  pres- 
ently granted  him  the  forgiveness  of  his  former 
sins,  and  brought  him  into  paradise  to  enjoy  the 
mystical  good  things  ;  who  also  cried  out  about 
the  ninth  hour,  and  said  to  His  Father :  "  My 
God  !  my  God  !  why  hast  Thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  ^ 
And  a  little  afterward,  when  He  had  cried  with 
a  loud  voice,  "  Father,  forgive   them,  for  they 
know  not  what  they  do,"  ^  and  had  added,  "  Into 
Thy  hands  I  commit  my  spirit,"  He  gave  up  the 
ghost,9  and  was  buried  before  sunset  in  a  new 
sepulchre.     But  when  the  first  day  of  the  week 
dawned  He  arose  from  the  dead,  and  fulfilled 
those  things  which  before  His  passion  He  fore- 
told to  us,  saying  :   "The  Son  of  man  must  con- 
tinue in  the  heart  of  the  earth  three  days  and 
three  nights."  '°     And  when  He  was  risen  from 
the  dead,  He  appeared  first  to  Mary  Magdalene, 
and  Mary  the  mother  of  James,  then  to  Cleopas 
in  the  way,  and  after  that  to  us  His  disciples, 
who  had  fled  away  for  fear  of  the  Jews,  but 
privately    were    very    inquisitive   about    Him." 
But  these  things  are  also  written  in  the  Gos- 
pel. 


'  Ps.  Ixix.  21. 

2  Ps.  XX  ii.  1 8. 

3  Isa.  liii.  12. 

••  Zech.  xiv.  7.    The  V.  Mss.  read:  "On  that  day  there  will  not 
be  light,  but  there  will  be  cold  and  frost  for  one  day." 

5  The  words  from  "  All  which  things  "  to  "  mystical  good  things  " 
are  omitted  in  one  V.  ms. 

'■  Luke  xxiii.  39,  etc. 

'  Matt,  xxvii.  46. 

*  Luke  xxiii.  34. 

9  Luke  xxiii.  46. 
'o  Matt.  xii.  40. 
"  Markxvi.  9;  John  xx.  11,  etc.;  Luke  xxiv.  18;  Mark  xvi.  14. 


OF  THE  GREAT  WEEK,  AND  ON  WHAT  ACCOUNT 
THEY  ENJOIN  US  TO  FAST  ON  WEDNESDAY  AND 
FRIDAY. 

XV.  He  therefore  charged  us  Himself  to  fast 
these  six  days  on  account  of  the  impiety  and 
transgression  of  the  Jews,  commanding  us  withal 
to  bewail  over  them,  and  lament  for  their  perdi- 
tion.    For  even  He  Himself  "  wept  over  them, 
because  they  knew  not  the  time  of  their  visita- 
tion." '^     But  He  commanded  us  to  fast  on  the 
fourth  and  sixth  days  of  the  week ;  the  former 
on  account  of  His  being  betrayed,  and  the  latter 
on  account  of  His  passion.     But  He  appointed 
us  to  break  our  fast  on  the  seventh  day  at  the 
cock-crowing,  but  to    fast  on  the  Sabbath-day. 
Not  that  the    Sabbath-day  is  a  day  of  fasting, 
being  the  rest  from  the  creation,  but  because  we 
ought  to  fast  on  this  one  Sabbath  only,  while  on 
this  day  the  Creator  was  under  the  earth.     For 
on    their  very  feast-day  they  apprehended    the 
Lord,  that  that  oracle  might  be  fulfilled  which 
says  :  "  They  placed  their  signs  in  the  middle  of 
their  feast,  and  knew  them  not." '^     Ye  ought 
therefore  to  bewail  over  them,  because  when  the 
Lord  came  they  did  not  believe  on  Him,  but 
rejected  His  doctrine,  judging   themselves   un- 
worthy of  salvation.     You  therefore  are  happy 
who   once  were  not  a  people,  but  are  now  an 
holy  nation,  delivered  from  the  deceit  of  idols, 
from  ignorance,  from  impiety,  who  once  had  not 
obtained  mercy,  but  now  have  obtained  mercy 
through  your  hearty  obedience  :  for  to  you,  the 
converted  Gentiles,  is  opened  the  gate  of  life, 
who  formerly  were  not  beloved,  but  are  now  be- 
loved ;  a  people  ordained  for  the  possession  of 
God,  to  show  forth  His  virtues,  concerning  whom 
our  Saviour  said,  "  I  was    found    of  them  that 
sought  me  not ;  I  was  made  manifest  to  them 
that  asked  not  after  me.     I  said.  Behold  me,  to 
a  nation  which  did  not  call  upon  my  name."'* 
For  when  ye  did  not  seek  after  Him,  then  were 
ye  sought  for  by  Him ;  and  you  who  have  be- 
lieved in  Him  have  hearkened  to  His  call,  and 
have  left  the  madness  of  polytheism,  and  have 
fled    to    the   true  monarchy,  to  Almighty  God, 
through  Christ  Jesus,  and  are  become  the  com- 
pletion of  the  number  of  the  saved —  "  ten  thou- 
sand   times    ten    thousand,    and    thousands   of 
thousands  ;  "  '5  as  it  is  written  in  David,  "A  thou- 
sand '^'  shall  fall  beside  thee,  and  ten  thousand  at 
thy  right  hand  ;"  '^  and  again,  "  The  chariots  of 
(;od  are  by  tens  of  thousands,  and  thousands  of 
tlie  prosperous,"  '^     But  unto  unbelieving  Israel 


'-  Luke  xix.  44. 
'^  Ps.  Ixxiv.  4. 
'■'  Isa.  Ixv.  1. 
'S  L)an.  vii.  10. 

'*  The  words  from  "  A  thousand  "  to  "  of  the  prosperous     are  not 
1  the  V.  MSS. 
"  Ps.  xci.  7. 
'^  Ps.  Ixviii.  17.' 


446 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


[Book  V. 


He  says  :  "  All  the  day  long  have  I  stretched 
out  mhie  hands  to  a  disobedient  and  gainsaying 
people,  which  go  in  a  way  that  is  not  good,  but 
after  their  own  sins,  a  people  provoking  me 
before  my  face." ' 

AN  ENUMERATION  OF  THE  PROPHETICAL  PREDIC- 
TIONS WHICH  DECLARE  CHRIST,  WHOSE  COM- 
PLEITON  THOUGH  THE  JEWS  SAW,  YET  OUT  OF 
THE  EVIL  TEMPER  OF  THEIR  MIND  THEY  DID 
NOT  BELIEVE  HE  WAS  THE  CHRIST  OF  GOD,  AND 
CONDEMNED  THE  LORD  OF  GLORY  TO  THE   CROSS. 

XVI.  See  how  the  people  provoked  the  Lord 
by  not  believing  in  Him  !  Therefore  He  says  : 
"They  provoked  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  He  was 
turned  to  be  their  enemy."  ^  For  blindness  is 
cast  upon  them,  by  reason  of  the  wickedness  of 
their  mind,  because,  when  they  saw  Jesus  they 
did  not  believe  Him  to  be  the  Christ  of  God, 
who  was  before  all  ages  ^  begotten  of  Him,  His 
only-begotten  Son,  God  the  Word,  whom  they 
did  not  own  through  their  unbelief,  neither  on 
account  of  His  mighty  works,  nor  yet  on  ac- 
count of  the  prophecies  which  were  written  con- 
cerning Him.  For  that  He  was  to  be  born  of 
a  virgin,  they  read  this  prophecy  :  "  Behold,  a 
virgin  shall  be  with  child,  and  shall  bring  forth 
a  Son,  and  they  shall  call  His  name  Emanuel."  "^ 
"  For  to  us  a  Child  is  born,  to  us  a  Son  is  given, 
whose  government  is  upon  His  shoulders ;  and 
His  name  is  called  the  Angel  of  His  Great 
Council,  the  Wonderful  Counsellor,  the  Mighty 
God,  the  Potentate,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  the 
Father  of  the  Future  Age."  s  Now,  that  be- 
cause of  their  exceeding  great  wickedness  they 
would  not  beUeve  in  Him,  the  Lord  shows  in 
these  words  :  "  Who  hath  believed  our  report  ? 
and  to  whom  hath  the  arm  of  the  Lord  been 
revealed?"''  And  afterward:  "Hearing  ye 
shall  hear,  and  shall  not  understand  ;  and  seeing 
ye  shall  see,  and  shall  not  perceive  :  for  the 
heart  of  this  people  is  waxed  gross."  '  Where- 
fore knowledge  was  taken  from  them,  because 
seeing  they  overlooked,  and  hearing  they  heard 
not.  But  to  you,  the  converted  of  the  Gentiles, 
is  the  kingdom  given,  because  you,  who  knew 
not  God,  have  believed  by  preaching,  and  "  have 
known  Him,  or  rather  are  known  of  Him,"  ^ 
through  Jesus,  the  Saviour  and  Redeemer  of 
those  that  hope  in  Him.  For  ye  are  translated 
from  your  former  vain  and  tedious  mode  of  life, 
and  have  contemned  the  lifeless  idols,  and  de- 
spised the  demons,  which  are  in  darkness,  and 


■  Isa.  Ixv.  2. 

2  Isa.  Ixiii.  lo. 

3  One  V.  MS.  omits  "  ages,"  and  the  other  "  begotten  of  Him." 

*  Isa.  vii.  14;   Matt.  i.  23. 

5  Isa.  ix.  6.     [Justin  Martyr,  p.  236,  n.  8,  vol.  i.,  this  series.] 
'  Isa.  liii.  I. 
7  Isa.  vi.  9,  10. 

*  Gal.  iv.  9. 


have  run  to  the  "  true  light,"  ^  and  by  it  have 
"  kuown  the  one  and  only  true  God  and  Father,"  '° 
and  so  are  owned  to  be  heirs  of  His  kingdom. 
For  since  ye  have  "  been  baptized  into  the 
Lord's  death,"  "  and  into  His  resurrection,  as 
"  new-born  babes,"  '-  ye  ought  to  be  wholly  free 
from  all  sinful  actions  ;  "  for  you  are  not  your 
own,  but  His  that  bought  you  "  '^  with  His  own 
blood.  For  concerning  the  former  Israel  the 
Lord  speaks  thus,  on  account  of  their  unbelief: 
"  The  kingdom  of  God  shall  be  taken  from 
them,  and  given  to  a  nation  bringing  forth  the 
fruits  thereof;  "  '■♦  that  is  to  say,  that  having  given 
the  kingdom  to  you,  who  were  once  far  estranged 
from  Him,  He  expects  the  fruits  of  your  grati- 
tude and  probity.  For  ye  are  those  that  were 
once  sent  into  the  vineyard,  and  did  not  obey, 
but  these  they  that  did  obey ;  '5  but  you  have 
repented  of  your  denial,  and  you  work  therein 
now.  But  they,  being  uneasy  on  account  of 
their  own  covenants,  have  not  only  left  the  vine- 
yard uncultivated,  but  have  also  killed  the  stew- 
ards of  the  Lord  of  the  vineyard,'^  —  one  with 
stones,  another  with  the  sword  ;  one  they  sawed 
asunder,'7  another  they  slew  in  the  holy  place, 
"  between  the  temple  and  the  altar  ;  "  '^  nay,  at 
last  they  "  cast  the  Heir  Himself  out  of  the 
vineyard,  and  slew  Him."  '9  And  by  them  He 
was  rejected  as  an  unprofitable  stone,^°  but  by 
you  was  received  as  the  corner-stone.  Where- 
fore He  says  concerning  you  :  "  A  people  whom 
I  knew  not  have  served  nie,  and  at  the  hearing 
of  the  ear  have  they  obeyed  me."  ^' 

HOW  THE   PASSOVER   OUGHT   TO    BE   CELEBRATED. 

XVII.  It  is  therefore  your  duty,  brethren,  who 
are  redeemed  by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ, 
to  observe  the  days  of  the  passover  exactly,  with 
all  care,  after  the  vernal  equinox,  lest  ye  be 
obliged  to  keep  the  memorial  of  the  one  passion 
twice  in  a  year.  Keep  it  once  only  in  a  year  for 
Him  that  died  but  once. 

Do  not  you  yourselves  compute,  but  keep  it 
when  your  brethren  of  the  circumcision  do  so  : 
keep  it  together  with  them ;  and  if  they  err  in 
their  computation,  be  not  you  concerned.  Keep 
your  nights  of  watching  in  the  middle  of  the  days 
of  unleavened  bread.  And  ivhen  the  Jews  are 
feasting,  do  you  fast  atid  wail  over  them,  because 
on  the  day  of  their  feast  they  crucified  Christ: 


9  John  i.  9. 

°  John  xvii.  3. 

'  Rom.  vi.  3. 

-  I  Pet.  ii.  2. 

^  I  Cor.  vi.  19,  20. 

*  Matt.  xxi.  43. 

5  Matt.  xxi.  28,  etc. 

*  Matt.  xxi.  35. 
^  Heb.  xi.  37. 

'  Matt  xxiii.  35. 

9  Matt.  xxi.  39. 
20  Matt.  xxi.  42. 

2'  Ps.  xviii.  43,  44. 


Sec.  III.] 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


447 


and  while  they  are  lamenting  and  eating  un- 
leavened bread  in  bitterness,  do  you  feast.'  But 
no  longer  be  careful  to  keep  the  feast  with  the 
Jews,  for  we  have  now  no  communion  with  them  ; 
for  they  have  been  led  astray  in  regard  to  the 
calculation  itself,  which  they  think  they  accom- 
plish perfectly,  that  they  may  be  led  astray  on 
every  hand,  and  be  fenced  off  from  the  truth. 
But  do  you  observe  carefully  the  vernal  equinox, 
which  occurs  on  the  twenty-second  of  the  twelfth 
month,  which  is  Dystros  (March),  observing 
carefully  until  the  twenty-first  of  the  moon,  lest 
the  fourteenth  of  the  moon  shall  fall  on  another 
week,  and  an  error  being  committed,  you  should 
through  ignorance  celebrate  the  passover  twice 
in  the  year,  or  celebrate  the  day  of  the  resurrec- 
tion of  our  Lord  on  any  other  day  than  a  Sunday. 

A  CONSTITUTION  CONCERNING  THE  GREAT   PASSOVER 
WEEK. 

XVIII.  Do  you  therefore  fast  on  the  days  of 
the  passover,  beginning  from  the  second  day 
of  the  week  until  the  preparation,  and  the  Sab- 
bath, six  days,  making  use  of  only  bread,  and 
salt,  and  herbs,  and  water  for  your  drink ;  but 
do  you  abstain  on  these  days  from  wine  and 
flesh,  for  they  are  days  of  lamentation  and  not 
of  feasting.  Do  ye  who  are  able  fast  the  day  of 
the  preparation  and  the  Sabbath-day  entirely, 
tasting  nothing  till  the  cock-crowing  of  the  night ; 
but  if  any  one  is  not  able  to  join  them  both  to- 
gether, at  least  let  him  observe  the  Sabbath-day  ; 
for  the  Lord  says  somewhere,  speaking  of  Him- 
self: "When  the  bridegroom  shall  be  taken 
away  from  them,  in  those  days  shall  they  fast."  ^ 
In  these  days,  therefore.  He  was  taken  from  us  by 
the  Jews,  falsely  so  named,  and  fastened  to  the 
cross,  and  "was  numbered  among  the  trans- 
gressors." 3 

CONCERNING  THE  WATCHING  ALL  THE  NIGHT  OF 
THE  GREAT  SABBATH,  AND  CONCERNING  THE  DAY 
OF  THE  RESURRECTION, 

XIX.  Wherefore  we  exhort  you  to  fast  on  those 
days,  as  we  also  fasted  till  the  evening,  when  He 
was  taken  away  from  us  ;  but  on  the  rest  of  the 
days,  before  the  day  of  the  preparation,  let  every 
one  eat  at  the  ninth  hour,  or  at  the  evening,  or 
as  every  one  is  able.  But  from  the  even  of  the 
fifth  day  till  cock-crowing  break  your  fast  when 
it  is  daybreak  of  the  first  day  of  the  week,  which 
is  the  Lord's  day.  From  the  even  till  cock- 
crowing  keep  awake,  and  assemble  together  in 
the  church,  watch  and  pray,  and  entreat  God  ; 
reading,  when   you  sit  up  all  night,  the   Law, 


'  This  italicized  passage  does  not  occur  in  the  MSS.,  but  is  taken 
from  Epiphanius.  It  is  believed  to  be  genuine,  in  which  case  what 
follows  must  be  regarded  as  the  work  of  the  interpolator.  [See  Epi- 
phanius, torn,  iv,  p.  29,  ed    Oehlcr,  1861.] 

2  Matt.  ix.  15;   Mark  li.  20;   Luke  v.  35. 

3  Isa.  liii  12. 


the  Prophets,  and  the  Psalms,  until  cock-crow- 
ing, and  baptizing  your  catechumens,  and  read- 
ing the  Gospel  with  fear  and  trembling,  and 
speaking  to  the  people  such  things  as  tend  to 
their  salvation  :  put  an  end  to  your  sorrow,  and 
beseech  God  that  Israel  may  be  converted,  and 
that  He  will  allow  them  place  of  repentance, 
and  the  remission  of  their  impiety  ;  for  the  judge, 
who  was  a  stranger,  "  washed  his  hands,  and 
said,  I  am  innocent  of  the  blood  of  this  just  per- 
son :  see  ye  to  it.  But  Israel  cried  out.  His  blood 
be  on  us,  and  on  our  children."  *  And  when 
Pilate  said,  "  Shall  I  crucify  your  king?  they  cried 
out.  We  have  no  king  but  Ca;sar :  crucify  Him, 
crucify  Him  ;  for  every  one  that  maketh  himself 
a  king  speaketh  against  C^sar."  And,  "  If  thou 
let  this  man  go,  thou  art  not  Caesar's  friend."  5 
And  Pilate  the  governor  and  Herod  the  king  com- 
manded Him  to  be  crucified ;  and  that  oracle 
was  fulfilled  which  says,  "Why  did  the  Gentiles 
rage,  and  the  people  imagine  vain  things?  The 
kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  and  the  rulers 
were  gathered  together  against  the  Lord,  and 
against  His  Christ ;  "  ^  and,  "  They  cast  away  the 
Beloved,  as  a  dead  man,  who  is  abominable."  7 
And  since  He  was  crucified  on  the  day  of  the 
Preparation,  and  rose  again  at  break  of  day  on 
the  Lord's  day,  the  scripture  was  fulfilled  which 
saith,  "  Arise,  O  God  ;  judge  the  earth  :  for  Thou 
shalt  have  an  inlieritance  in  all  the  nations  ;  "  ** 
and  again,  "  I  will  arise,  saith  the  Lord  ;  I  will  put 
Him  in  safety,  I  will  wax  bold  through  Him  ;  "  ^ 
and,  "  But  Thou,  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  me,  and 
raise  me  up  again,  and  I  shall  requite  them."  ■" 
For  this  reason  do  you  also,  now  the  Lord  is 
risen,  offer  your  sacrifice,  concerning  which  He 
made  a  constitution  by  us,  saying,  "  Do  this  for 
a  remembrance  of  me;""  and  thenceforward 
leave  off  your  fasting,  and  rejoice,  and  keep  a 
festival,  because  Jesus  Christ,  the  pledge  of  our 
resurrection,  is  risen  from  the  dead.  And  let 
this  be  an  everlasting  ordinance  till  the  consum- 
mation of  the  world,  until  the  Lord  come.  For 
to  Jews  the  Lord  is  still  dead,  but  to  Christians 
He  is  risen  :  to  the  former,  by  their  unbelief;  to 
the  latter,  by  their  full  assurance  of  faith.  For 
the  hope  in  Him  is  immortal  and  eternal  life. 
After  eight  days  let  there  be  another  feast  ob- 
served with  honour,  the  eighth  day  itself,  on 
which  He  gave  me  Thomas,  who  was  hard  of 
belief,  full  assurance,  by  showing  me  the  print 
of  the  nails,  and  the  wound  made  in  His  side  by 
the  spear.'^'     And  again,  from  the  first  Lord's 


*  Matt,  xxvii.  24,  25. 

5  John  xix.  15,  6,  12. 

6  Ps.  ii.  I,  2. 
1  Isa.  xiv.  ig. 

*  Ps.  Ixxxii.  8. 
9  Ps.  xii.  5. 

•o  Ps.  xli.  10. 
"  Luke  xxii.  19. 
'-  John  XX.  25. 


448 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


[Book  V. 


day  count  forty  days,  from  the  Lord's  day  till 
the  fifth  day  of  the  week,  and  celebrate  the  feast 
of  the  ascension  of  the  Lord,  whereon  He  fin- 
ished all  His  dispensation  and  constitution,  and 
returned  to  that  God  and  Father  that  sent  Him, 
and  sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  power,  and 
remains  there  until  His  enemies  are  put  under 
His  feet ;  who  also  will  come  at  the  consumma- 
tion of  the  world  with  power  and  great  glory,  to 
judge  the  quick  and  the  dead,  and  to  recom- 
pense to  every  one  according  to  his  works.  And 
then  shall  they  see  the  beloved  Son  of  God  whom 
they  pierced  ; '  and  when  they  know  Him,  they 
shall  mourn  for  themselves,  tribe  by  tribe,  and 
their  wives  apart.^ 

A    PROPHETIC    PREDICTION    CONCERNING    CHRIST 
JESUS. 

XX.  For  even  now,  on  the  tenth  day  of  the 
month  Gorpiseus,  when  they  assemble  together, 
they    read   the    Lamentations    of  Jeremiah,    in 
which  it  is  said,  "The  Spirit  before  our  face, 
Christ   the    Lord  was   taken   in   their   destruc- 
tions ; "  3   and   Baruch,   in  whom  it  is  written, 
"  This  is  our  God ;  no  other  shall  be  esteemed 
with  Him.     He  found  out  every  way  of  knowl- 
edge, and  showed  it  to  Jacob  His  son,  and  Israel 
His    beloved.     Afterwards    He  was   seen   upon  ] 
earth,  and  conversed  with  men."  ^     And  when 
they   read   them,    they   lament   and   bewail,  as 
themselves  suppose,  that  desolation  w^hich  hap- 
pened by  Nebuchadnezzar;   but,  as  the   truth 
shows,  they  unwillingly  make  a  prelude  to  that 
lamentation  which  will  overtake  them.    But  after 
ten  days   from  the  ascension,  which  from  the 
first  Lord's  day  is  the  fiftieth  day,  do  ye  keep 
a  great  festival :  for  on  that  day,  at  the  third 
hour,  the  Lord  Jesus  sent  on  us  the  gift  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  and  we  were  filled  with  His  energy, 
and  we  "  spake  with  new  tongues,  as  that  Spirit 
did  suggest  to  us  ;  "  5  and  we  preached  both  to 
Jews  and  Gentiles,  that  He  is  the  Christ  of  God, 
who  is  "  determined  by  Him  to  be  the  Judge 
of  quick  and  dead."  "^     To  Him  did  Moses  bear 
witness,  and  said  :  "  The  Lord  received  fire  from 
the  Lord,  and  rained  it  down."  7    Him  did  Jacob 
see  as  a  man,  and  said  :  "  I  have  seen  God  face 
to  face,  and  my  soul  is  preserved."  *     Him  did 
Abraham  entertain,  and  acknowledge  to  be  the 
Judge,  and  his  Lord.^     Him  did  Moses  see  in 
the  bush  ; '°  concerning  Him  did  he  speak  in 
Deuteronomy :  "  A  Prophet  will  the  Lord  your 


God  raise  up  unto  you  out  of  your  brethren, 
like  unto  me  ;  Him  shall  ye  hear  in  all  things, 
whatsoever  He  shall  say  unto  you.     And  it  shall 
be,  that  every  soul  that  will  not  hear  that  Prophet, 
shall  be  destroyed  from  among  his  people."" 
Him  did  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun  see,  as  the 
captain  of  the  Lord's  host,  in  armour,  for  their 
assistance  against  Jericho  ;  to  whom  he  fell  down, 
and  worshipped,  as  a  servant  does  to  his  master.'^ 
Him  Samuel  knew  as  the  "  Anointed  of  God,"  'J 
!  and  thence  named  the  priests  and  the  kings  the 
anointed.     Him  David  knew,  and  sung  an  hymn 
concerning  Him,  "  A  song  concerning  the  Be- 
loved ; "  "*   and    adds   in   his    person,   and  says, 
"  Gird  Thy  sword  upon  Thy  thigh,  O  Thou  who 
art  mighty  in  Thy  beauty  and  renown  :  go  on, 
and  prosper,  and  reign,  for  the  sake  of  truth, 
and  meekness,  and  righteousness  ;  and  Thy  right 
hand  shall  guide  Thee  after  a  wonderful  manner. 
Thy  darts  are  sharpened,  O  Thou  that  art  mighty  ; 
the  people  shall  fall  under  Thee  in  the  heart  of 
i  the  king's  enemies.     Wherefore  God,  Thy  God, 
!hath  anointed  Thee  with   the    oil   of  gladness 
above    Thy    fellows."      Concerning    Him    also 
spake  Solomon,  as  in  His  person  :  "  The  Lord 
created  me  the  beginning  of  His  ways,  for  His 
works :    before    the  world  He  founded  me,  in 
the  beginning  before  He  made  the  earth,  before 
the  fountains  of  waters  came,  before  the  moun- 
tains were  fastened  ;  He  begat  me  before  all  the 
hills."  '5     And  again  :  "  Wisdom  built  herself  an 
house."  '^     Concerning  Him  also  Isaiah   said  : 
"  A  Branch  shall  come  out  of  the  root  of  Jesse, 
and  a  Flower  shall  spring  out  of  his  root."    And, 
"  There  shall  be  a  root  of  Jesse  ;  and  He  that 
is  to  rise  to  reign  over  the  Gentiles,  in   Him 
shall  the  Gentiles  trust."  '7    And  Zechariah  says  : 
"  '^  Behold,  thy  King  cometh  unto  thee,  just,  and 
having  salvation  ;  meek,  and  riding  upon  an  ass, 
and  upon  a  colt,  the  foal  of  an  ass."  "^     Him 
Daniel  describes  as  "  the  Son  of  man  coming 
to  the  Father,"  ^°  and  receiving  all  judgment  and 
honour  from  Him  ;  and  as  "  the  stone  cut  out 
!  of  the  mountain  without  hands,  and  becoming 
a  great  mountain,  and  filling  the  whole  earth,"  ^' 
dashing  to  pieces  the  many  governments  of  the 
'  smaller  countries,  and  the  polytheism  of  gods, 
I  but  preaching  the  one  God,  and  ordaining  the 
monarchy   of  the    Romans.     Concerning   Him 
also  did  Jeremiah  prophesy,  saying  :  "  The  Spirit 
before  His  face,  Christ  the  Lord,  was  taken  in 
their  snares  :  of  whom  we  said.  Under  His  shadow 


'  Zech.  xii.  lo;  John  xix.  37. 

2  The  words  "  and  their  wives  apart "  are  not  in  one  V.  MS. 

3  Lam.  iv.  20. 

*  Bar.  iii.  35-37. 
5  Acts  ii.  4. 
<>  Acts  X.  42. 
'  Gen.  xix.  24. 
'  Gen.  xxxii.  30. 
9  Gen.  xviii.  25,  27. 
'°  Ex.  iii.  2. 


"  Deut.  xviii.  15. 

'-  Josh.  V.  14. 

'3  I  Sam.  xii.  3. 

i-i  Ps   xlv. 

'5   Prov.  viii.  22-25. 

■^  Prov.  ix.  1. 

■'  Isa.  xi.  I,  10. 

'3  One  V.  MS.  inserts: 

'9  Zech.  ix.  9. 

2°  Dan.  vii.  13. 

2'  Dan.  ii.  34. 


'  Rejoice  greatly,  O  daughter  of  Zion.' 


Sec.  III.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


449 


we  shall  live  among  the  Gentiles." '  Ezekiel  also, 
and  the  following  prophets,  afifirm  everywhere 
that  He  is  the  Christ,  the  Lord,  the  King,  the 
Judge,  the  Lawgiver,  the  Angel  of  the  Father, 
the  only-begotten  God.  Him  therefore  do  we 
also  preach  to  you,  and  declare  Him  to  be  God 
the  Word,  who  ministered  to  His  God  and  Father 
for  the  creation  of  the  universe.  By  believing 
in  Him  you  shall  live,  but  by  disbelieving  you 
shall  be  punished.  For  "  he  that  is  disobedient 
to  the  Son  shall  not  see  life,  but  the  wrath  of 
God  abideth  on  him."  ^  Therefore,  after  you 
have  kept  the  festival  of  Pentecost,  keep  one 
week  more  festival,  and  after  that  fast ;  for  it  is 
reasonable  to  rejoice  for  the  gift  of  God,  and  to 
fast  after  that  rela.xation  :  for  both  Moses  and 
Elijah  fasted  forty  days,  and  Daniel  for  "  three 
weeks  of  days  did  not  eat  desirable  bread,  and 
flesh  and  wine  did  not  enter  into  his  mouth."  ^ 
And  blessed  Hannah,  when  she  asked  for  Sam- 
uel, said  :  "  I  have  not  drunk  wine  nor  strong 


'  Lam.  iv.  20. 
*  John  iii.  36. 
3  Ex.  xxjciv.  28;  I  Kings  xix.  8;  Dan.  x.  2,  3. 


drink,  and  I  pour  out  my  soul  before  the  Lord."  * 
And  the  Ninevites,  when  they  fasted  three  days 
and  three  nights,s  escaped  the  execution  of 
wrath.  And  Esther,  and  Mordecai,  and  Judith,^ 
by  fasting,  escaped  the  insurrection  of  the  un- 
godly Holofernes  and  Haman.  And  David  says  : 
"  My  knees  are  weak  through  fasting,  and  my 
flesh  faileth  for  want  of  oil."  ?  Do  you  there- 
fore fast,  and  ask  your  petitions  of  God.  We 
enjoin  you  to  fast  every  fourth  day  of  the  week, 
and  every  day  of  the  preparation,  and  the  sur- 
plusage of  your  fast  bestow  upon  the  needy; 
every  Sabbath-day  excepting  one,  and  every 
Lord's  day,  hold  your  solemn  assemblies,  and 
rejoice  :  for  he  will  be  guilty  of  sin  who  fasts  on 
the  Lord's  day,  being  the  day  of  the  resurrec- 
tion, or  during  the  time  of  Pentecost,  or,  in 
general,  who  is  sad  on  a  festival  day  to  the 
Lord.  For  on  them  we  ought  to  rejoice,  and 
not  to  mourn. 


<  I  Sam.  i.  15. 

5  Jonah  iii.  5. 

6  Esth.  iv.  i5;  Judith  viii.  6. 

7  Ps.  cix.  24. 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 

BOOK    VI. 


SEC.    I.  —  ON   HERESIES. 

WHO     THEY     WERE     THAT     VENTURED      TO      MAKE 
SCHISMS,    AND    DID    NOT    ESCAPE   PUNISHMENT. 

I.  Above  all  things,  O  bishop,  avoid  the  sad 
and  dangerous  and  most  atheistical  heresies, 
eschewing  them  as  fire  that  burns  those  that 
come  near  to  it.  Avoid  also  schisms  :  for  it  is 
neither  lawful  to  turn  one's  mind  towards  wicked 
heresies,  nor  to  separate  from  those  of  the  same 
sentiment  out  of  ambition.  For  some  who  ven- 
tured to  set  up  such  practices  of  old  did  not 
escape  punishment.  For  Dathan  and  Abiram,' 
who  set  up  in  opposition  to  Moses,  were  swal- 
lowed up  into  the  earth.  But  Corah,  and  those 
two  hundred  and  fifty  who  with  him  raised  a 
sedition  against  Aaron,  were  consumed  by  fire. 
Miriam  also,  who  reproached  Moses,  was  cast 
out  of  the  camp  for  seven  days ;  for  she  said 
that  Moses  had  taken  an  Ethiopian  to  wife.^ 
Nay,  in  the  case  of  Azariah  and  Uzziah,^  the 
latter  of  which  was  king  of  Judah,  but  venturing 
to  usurp  the  priesthood,  and  desiring  to  offer 
incense,  which  it  was  not  lawful  for  him  to  do, 
was  hindered  by  Azariah  the  high  priest,  and 
the  fourscore  priests  ;  and  when  he  would  not 
obey  he  found  the  leprosy  to  arise  in  his  fore- 
head, and  he  hastened  to  go  out,  because  the 
Lord  had  reproved  him. 

THAT    IT    IS    NOT    LAWFUL    TO     RISE     UP     EITHER 
AGAINST   THE    KINGLY    OR   THE    PRIESTLY    OFFICE. 

II.  Let  US  therefore,  beloved,  consider  what 
sort  of  glory  that  of  the  seditious  is,  and  what 
their  condemnation.  For  if  he  that  rises  up 
against  kings  is  worthy  of  punishment,  even 
though  he  be  a  son  or  a  friend,  how  much  more 
he  that  rises  up  against  the  priests  !  For  by 
how  much  the  priesthood  is  more  noble  than 
the  royal  power,  as  having  its  concern  about 
the  soul,  so  much  has  he  a  greater  punishment 
who  ventures  to  oppose  the  priesthood,  than  he 
who  ventures  to  oppose  the  royal  power,  although 


neither  of  them  goes  unpunished.  For  neither 
did  Absalom  nor  Abdadan^  escape  without  pun- 
ishment ;  nor  Corah  and  Dathan.'  The  former 
rose  against  David,  and  strove  concerning  the 
kingdom  ;  the  latter  against  Moses,  concerning 
pre-eminence.  And  they  both  spake  evil ;  Absa- 
lom of  his  father  David,  as  of  an  unjust  judge, 
saying  to  every  one  :  "  Thy  words  are  good,  but 
there  is  no  one  that  will  hear  thee,  and  do  thee 
justice.  Who  will  make  me  a  ruler?  "5  But 
Abdadan  :  "  I  have  no  part  in  David,  nor  any 
inheritance  in  the  son  of  Jesse." '^  It  is  plain 
that  he  could  not  endure  to  be  under  David's 
government,  of  whom  God  spake :  "  I  have 
found  David  the  son  of  Jesse,  a  man  after  my 
heart,  who  will  do  all  my  commands."  ^  But 
Dathan  and  Abiram,  and  the  followers  of  Corah, 
said  to  Moses  :  "  Is  it  a  small  thing  that  thou 
hast  brought  us  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  out 
of  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey  ?  And 
why  hast  thou  put  out  our  eyes?  And  wilt  thou 
rule  over  us?"  And  they  gathered  together 
against  him  a  great  congregation ;  and  the  fol- 
lowers of  Corah  said  :  "  Has  God  spoken  alone 
to  Moses?  Why  is  it  that  He  has  given  the 
high-priesthood  to  Aaron  alone?  Is  not  all  the 
congregation  of  the  Lord  holy?  And  why  is 
Aaron  alone  possessed  of  the  priesthood?"^ 
And  before  this,  one  said  :  "  Who  made  thee  a 
ruler  and  a  judge  over  us?  "  9 

CONCERNING  THE  VIRTUE  OF  MOSES  AND  THE  IN- 
CREDULITY OF  THE  JEWISH  NATION,  AND  WHAT 
WONDERFUL  WORKS   GOD   DID   AMONG  THEM. 

III.  And  they  raised  a  sedition  against  Moses 
the  servant  of  God,  the  meekest  of  all  men,'°  and 
faithful,  and  affronted  "  so  great  a  man  with  the 
highest  ingratitude  ;  him  who  was  their  lawgiver, 
and  guardian,  and  high  priest,  and  king,  the  ad- 


'  Num.  xvi. 
*  Num.  xii.  i. 
3  2  Chron.  xxvi. 


<  2  Sam.  xviii.-xx. 
5  2  Sam.  XV.  3. 
<>  2  Sam.  XX.  I. 
'  Acts  xiii.  22. 

8  Num.  xvi.  13,  xii.  2,  xvi.  3. 

9  Ex.  ii.  14. 

'°  Num.  xii.  3.  ,  ,      ,  •    ,    1-         .. 

"  The  words  from  "  and  affronted     to     by  his  hoUness    are  not 
in  one  V.  MS. 


450 


Sec.  II.] 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


451 


ministrator  of  divine  things  ;  one  that  showed  as 
a  creator  the  mighty  works  of  the  Creator ;  the 
meekest  man,  freest  from  arrogance,  and  full  of 
fortitude,  and  most  benign  in  his  temper  ;  one 
who  had  delivered  them  from  many  dangers, 
and  freed  them  from  several  deaths  by  his  holi- 
ness ;  who  had  done  so  many  signs  and  wonders 
from  God  before  the  people,  and  had  performed 
glorious  and  wonderful  works  for  their  benefit ; 
who  had '  brought  the  ten  plagues  upon  the 
Egyptians ;  who  had  divided  the  Red  Sea,  and 
had  separated  the  waters  as  a  wall  on  this  side 
and  on  that  side,  and  had  led  the  people  through 
them  as  through  a  dry  wilderness,^  and  had 
drowned  Pharaoh  and  the  Egyptians,  and  all  that 
were  in  company  with  them  ;  ^  and  had  made 
the  fountain  sweet  for  them  with  wood,  and  had 
brought  water  out  of  the  stony  rock  for  them 
when  they  were  thirsty ;  ^  and  had  given  them 
manna  out  of  heaven,  and  had  distributed  flesh 
to  them  out  of  the  air  ;  s  and  had  afforded  them 
a  pillar  of  fire  in  the  night  to  enlighten  and  con- 
duct them,  and  a  pillar  of  a  cloud  to  shadow 
them  in  the  day,  by  reason  of  the  violent  heat 
of  the  sun  ;  ^  and  had  exhibited  to  them  the  law 
of  God,  engraven  from  the  mouth,  and  hand, 
and  writing  of  God,  in  tables  of  stone,  the  per- 
fect number  of  ten  commandments  ; '  "  to  whom 
God  spake  face  to  face,  as  if  a  man  spake  to  his 
friend  ;  "  ^  of  whom  He  said,  "  And  there  arose 
not  a  prophet  like  unto  Moses."  ^  Against  him 
arose  the  followers  of  Corah,  and  the  Reuben- 
ites,'°  and  threw  stones  at  Moses,  who  prayed, 
and  said:  "  Accept  not  Thou  their  offering."  " 
And  the  glory  of  God  appeared,  and  sent  some 
down  into  the  earth,  and  burnt  up  others  with 
fire  ;  and  so,  as  to  those  ringleaders  of  this  schis- 
matical  deceit  which  said,  ''  Let  us  make  our- 
selves a  leader,"  '^  the  earth  opened  its  mouth, 
and  swallowed  them  up,  and  their  tents,  and 
what  appertained  to  them,  and  they  went  down 
alive  into  hell ;  but  He  destroyed  the  followers 
of  Corah  with  fire. 

SEC.    II. HISTORY    AND    DOCTRINES    OF    HERESIES. 

THAT  SCHISM  IS  MADE  NOT  BY  HIM  WHO  SEPA- 
RATES HIMSELF  FROM  THE  UNGODLY,  BUT  WHO 
DEPARTS    FROM    THE    GODLY. 

IV.  If  therefore  God  inflicted  pimishment  im- 
mediately on  those  that  made  a  schism  on  ac- 

'  The  words  from  "  who  had"  to  "  Egyptians"  are  not  in  one 

V.  MS. 

^  Ex.  vii.,  etc. 
3  Ex.  xiv.  28. 
*  Ex.  xvii.  6. 
S  Ex.  xvi 
*"  Ex.  xiii.  21. 
'  Ex.  xxxi.,  etc. 
^  Ex.  xx.\iii.  n. 
9  Dent,  xxxiv   10. 
'°  Num.  xiv.  10. 
"  Num.  xvi.  15. 
•2  Mum,  xiv.  5. 


count  of  their  ambition,  how  much  rather  will 
He  do  it  upon  those  who  are  the  leaders  of 
impious  heresies  !  Will  not  He  inflict  severer 
punishment  on  those  that  blaspheme  His  provi- 
dence or  His  creation?  But  do  you,  brethren, 
who  are  instructed  out  of  the  Scripture,  take 
care  not  to  make  divisions  in  opinion,  nor  di- 
visions in  unity.  For  those  who  set  up  unlawful 
opinions  are  marks  of  perdition  to  the  people. 
In  like  manner,  do  not  you  of  the  laity  come 
near  to  such  as  advance  doctrines  contrary  to 
the  mind  of  God  ;  nor  be  you  partakers  of  their 
impiety.  For  says  God  :  "  Separate  yourselves 
from  the  midst  of  these  men,  lest  you  perish 
together  with  them."  '^  And  again  :  "  Depart 
from  the  midst  of  them,  and  separate  yourselves, 
says  the  Lord,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing, 
and  I  will  receive  you."  '•♦ 

UPON  WHAT  ACCOUNT  ISRAEL,  FALSELY  SO  NAMED, 
IS  REJECTED  BY  GOD,  DEMONSTRATED  FROM  THE 
PROPHETIC    PREDICTIONS. 

V.  For  those  are  most  certainly  to  be  avoided 
who  blaspheme  God.  The  greatest  part  of  the 
ungodly,  indeed,  are  ignorant  of  God  ;  but  these 
men,  as  fighters  against  God,  are  possessed  with 
a  wilful  evil  disposition,  as  with  a  disease.  For 
from  the  wickedness  of  these  heretics  ''  pollu- 
tion is  gone  out  upon  all  the  earth,"  's  as  says  the 
prophet  Jeremiah.  For  the  wicked  synagogue  is 
now  cast  off  by  the  Lord  God,  and  His  house 
is  rejected  by  Him,  as  He  somewhere  speaks  : 
"  I  have  forsaken  mine  house,  I  have  left  mine 
inheritance."  '^  And  again,  says  Isaiah  :  "  I  will 
neglect  my  vineyard,  and  it  shall  not  be  pruned 
nor  digged,  and  thorns  shall  spring  up  upon  it, 
as  upon  a  desert ;  and  I  will  command  the  clouds 
that  they  rain  no  rain  upon  it."  ''  He  has  there- 
fore "  left  His  people  as  a  tent  in  a  vineyard,  and 
as  a  garner  in  a  fig  or  olive  yatd,  and  as  a  be- 
sieged city."  '^  He  has  taken  away  from  them 
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  prophetic  rain,  and  has 
replenished  His  Church  with  spiritual  grace,  as 
the  "  river  of  Egypt  in  the  time  of  first-fruits  ;  "  '^ 
and  has  advanced  the  same  "  as  an  house  u])on 
an  hill,  or  as  an  high  mountain  ;  as  a  mountain 
fruitful  for  milk  and  fatness,  wherein  it  has  ])lcased 
God  to  dwell.  For  the  Lord  will  inhabit  therein 
to  the  end."  ^"  And  He  says  in  Jeremiah  :  "  Our 
sanctuary  is  an  exalted  throne  of  glory."-'  And 
He  says  in  Isaiah  :  "  And  it  shall  come  to  pass 
in  the  last  days,  that  the  mountain  of  the  Lord 
shall  be  glorious,  and  the  house  of  the  Lord  shall 


'3  Num.  xvi.  21. 

"  2  Cor.  vi.  17. 

'5  Jer.  xxiii.  15. 

"^  Jer.  xii.  7. 

'7  Isa.  V.  6. 

"  Isa.  i.  8. 

'9  See  Ecchis.  xxiv.  25. 

=0  Ps.  Ixviii.  16. 

*'  Jer.  xvii.  12. 


45^ 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


[Book  VI. 


be  upon  the  top  of  the  mountains,  and  shall  be 
advanced  above  the  hills."  '  Since,  therefore. 
He  has  forsaken  His  people.  He  has  also  left 
His  temple  desolate,  and  rent  the  veil  of  the 
temple,  and  took  from  them  the  Holy  Spirit ;  for 
says  He,  "  Behold,  your  house  is  left  unto  you 
desolate."  ^  And  He  has  bestowed  upon  you, 
the  converted  of  the  Gentiles,  spiritual  grace,  as 
He  says  by  Joel :  ''  And  it  shall  come  to  pass 
after  these  things,  saith  God,  that  I  will  pour  out 
of  my  Spirit  upon  all  flesh  ;  and  your  sons  shall 
prophesy,  and  your  daughters  shall  see  visions, 
and  your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams."  ^  For 
God  has  taken  away  all  the  power  and  efficacy 
of  His  word,  and  such  like  visitations,  from  that 
people,  and  has  transferred  it  to  you,  the  con- 
verted of  the  Gentiles.  For  on  this  account  the 
devil  himself  is  very  angry  at  the  holy  Church 
of  God  :  he  is  removed  to  you,  and  has  raised 
against  you  adversities,  seditions,  and  reproaches, 
schisms,  and  heresies.  For  he  had  before  sub- 
dued that  people  to  himself,  by  their  slaying  of 
Christ.  But  you  who  have  left  his  vanities  he 
tempts  in  different  ways,  as  he  did  the  blessed 
Job.-*  For  indeed  he  opposed  that  great  high 
priest  Joshua  the  son  of  Josedek  ;  5  and  he  often- 
times sought  to  sift  us,  that  our  faith  might  fail.'''' 
But  our  Lord  and  Master,  having  brought  him  to 
trial,  said  unto  him  :  "  The  Lord  rebuke  thee, 
O  devil ;  and  the  Lord,  who  hath  chosen  Jeru- 
salem, rebuke  thee.  Is  not  this  plucked  out  of 
the  fire  as  a  brand?"  ^  And  who  said  then  to 
those  that  stood  by  the  high  priest,  "  Take  away 
his  ragged  garments  from  him ; "  and  added, 
"  Behold,  I  have  taken  thine  iniquities  away  from 
thee  ;  "  He  will  say  now,  as  He  said  formerly  of 
us  when  we  were  assembled  together,  "  I  have 
prayed  that  your  faith  may  not  fail."  ^ 

THAT  EVEN  AMONG  THE  JEWS  THERE  AROSE  THE 
DOCTRINE  OF*  SEVERAL  HERESIES  HATEFUL  TO 
GOD. 

VI.  For  even  the  Jewish  nation  had  wicked 
heresies  :  for  of  them  were  the  Sadducees,  who 
do  not  confess  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  ;  and 
the  Pharisees,  who  ascribe  the  practice  of  sinners 
to  fortune  and  fate ;  and  the  Basraotheans,  who 
deny  providence,  and  say  that  the  world  is  made 
by  spontaneous  motion,  and  take  away  the  im- 
mortality of  the  soul ; .  and  the  Hemerobaptists, 
who  every  day,  unless  they  wash,  do  not  eat,  — 
nay,  and  unless  they  cleanse  their  beds  and  tables, 
or  platters  and  cups  and  seats,  do  not  make  use 
of  any  of  them  ;  and  those  who  are  newly  risen 


'  Isa.  ii.  2. 

2  Matt,  xxiii.  38. 

3  Joel  ii.  28. 

*  Job  i.,  etc. 
5  Zech.  iii.  i. 

*  Luke  xxii.  31. 

'  Zech.  iii.  2,  etc. 

*  Luke  xxii.  32. 


amongst  us,  the  Ebionites,  who  will  have  the  Son 
of  God  to  be  a  mere  man,  begotten  by  human 
pleasure,  and  the  conjunction  of  Joseph  and 
Mary.  There  are  also  those  that  separate  them- 
selves from  all  these,  and  observe  the  laws  of 
their  fathers,  and  these  are  the  Essenes.  These, 
therefore,  arose  among  the  former  people.  And 
now  the  evil  one,  who  is  wise  to  do  mischief,  and 
as  for  goodness,  knows  no  such  good  thing,  has 
cast  out  some  from  among  us,  and  has  wrought 
by  them  heresies  and  schisms. 

WHENCE     THE     HERESIES     SPRANG,    AND    WHO    WAS 
THE    RINGLEADER    OF   THEIR    IMPIETY. 

VII.  Now  the  original  of  the  new  heresies 
began  thus  :  the  devil  entered  into  one  Simon, 
of  a  village  called  Gitthse,  a  Samaritan,  by  pro- 
fession a  magician,  and  made  him  the  minister 
of  his  wicked  design.^  For  when  Philip  our 
fellow-apostle, '°  by  the  gift  of  the  Lord  and  the 
energy  of  His  Spirit,  performed  the  miracles  of 
healing  in  Samaria,  insomuch  that  the  Samaritans 
were  affected,  and  embraced  the  faith  of  the 
God  of  the  universe,  and  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
were  baptized  into  His  name ;  nay,  and  that 
Simon  himself,  when  he  saw  the  signs  and  won- 
ders which  were  done  without  any  magic  cere- 
monies, fell  into  admiration,  and  believed,  and 
was  baptized,  and  continued  in  fasting  and 
prayer,  —  we  heard  of  the  grace  of  God  which 
was  among  the  Samaritans  by  Philip,  and  came 
down  "  to  them  ;  and  enlarging  much  upon  the 
word  of  doctrine,  we  laid  our  hands  upon  all 
that  were  baptized,  and  we  conferred  upon  them 
the  participation  of  the  Spirit.  But  when  Simon 
saw  that  the  Spirit  was  given  to  believers  by  the 
imposition  of  our  hands,  he  took  money,  and 
offered  it  to  us,  saying,  "  Give  me  also  the  power, 
that  on  whomsoever  I  also  shall  lay  my  hand, 
he  may  receive  the  Holy  Ghost ;  "  '^  being  de- 
sirous that  as  the  devil  '^  deprived  Adam  by  his 
tasting  of  the  tree  of  that  immortality  which 
was  promised  him,  so  also  that  Simon  might 
entice  us  by  the  receiving  of  money,  and  might 
thereby  cut  us  off  from  the  gift  of  God,'-*  that  so 
by  exchange  we  might  sell  to  him  for  money  the 
inestimable  gift  of  the  Spirit.  But  as  we  were 
all  troubled  at  this  offer,  I  Peter,  with  a  fixed 
attention  on  that  malicious  serpent  which  was 
in  him,  said  to  Simon  :  "  Let  thy  money  go  with 
thee  to  perdition,  because  thou  hast  thought  to 
purchase  the  gift  of  God  with  money.  Thou 
hast  no  part  in  this  matter,  nor  lot  in  this  faith ; 


9  Acts  viii. 

■°  [  Either  an  ignorant  error  or  a  peculiar  use  of  a  technical  word 
(p.  383,  supra)  to  signify  a  missionary.  See  the  note,  book  viii.  sec. 
3,  cap.  17,  i7ifra.\ 

"  [Were  sent,  rather.     See  Acts  viii.  14.] 

'2  Acts  viii.  ig 

'3  "  The  devil:  "  this  reading  is  adopted  from  the  V.  MSS. 

'■<  The  v.  MSS.  insert  here:  "Simon,  therefore,  being  moved  by 
the  devil,  brought  the  money." 


Sec.  II.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


453 


for  thy  heart  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God. 
Repent  therefore  of  this  thy  wickedness,  and 
pray  to  the  Lord,  if  perhaps  the  thought  of  thine 
heart  may  be  forgiven  thee.  For  I  perceive 
thou  art  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  the  bond 
of  iniquity."  '  But  then  Simon  was  terrified, 
and  said  :  "  I  entreat  you,  pray  ye  to  the  Lord 
for  me,  that  none  of  those  things  which  ye  have 
spoken  come  upon  me."  ^ 

WHO   WERE   THE   SUCCESSORS   OF   SIMON'S    IMPIETY, 
AND    WHAT    HERESIES   THEY    SET   UP. 

VIII.  But  when  we  went  forth  among  the  Gen- 
tiles to  preach  the  word  of  life,  then  the  devil 
wrought  in  the  people  to  send  after  us  false 
apostles  to  the  corrupting  of  the  word  :  and 
they  sent  forth  one  Cleobius,  and  joined  him 
with  Simon,  and  these  became  disciples  to  one 
Dositheus,  whom  they  despising,  put  him  down 
from  the  principality.  Afterwards  also  others 
were  the  authors  of  absurd  doctrines  :  Cerin- 
thus,  and  Marcus,  and  Menander,  and  Basilides, 
and  Saturnilus.  Of  these  some  own  the  doctrine 
of  many  gods,  some  only  of  three,  but  contrary 
to  each  other,  without  beginning,  and  ever  with 
one  another,  and  some  of  an  infinite  number  of 
them,  and  those  unknown  ones  also.  And  some 
reject  marriage  ;  and  their  doctrine  is,  that  it  is 
not  the  appointment  of  God  ;  and  others  abhor 
some  kinds  of  food :  some  are  impudent  in 
uncleanness,  such  as  those  who  are  falsely  called 
Nicolaitans.  And  Simon  meeting  me  Peter, 
first  at  Caesarea  Stratonis  (where  the  faithful 
t^ornelius,  a  Gentile,  believed  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
by  me),  endeavoured  to  pervert  the  word  of 
God  ;  there  being  with  me  the  holy  children, 
Zacchaeus,  who  was  once  a  publican,  and  Bar- 
nabas ;  and  Nicetas  and  Aquila,  brethren  of 
Clement  the  bishop  and  citizen  of  Rome,  who 
was  the  disciple  of  Paul,  our  fellow-apostle  and 
fellow-helper  in  the  Gospel.  I  thrice  discoursed 
before  them  with  him  concerning  the  true  Proph- 
et, and  concerning  the  monarchy  of  God ;  and 
when  I  had  overcome  him  by  the  power  of  the 
Lord,  and  had  put  him  to  silence,  I  drove  him 
away  into  Italy. 

HOW  SIMON,  DESIRING  TO  FLY  RY  SOME  MAGICAL 
ARTS,  FELL  DOWN  HEADLONG  FROM  ON  HIGH  AT 
THE  PRAYERS  OF  PETER,  AND  liRAKE  HIS  FEEI', 
AND    HANDS,    AND    ANKLE-BONES. 

IX.  Now  when  he  was  in  Rome,  he  mightily 
disturbed  the  Church,  and  subverted  many,  and 
brought  them  ov«r  to  himself,  and  astonished 
the  Gentiles  with  his  skill  in  magic,  insomuch 
that  once,  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  he  went 
into  their  theatre,  and  commanded  the  people 


'  Acts  viii.  20,  etc. 
*  Acts  viii.  24. 


that  they  should  bring  me  also  by  force  into  the 
theatre,  and  promised  he  would  fly  in  the  air; 
and  when  all  the  people  were  in  suspense  at  this, 
I  prayed  by  myself.  And  indeed  he  was  carried 
up  into  the  air  by  demons,  and  did  fly  on  high 
in  the  air,  saying  that  he  was  returning  into 
heaven,  and  that  he  would  supply  them  with 
good  things  from  thence.  And  the  people  mak- 
ing acclamations  to  him,  as  to  a  god,  I  stretched 
out  my  hands  to  heaven,  with  my  mind,  and 
besought  God  through  the  Lord  Jesus  to  throw 
down  this  pestilent  fellow,  and  to  destroy  the 
power  of  those  demons  that  made  use  of  the 
same  for  the  seduction  and  perdition  of  men, 
to  dash  him  against  the  ground,  and  bruise  him, 
but  not  to  kill  him.  And  then,  fixing  my  eyes 
on  Simon,  I  said  to  him  :"  If  I  be  a  man  of 
God,  and  a  real  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  a 
teacher  of  piety,  and  not  of  deceit,  as  thou  art, 
Simon,  I  command  the  wicked  powers  of  the 
apostate  from  piety,  by  whom  Simon  the  magi- 
cian is  carried,  to  let  go  their  hold,  that  he  may 
fall  down  headlong  from  his  height,  that  he  may 
be  exposed  to  the  laughter  of  those  that  have 
been  seduced  by  him."  AVhen  I  had  said  these 
words,  Simon  was  deprived  of  his  powers,  and 
fell  down  headlong  with  a  great  noise,  and  was 
violently  dashed  against  the  ground,  and  had 
his  hip  and  ankle-bones  broken  ;  and  the  people 
cried  out,  saying,  "  There  is  one  only  God,  whom 
Peter  rightly  preaches  in  truth."  And  many  left 
him  ;  but  some  who  were  worthy  of  perdition 
continued  in  his  wicked  doctrine.  And  after 
this  manner  the  most  atheistical  heresy  of  the 
Simonians  was  first  established  in  Rome  ;  and 
the  devil  wrought  by  the  rest  of  the  false  apos- 
tles 3  also. 

HOW   THE    HERESIES    DIFFER     FROM     EACH     OTHER, 
AND    FROM    THE   TRUTH. 

X.  Now  all  these  had  one  and  the  same  de- 
sign of  atheism,  to  blaspheme  Almighty  God, 
to  spread  their  doctrine  that  He  is  an  unknown 
being,  and  not  the  Father  of  Christ,  nor  the 
Creator  of  the  world  ;  but  one  who  cannot  be 
spoken  of,  ineffable,  not  to  be  named,  and  be- 
gotten by  Himself;  that  we  are  not  to  make  use 
of  the  law  and  the  prophets  ;  that  there  is  no 
])rovidence  and  no  resurrection  to  be  believed ; 
that  there  is  no  judgment  nor  retribution  ;  that 
the  soul  is  not  immortal ;  that  we  must  only 
indulge  our  jjleasures,  and  turn  to  any  sort  of 
worship  without  distinction.  Some  of  them  say 
that  there  are  many  gods,  some  that  there  are 
three  gods  without  beginning,  some  that  there 
are  two  unbegotten  gods,  some  that  there  are 
innumerable  yEons.  Further,  some  of  them 
teach  that  men  are  not  to  marry,  and  must  ab- 


3  [2  Cor.  xi.  13.     Sec  p.  457,  I'tt/ra.] 


454 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


[Book  VI, 


stain  from  flesh  and  wine,  affirming  that  marriage, 
and  the  begetting  of  children,  and  the  eating  of 
certain  foods,  are  abominable  ;  that  so,  as  sober 
persons,  they  may  make  their  wicked  opinions 
to  be  received  as  worthy  of  belief.  And  some 
of  them  absolutely  prohibit  the  eating  of  flesh, 
as  being  the  flesh  not  of  brute  animals,  but  of 
creatures  that  have  a  rational  soul,  as  though 
those  that  ventured  to  slay  them  would  be 
charged  with  the  crime  of  murder.  But  others 
of  them  affirm  that  we  must  only  abstain  from 
swine's  flesh,  but  may  eat  such  as  are  clean  by 
the  law ;  and  that  we  ought  to  be  circumcised, 
according  to  the  law,  and  to  believe  in  Jesus 
as  in  an  holy  man  and  a  prophet.  But  others 
teach  that  men  ought  to  be  impudent  in  un- 
cleanness,  and  to  abuse  the  flesh,  and  to  go 
through  all  unholy  practices,  as  if  this  were  the 
only  way  for  the  soul  to  avoid  the  rulers  of  this 
world.  Now  all  these  are  the  instruments  of 
the  devil,  and  the  children  of  wrath. 

SEC.      III.  THE      HERESIES      ATTACKED      BY     THE 

APOSTLES. 

AN    EXPOSITION    OF   THE    PREACHING    OF   THE   APOS- 
TLES. 

XI.  But  we,  who  are  the  children  of  God  and 
the  sons  of  peace,  do  preach  the  holy  and  right 
word  of  piety,  and  declare  one  only  God,  the 
Lord  of  the  law  and  of  the  prophets,  the  Maker 
of  the  world,  the  Father  of  Christ ;  not  a  being 
that  caused  Himself,  or  begat  Himself,  as  they 
suppose,  but  eternal,  and  without  original,  and 
inhabiting  light  inaccessible  ;  not  two  or  three, 
or  manifold,  but  eternally  one  only ;  not  a  being 
that  cannot  be  known  or  spoken  of,  but  who 
was  preached  by  the  law  and  the  prophets  ;  the 
Almighty,  the  Supreme  Governor  of  all  things, 
the  All-powerful  Being  ;  the  God  and  Father  of 
the  Only-begotten,  and  of  the  First-born  of  the 
whole  creation ;  one  God,  the  Father  of  one 
Son,  not  of  many ;  the  Maker  of  one  Comforter 
by  Christ,  the  Maker  of  the  other  orders,  the 
one  Creator  of  the  several  creatures  by  Christ, 
the  same  their  Preserver  and  Legislator  by  Him  ; 
the  cause  of  the  resurrection,  and  of  the  judg- 
ment, and  of  the  retribution  which  shall  be  made 
by  Him  :  that  this  same  Christ  was  pleased  to 
become  man,  and  went  through  life  without  sin, 
and  suffered,  and  rose  from  the  dead,  and  re- 
turned to  Him  that  sent  Him.  We  also  say 
that  every  creature  of  (iod  is  good,  and  nothing 
abominable  ;  that  everything  ior  the  support  of 
life,  when  it  is  partaken  of  righteously,  is  very 
good :  for,  according  to  the  Scripture,  "  all 
things  were  very  good,"  '  We  believe  that  law- 
ful marriage,  and  the  begetting  of  children,  is 
honourable   and    undefiled ;    for    difference    of 


'  Gen.  i.  31, 


sexes  was  formed  in  Adam  and  Eve  for  the  in- 
crease of  mankind.  We  acknowledge  with  us 
a  soul  that  is  incorporeal  and  immortal,  —  not 
corruptible  as  bodies  are,  but  immortal,  as  being 
rational  and  free.  We  abhor  all  unlawful  mix- 
tures, and  that  which  is  practised  by  some  against 
nature  as  wicked  and  impious.  W^e  profess  there 
will  be  a  resurrection  both  of  the  just  and  unjust, 
and  a  retribution.  We  profess  that  Christ  is  not 
a  mere  man,  but  God  the  Word,  and  man  the 
Mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  High 
Priest  of  the  Father ;  nor  are  we  circumcised 
with  the  Jews,  as  knowing  that  He  is  come  "  to 
whom  the  inheritance  was  reserved,"  ^  and  on 
whose  account  the  families  were  kept  distinct  — 
"  the  expectation  of  the  Gentiles,"  Jesus  Christ, 
who  sprang  out  of  Judah,^  the  Son  from  the 
branch,  the  flower  from  Jesse,  whose  government 
is  upon  His  shoulder,-* 

FOR   THOSE  THAT    CONFESS    CHRIST,    BUT   ARE    DE- 
SIROUS  TO    JUDAIZE, 

XII.  But  because  this  heresy  did  then  seem 
the  more  powerful  to  seduce  men,  and  the 
whole  Church  was  in  danger,^  we  the  twelve 
assembled  together  at  Jerusalem  (for  Matthias 
was  chosen  to  be  an  apostle  in  the  room  of  the 
betrayer,  and  took  the  lot  of  Judas ;  as  it  is 
said,  "  His  bishopric''  let  another  take  "),  We 
deliberated,  together  with  James  the  Lord's 
brother,  what  was  to  be  done  ;  and  it  seemed 
good  to  him  and  to  the  elders  to  speak  to  the 
people  words  of  doctrine.  For  certain  men 
likewise  went  down  from  Judea  to  Antioch,  and 
taught  the  brethren  who  were  there,  saying : 
"  Unless  ye  be  circumcised  after  the  manner  of 
Moses,  and  walk  according  to  the  other  customs 
which  he  ordained,  ye  cannot  be  saved."  ^ 
When,  therefore,  there  had  been  no  small  dis- 
sension and  disputation,  the  in-ethren  which  were 
at  Antioch,  when  they  knew  that  we  were  all 
met  together  about  this  question,  sent  out  unto 
us  men  who  were  faithful  and  understanding  in 
the  Scriptures  to  learn  concerning  this  question. 
And  they,  when  they  were  come  to  Jerusalem, 
declared  to  us  what  questions  were  arisen  in  the 
church  of  Antioch,  —  namely,  that  some  said 
men  ought  to  be  circumcised,  and  to  observe 
the  other  purifications.  And  when  some  said 
one  thing,  and  some  another,  I  Peter  stood  up, 
and  said  unto  them  :  "  Men  and  brethren,  ye 
know  how  tliat  from  ancient  days  God  made 
choice  among  you  that  the  Gentiles  should  hear 
the  word  of  the  Gospel  by  my  mouth,  and  be- 
lieve ;  and  God,  which  knowetn  the  hearts,  bare 


2  Gen.  xlix.  10. 

3  Gen.  xlix.  9. 

*  Isa.  xi.  I,  ix.  6. 
5  Acts  XV. 

*  Ps.  cix.  8;  Acts  i.  20.     [The   name  common   to   apostles  and 
elders.] 

1  Acts  XV.  I. 


Sec.  III.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF  THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


455 


them  witness.'  For  an  angel  of  the  Lord  ap- 
peared on  a  certain  time  to  Corneh'us,^'  who  was 
a  centurion  of  the  Roman  government,  and 
spake  to  him  concerning  me,  that  he  should  send 
for  me,  and  hear  the  word  of  life  from  my 
mouth.  He  therefore  sent  for  me  from  Joppa 
to  C^esarea  Stratonis  ;  and  when  I  was  ready  to 
go  to  him,  I  would  have  eaten.  And  while  they 
made  ready  I  was  in  the  upper  room  praying ; 
and  I  saw  heaven  opened,  and  a  vessel,  knit  at 
the  four  corners  like  a  splendid  sheet,  let  down 
to  the  earth,  wherein  were  all  manner  of  four- 
footed  beasts,  and  creeping  things  of  the  earth, 
and  fowls  of  the  heaven.  And  there  came  a 
voice  out  of  heaven  to  me,  saying,  Arise,  Peter ; 
kill,  and  eat.  And  I  said.  By  no  means,  Lord  : 
for  I  have  never  eaten  anything  common  or  un- 
clean. And  there  came  a  voice  a  second  time, 
saying,  What  God  hath  cleansed,  that  call  not 
thou  common.  And  this  was  done  thrice,  and 
the  vessel  was  received  up  again  into  heaven. 
But  as  I  doubted  what  this  vision  should  mean, 
the  Spirit  said  to  me.  Behold,  men  seek  thee  ; 
but  rise  up,  and  go  thy  way  with  them,  nothing 
doubting,  for  I  have  sent  them.^  These  men 
were  those  which  came  from  the  centurion,  and 
so  by  reasoning  I  understood  the  word  of  the 
Lord  which  is  written :  '  Whosoever  shall  call 
on  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved.'  *  And 
again  :  '  All  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  remem- 
ber, and  turn  unto  the  Lord,  and  all  the  families 
of  the  heathen  shall  worship  before  Him  :  for 
the  kingdom  is  in  the  Lord's,  and  He  is  the 
governor  of  the  nations.'  s  And  observing  that 
there  were  expressions  everywhere  concerning 
the  calling  of  the  Gentiles,  I  rose  up,  and  went 
with  them,  and  entered  into  the  man's  house. 
And  while  I  was  preaching  the  word,  the  Holy 
Spirit  fell  upon  him,  and  upon  those  that  were 
with  him,  as  it  did  upon  us  at  the  beginning ; 
and  He  put  no  difference  between  us  and  them, 
purifying  their  hearts  by  faith.  And  I  perceived 
that  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons ;  but  that  in 
every  nation  he  that  feareth  Him,  and  worketh 
righteousness,  will  be  accepted  with  Him.  But 
even  the  believers  which  were  of  the  circum- 
cision were  astonished  at  this.  Now  therefore 
why  tempt  ye  God,  to  lay  an  heavy  yoke  upon 
the  neck  of  the  disciples,  which  neither  we  nor 
our  fathers  were  able  to  bear  ?  But  by  the  grace 
of  the  Lord,  we  believe  we  shall  be  saved,  even 
as  they.''  For  the  Lord  has  loosed  us  from  our 
bonds,  and  has  made  our  burden  light,  and  has 
loosed  the  heavy  yoke  from  us  by  His  clem- 
ency."    While  I  spake  these  things,  the  whole 


'  Acts.  XV.  7,  8. 

-  Acts  X. 

3  Acts  X.  13,  etc. 

^  Joel  ii.  32. 

5  Ps.  xxii.  27,  28. 

(•  Acts  xi.  15,  X.  34,  35,  45,  XV.  9, 


multitude  kept  silence.  But  James  the  Lord's 
brother  answered  and  said  :  "  Men  and  breth- 
ren, hearken  unto  me  ;  Simeon  hath  declared 
how  God  at  first  visited  to  take  out  a  people 
from  the  Gentiles  for  His  name.  And  to  this 
agree  the  words  of  the  prophets ;  as  it  is  writ- 
ten :  '  Afterwards  I  will  return,  and  will  raise 
again  and  rebuild  the  tabernacle  of  David,  which 
is  fallen  down ;  and  I  will  rebuild  its  ruins,  and 
will  again  set  it  up,  that  the  residue  of  men  may 
seek  after  the  Lord,  and  all  the  nations  upon 
whom  my  name  is  called,  saith  the  Lord,  who 
doth  these  things.'  7  Known  unto  God  are  all 
His  works  from  the  beginning  of  the  world. 
Wherefore  my  sentence  is,  that  we  do  not  trouble 
those  who  from  among  the  Gentiles  turn  unto 
God  :  but  to  charge  them  that  they  abstain  from 
the  pollutions  of  the  Gentiles,  and  from  what  is 
sacrificed  to  idols,  and  from  blood,  and  from 
things  strangled,  and  from  fornication ;  which 
laws  were  given  to  the  ancients  who  lived  before 
the  law,  under  the  law  of  nature,  Enos,  Enoch, 
Noah,  Melchizedek,  Job,  and  if  there  be  any 
other  of  the  same  sort."  ^  Then  it  seemed  good 
to  us  the  apostles,  and  to  James  the  bishop,  and 
to  the  elders,  with  the  whole  Church,  to  send 
men  chosen  from  among  our  own  selves,  with 
Barnabas,  and  Paul  of  Tarsus,  the  apostle  of  the 
Gentiles,  and  Judas  who  was  called  Barsabbas, 
and  Silas,  chief  men  among  the  brethren,  and 
wrote  by  their  hand,  as  follows  :  "  The  apostles, 
and  elders,  and  brethren,^  to  the  brethren  o(  An- 
tioch,  Syria,  and  Cilicia  of  the  Gentiles,  send 
greeting :  Since  we  have  heard  that  some  from 
us  have  troubled  you  with  words,  subverting 
your  souls,  to  whom  we  gave  no  such  command- 
ment, it  has  seemed  good  to  us,  when  we  were 
met  together  with  one  accord,  to  send  chosen 
men  to  you,  with  our  beloved  Barnabas  and 
Paul,  men  that  have  hazarded  their  lives  for  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  whom  ye  sent  unto  us. 
We  have  sent  also  with  them  Judas  and  Silas, 
who  shall  themselves  declare  the  same  things 
by  mouth.  For  it  seemed  good  to  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  to  us,  to  lay  no  other  burden  upon 
you  than  these  necessary  things ;  that  ye  abstain 
from  things  offered  to  idols,  and  from  blood, 
and  from  things  strangled,  and  from  fornication  : 
from  which  things  if  ye  keep  yourselves,  ye  shall 
do  well.  Fare  ye  well."  '°  We  accordingly  sent 
this  epistle  ;  but  we  ourselves  remained  in  Jeru- 
salem many  days,  consulting  together  for  the 
public  benefit,  for  the  well  ordering  of  all  things. 

THAT   WE    MUST   SEPARA.TE    FROM    HERETICS. 

XIII.     But  after  a  long  time  we  visited  the 
brethren,  and  confirmed  them  with  the  word  of 


7  Amos  ix.  II. 

*  Acts  XV.  13,  etc. 

9  [Compare  F^Iucidation  HI.  vol.  v.  p.  411,  this  series.] 

'°  Acts  XV.  23,  etc. 


456 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  YI. 


piety,  and  charged  them  to  avoid  those  who, 
under  the  name  of  Christ  and  Moses,  war  against 
Christ  and  Moses,  and  in  the  clothing  of  sheep 
hide  the  wolf.  For  these  are  false  Christs,  and 
false  prophets,  and  false  apostles,  deceivers  and 
corrupters,  portions  of  foxes,  the  destroyers  of 
the  herbs  of  the  vineyards :  "  for  whose  sake 
the  love  of  many  will  wax  cold.  But  he  that 
endureth  stedfast  to  the  end,  the  same  shall  be 
saved.'  Concerning  whom,  that  He  might  se- 
cure us,  the  Lord  declared,  saying :  "  There 
will  come  to  you  men  in  sheep's  clothing,  but 
inwardly  they  are  ravening  wolves.  Ye  shall 
know  them  by  their  fruits ;  take  care  of  them. 
For  false  Christs  and  false  prophets  shall  arise 
and  shall  deceive  many."  ^ 

WHO  WERE  THE  PREACHERS  OF  THE  CATHOLIC 
DOCTRINE,  AND  WHICH  ARE  THE  COMMAND- 
MENTS   GIVEN    BY    THEM. 

XIV.  On  whose  account  also  we,  who  are  now 
assembled  in  one  place,  —  Peter  and  Andrew  ; 
James  and  John,  sons  of  Zebedee  ;  Philij)  and 
Bartholomew  ;  Thomas  and  Matthew  ;  James  the 
son  of  Alphceus,  and  Lebbeeus  who  is  surnamed 
Thaddceus  ;  and  Simon  the  Canaanite,^  and  Mat- 
thias, who  instead  of  Judas  was  numbered  with 
us ;  and  James  the  brother  of  the  Lord  and 
bishop  of  Jerusalem,  and  Paul  the  teacher  of  the 
Gentiles,  the  chosen  vessel,  having  all  met  to- 
gether, have  written  to  you  this  Catholic  doctrine 
for  the  confirmation  of  you,  to  whom  the  over- 
sight of  the  universal  Church  is  committed  : 
wherein  we  declare  unto  you,  that  there  is  only 
one  God  Almighty,  besides  whom  there  is  no 
other,  and  that  you  must  worship  and  adore  Him 
alone,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  in  the 
most  holy  Spirit ;  ■•  that  you  are  to  make  use  of 
the  sacred  Scriptures,  the  law,  and  the  prophets  ; 
to  honour  your  parents ;  to  avoid  all  unlawful 
actions ;  to  believe  the  resurrection  and  the 
judgment,  and  to  e.xpect  the  retribution  ;  and  to 
use  all  His  creatures  with  thankfulness,  as  the 
works  of  God,  and  having  no  evil  in  them ;  to 
marry  after  a  lawful  manner,  for  such  marriage  is 
unblameable.  For  "  the  woman  is  suited  to  the 
man  by  the  Lord  ;  "  5  and  the  Lord  says  :  "  He 
that  made  them  from  the  beginning,  made  them 
male  and  female  ;  and  said,  P'or  this  cause  shall 
a  man  leave  his  father  and  his  mother,  and  shall 
cleave  unto  his  wife  :  and  they  two  shall  be  one 
flesh."  ^  Nor  let  it  be  esteemed  lawful  after 
marriage  to  put  her  away  who  is  without  blame. 
For  says    He:    "Thou  shalt  take   care  to  thy 

'  Matt.  xxiv.  12,  13. 
^  Matt.  vii.  15,  xxiv.  24. 
3  Matt.  X.  2. 

*  One  v.  MS.  reads  as  follows:  "And  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  the  most  holy  Spirit." 

5  Prov.  xix.  14. 

*  Matt.  xix.  4,  5. 


spirit,  and  shalt  not  forsake  the  wife  of  thy  youth  ; 
for  she  is  the  partner  ^  of  thy  life,  and  the  re- 
mains of  thy  spirit.  I  and  no  other  have  made 
her."  ^  For  the  Lord  says:  "What  God  has 
joined  together,  let  no  man  put  asunder,"  9  For 
the  wife  is  the  partner  of  life,  united  by  God 
unto  one  body  from  two.  But  he  that  divides 
that  again  into  two  which  is  become  one,  is  the 
enemy  of  the  creation  of  God,  and  the  adversary 
of  His  providence.  In  like  manner,  he  that  re- 
tains her  that  is  corrupted  is  a  transgressor  of 
the  law  of  nature ;  since  "  he  that  retains  an 
adulteress  is  foolish  and  impious."  '°  For  says 
He,  "  Cut  her  off  from  thy  flesh  ;  "  "  for  she  is 
not  an  help,  but  a  snare,  bending  her  mind  from 
thee  to  another.  Nor  be  ye  circumcised  in  your 
flesh,  but  let  the  circumcision  which  is  of  the 
heart  by  the  Spirit  suffice  for  the  faithful ;  for  He 
says,  "  Be  ye  circumcised  to  your  God,  and  be 
circumcised  in  the  foreskin  of  your  heart."  '^ 

THAT  WE  OUGHT  NOT  TO  REBAPTIZE,  NOR  TO  RE- 
CEIVE THAT  BAPTISM  WHICH  IS  GIVEN  BY  THE 
UNGODLY,  WHICH  IS  NOT  BAPIISM,  BUT  A  POL- 
LUTION. 

XV.  Be  ye  likewise  contented  with  one  bap- 
tism alone,  that  which  is  into  the  death  of  the 
Lord  ;  not  that  which  is  conferred  by  wicked 
heretics,  but  that  which  is  conferred  by  unblame- 
able priests,  "  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of 
the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost :  "  '3  and  let  not 
that  which  comes  from  the  ungodly  be  received 
by  you,  nor  let  that  which  is  done  by  the  godly 
be  disannulled  by  a  second.  For  as  there  is 
one  God,  one  Christ,  and  one  Comforter,  and 
one  death  of  the  Lord  in  the  body,  so  let  that 
baptism  which  is  unto  Him  be  but  one.  But 
those  that  receive  polluted  baptism  from  the  un- 
godly will  become  partners  in  their  opinions. 
For  they  are  not  priests.  For  God  says  to  them  : 
"  Because  thou  hast  rejected  knowledge,  I  will 
also  reject  thee  from  the  office  of  a  priest  to 
me."  "»  Nor  indeed  are  those  that  are  baptized 
by  them  initiated,  but  are  polluted,  not  receiving 
the  remission  of  sins,  but  the  bond  of  impiety. 
And,  besides,  they  that  attempt  to  baptize  those 
already  initiated  crucify  the  Lord  afresh,  slay 
Him  a  second  time,  laugh  at  divine  and  ridicule 
holy  things,  affront  the  Spirit,  dishonour  the 
sacred  blood  of  Christ  as  common  blood,  are 
impious  against  Him  that  sent.  Him  that  suf- 
fered, and  Him  that  witnessed.  Nay,  he  that, 
out  of  contempt,  will  not  be  baptized,  shall  be 


'  The  words  from  "for  she  is  the  partner"  to  "made  her"  are 
omitted  in  one  V.  Ms. 

8  Mai.  ii.  15,  14. 

9  Malt,  xix   6. 
'"  Prov.  xviii.  22. 
"  Ecclus.  XXV.  26. 
'-■  Jer.  iv.  4. 

'3  Matt,  xxviii.  19. 

'*  Hos.  iv.  6.     [Compare  vol.  v.  p.  565,  this  series.] 


Sec.  III.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


457 


condemned  as  an  unbeliever,  and  shall  be  re- 
proached as  ungrateful  and  foolish.  For  the 
Lord  says  :  "  Except  a  man  be  baptized  of  water 
and  of  the  Spirit,  he  shall  by  no  means  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  '  And  again  :  "  He 
that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved ; 
but  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."^ 
But  he  that  says,  When  I  am  dying  I  will  be 
baptized,  lest  I  should  sin  and  defile  my  baptism, 
is  ignorant  of  God,  and  forgetful  of  his  own 
nature.  For  "  do  not  thou  delay  to  turn  unto 
the  Lord,  for  thou  knowest  not  what  the  next 
day  will  bring  forth."  ^  Do  you  also  baptize 
your  infants,  and  bring  them  up  in  the  nurture 
and  admonition  of  God.  For  says  He  :  "  Suffer 
the  little  children  to  come  unto  me,  and  forbid 
them  not."  ■* 

CONCERNING   BOOKS  WITH   FALSE   INSCRIPTIONS. 

XVI.  We  have  sent  all  these  things  to  you,  that 
ye  may  know  our  opinion,  what  it  is  ;  and  that 
ye  may  not  receive  those  books  which  obtain  in 
our  name,  but  are  written  by  the  ungodly.  For 
you  are  not  to  attend  to  the  names  of  the  apos- 
tles, but  to  the  nature  of  the  things,  and  their 
settled  opinions.  For  we  know  that  Simon  and 
Cleobius,  and  their  followers,  have  compiled 
poisonous  books  under  the  name  of  Christ  and 
of  His  disciples,  and  do  carry  them  about  in 
order  to  deceive  you  who  love  Christ,  and  us 
His  servants.  And  among  the  ancients  also 
some  have  written  apocryphal  books  of  Moses, 
and  Enoch,  and  Adam,  and  Isaiah,  and  David, 
and  Elijah,  and  of  the  three  patriarchs,  pernicious 
and  repugnant  to  the  truth.  The  same  things 
even  now  have  the  wicked  heretics  done,  re- 
proaching the  creation,  marriage,  providence,  the 
begetting  of  children,  the  law,  and  the  prophets  ; 
inscribing  certain  barbarous  names,  and,  as  they 
think,  of  angels,  but,  to  speak  the  truth,  of  de- 
mons, which  suggest  things  to  them  :  whose  doc- 
trine eschew,  that  ye  may  not  be  partakers  of 
the  punishment  due  to  those  that  write  such 
things  for  the  seduction  and  perdition  of  the 
f^^iithful  and  unblameable  disciples  of  the  Lord 
Jesus. 

MATRIMONIAL    PRECEPTS    CONCERNING    CLERGYMEN. 

XVII.  We  have  already  said,  that  a  bishop,  a 
presbyter,  and  a  deacon,  when  they  are  consti- 
tuted, must  be  but  once  married,  whether  their 
wives  be  alive  or  whether  they  be  dead ;  and 
that  it  is  not  lawful  for  them,  if  they  are  unmar- 
ried when  they  are  ordained,  to  be  married  after- 
wards ;  or  if  they  be  then  married,  to  marry  a 
second  time,  but  to  be  content  with  that  wife 


'  John  iii.  5. 

2  Mark  xvi.  16. 

3  Ecclns   V.  7;  Prov.  xxvii.  i,  iii.  28. 
*  M.iu.  \ix.  14. 


which  they  had  when  they  came  to  ordination. s 
We  also  appoint  that  the  ministers,  and  singers, 
and  readers,  and  porters,  shall  be  only  once 
married.  But  if  they  entered  into  the  clergy 
before  they  were  married,  we  permit  them  to 
marry,  if  they  have  an  inclination  thereto,  lest 
they  sin  and  incur  punishment.^  But  we  do  not 
permit  any  one  of  the  clergy  to  take  to  wife 
either  a  courtesan,  or  a  servant,  or  a  widow,  or 
one  that  is  divorced,  as  also  the  law  says.  Let 
the  deaconess  be  a  pure  virgin  ;  or,  at  the  least, 
a  widow  who  has  been  but  once  married,  faith- 
ful, and  well  esteemed. 7 

AN     EXHORTATION     COMMANDING     TO     AVOID     THE 
COMMUNION    OF   THE    IMPIOUS    HERETICS. 

xviii.  Receive  ye  the  penitent,  for  this  is  the 
will  of  God  in  Christ.  Instruct  the  catechumens 
in  the  elements  of  religion,  and  then  baptize 
them.  Eschew  the  atheistical  heretics,  who  are 
past  repentance,  and  separate  them  from  the 
faithful,  and  excommunicate  them  from  the 
Church  of  God,  and  charge  the  faithful  to  abstain 
entirely  from  them,  and  not  to  partake  with  them 
either  in  sermons  or  prayers  :  for  these  are  those 
that  are  enemies  to  the.  Church,  and  lay  snares 
for  it ;  who  corrupt  the  flock,  and  defile  the 
heritage  of  Christ,  pretenders  only  to  wisdom, 
and  the  vilest  of  men  ;  concerning  whom  Solo- 
mon the  wise  said  :  "  The  wicked  doers  pretend 
to  act  piously."  For,  says  he,  "  there  is  a  way 
which  seemeth  right  to  some,  but  the  ends  there- 
of look  to  the  bottom  of  hell."  ^  These  are  they 
concerning  whom  the  Lord  declared  His  mind 
with  bitterness  and  severity,  saying  that  "  they 
are  false  Christs  and  folse  teachers  ;  "9  who  have 
blasphemed  the  Spirit  of  grace,  and  done  despite 
to  the  gift  they  had  from  Him  after  the  grace  0/ 
baptism,  "  to  whom  forgiveness  sliall  not  be 
granted,  neither  in  this  world  nor  in  that  which 
is  to  come  ;  "  '°  who  are  both  more  wicked  than 
the  Jews  and  more  atheistical  than  the  Gentiles  ; 
who  blaspheme  the  God  over  all,  and  tread  under 
foot  His  Son,  and  do  despite  to  the  doctrine  of 
the  Spirit ;  who  deny  the  words  of  God,  or  pre- 
tend hypocritically  to  receive  them,  to  the  af- 
fronting of  God,  and  the  deceiving  of  those  that 
come  among  them  ;  who  abuse  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures, and  as  for  righteousness,  they  do  not  so 
much  as  know  what  it  is ;  who  spoil  the  Church 
of  God,  as  the  "  litde  foxes  do  the  vineyard  ;  "  " 
whom  we  exhort  you  to  avoid,  lest  you  lay  traps 
for  your  own  souls,  "  For  he  that  walketh  with 
wise  men  shall  be  wise,  but   he  that  walketh 


5  1  Tim.  iii.  2,  12;  Tit.  i.  6 

6  [See  Elucidation  XHI.  vol.  v.  p.  160,  this  series.] 

7  I.ev.  xxi.  7,  14;   I  Tim.  v.  9. 
'  Prov.  xiv.  12. 

9  M.itl.  xxiv.  24. 
"^  Matt.  xii.  32. 
"   I'id.  Cant.  ii.  15. 


458 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  VI. 


with  the  foolish  shall  be  known."  '  For  we  ought 
neither  to  run  along  with  a  thief,  nor  put  in  our 
lot  with  an  adulterer ;  since  holy  David  says  : 
"  O  Lord,  I  have  hated  them  that  hate  Thee, 
and  I  am  withered  away  on  account  of  Thy 
enemies.  I  hated  them  with  a  perfect  hatred  : 
they  were  to  me  as  enemies."^  And  God  re- 
proaches Jehoshaphat  with  his  friendship  towards 
Ahab,  and  his  league  with  him  and  with  xAhaziah, 
by  Jonah  the  prophet :  "  Art  thou  in  friendship 
with  a  sinner?  Or  dost  thou  aid  him  that  is 
hated  by  the  Lord?"^  "For  this  cause  the 
wrath  of  the  Lord  would  be  upon  thee  suddenly, 
but  that  thy  heart  is  found  perfect  with  the  Lord. 
For  this  cause  the  Lord  hath  spared  thee ;  yet 
are  thy  works  shattered,  and  thy  ships  broken  to 
pieces."  ■♦  Eschew  therefore  their  fellowship,  and 
estrange  yourselves  from  their  friendship.  For 
concerning  them  did  the  prophet  declare,  and 
say  :  "  It  is  not  lawful  to  rejoice  with  the  un- 
godly," 5  says  the  Lord.  For  these  are  hidden 
wolves,  dumb  dogs,  that  cannot  bark,  who  at 
present  are  but  few,  but  in  process  of  time,  when 
the  end  of  the  world  draws  nigh,  will  be  more  in 
number  and  more  troublesome,  of  whom  said  the 
Lord,  "  Will  the  Son  of  man,  when  He  comes, 
find  faith  on  the  earth? "^  and,  "Because  iniq- 
uity shall  abound,  the  love  of  many  shall  wax 
cold ;"  and,  "There  shall  come  false  Christs  and 
false  prophets,  and  shall  show  signs  in  the  heaven, 
so  as,  if  it  were  possible,  to  deceive  the  elect :  "^ 
from  whose  deceit  God,  through  Jesus  Christ, 
who  is  our  hope,  will  deliver  us.  For  we  our- 
selves, as  we  passed  through  the  nations,  and 
confirmed  the  churches,  curing  some  with  much 
exhortation  and  healing  words,  restored  them 
again  when  they  were  in  the  certain  way  to  death. 
But  those  that  were  incurable  we  cast  out  from 
the  flock,  that  they  might  not  infect  the  lambs, 
which  were  found  with  their  scabby  disease,  but 
might  continue  before  the  Lord  God  pure  and 
undefiled,  sound  and  unspotted.  And  this  we 
did  in  every  city,  everywhere  through  the  whole 
world,  and  have  left  to  you  the  bishops  and  to 
the  rest  of  the  priests  this  very  Catholic  doctrine 
worthily  and  righteously,  as  a  memorial  or  con- 
firmation to  those  who  have  believed  in  God  ; 
and  we  have  sent  it  by  our  fellow-minister  Clem- 
ent, our  most  faithful  and  intimate  son  in  the 
Lord,  together  with  Barnabas,  and  Timothy  our 
most  dearly  beloved  son,  and  the  genuin^e  Mark, 
together  with  whom  we  recommend  to  you  also 
Titus  and  Luke,  and  Jason  and  Luciiasj  and 
Sosipater.^ 


'  Prov.  xiii.  20. 
^  Ps.  cxxxix.  21,  22. 
3  2  Chron.  xix.  2. 
*  2  Chron   XX.  37. 

5  l^id.  Isa.  Ivii.  21. 

6  Luke  xviii.  8. 

'  Matt.  xxiv.  12,  24. 
'  Rom.  xvi.  21. 


SEC.    IV. OF   THE    LAW. 

By  whom  also  we  exhort  you  in  the  Lord  to 
abstain  from  your  old  conversation,  vain  bonds, 
separations,  observances,  distinction  of  meats, 
and  daily  washings  :  for  "  old  things  are  passed 
away ;  behold,  all  things  are  become  new."  9 

TO   THOSE   THAT   SPEAK    EVIL    OF   THE    LAW. 

XIX.  For  since  ye  have  known  God  through 
Jesus  Christ,  and  all  His  dispensation,  as  it  has 
been  from  the  beginning,  that  He  gave  a  plain 
law  to  assist  the  law  of  nature,'"  such  a  one  as 
is  pure,  saving,  and  holy,  in  which  His  own 
name  was  inscribed,"  perfect,  which  is  never  to 
fail,  being  complete  in  ten  commands,  unspotted, 
converting  souls ;  '^  which,  when  the  Hebrews 
forgot,  He  put  them  in  mind  of  it  by  the  prophet 
Malachi,  saying,  "  Remember  ye  the  law  of 
Moses,  the  man  of  God,  who  gave  you  in  charge 
commandments  and  ordinances."  '^  Which  law 
is  so  very  holy  and  righteous,  that  even  our 
Saviour,  when  on  a  certain  time  He  healed  one 
leper,  and  afterwards  nine,  said  to  the  first,  "Go, 
show  thyself  to  the  high  priest,  and  offer  the  gift 
which  Moses  commanded  for  a  testimony  unto 
them  ;"  '•♦  and  afterwards  to  the  nine,  "  Go,  show 
yourselves  to  the  priests."  's  For  He  nowhere 
has  dissolved  the  law,  as  Simon  pretends,  but 
fulfilled  it ;  for  He  says  :  "  One  iota,  or  one  tit- 
tle, shall  not  pass  from  the  law  until  all  be  ful- 
filled." For  says  He,  "  I  come  not  to  dissolve 
the  law,  but  to  fulfil  it."  '^  For  Moses  himself, 
who  was  at  once  the  lawgiver,  and  the  high 
priest,  and  the  prophet,  and  the  king,  and  Elijah, 
the  zealous  follower  of  the  prophets,  were  pres- 
ent at  our  Lord's  transfiguration  in  the  moun- 
tain,'7  and  witnesses  of  His  incarnation  and  of 
His  sufferings,  as  the  intimate  friends  of  Christ, 
but  not  as  enemies  and  strangers.  Whence  it  is 
demonstrated  that  the  law  is  good  and  holy,  as 
also  the  prophets. 

WHICH  IS  THE  LAW  OF  NATURE,  AND  WHICH  IS 
THAT  AFTERWARDS  INTRODUCED,  AND  WHY  IT 
WAS    INTRODUCED. 

XX.  Now  the  law  is  the  decalogue,  which  the 
Lord  promulgated  to  them  with  an  audible 
voice,'**  before  the  people  made  that  calf  which 
represented  the  Egyptian  Apis.'^  And  the  law 
is  righteous,  and  therefore  is  it  called  the  law, 
because  judgments  are  thence  made  according 


9  2  Cor.  T.  17. 

'o  Isai  viii.  20,  LXX. 

"  Deut.  xii.  5. 

^  Ps.  xix.  7. 

>3  Mai.  iv.  4. 

'*  Matt.  viii.  4;  Mark  i,  44, 

'5  Luke  xvii-.  i-4-. 

'6  Matt.  V.  18,  17. 

'7  Luke  ix.  30. 

'*  Ex.  XX. 

'9  Ex.  xxxii. 


Sec.  IV.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


459 


to  the  law  of  nature,  which  the  followers  of  I  with  a  mortifying  burden  and  a  hard  collar,  and 
Simon  abuse,  supposing  they  shall  not  be  judged  :  no  longer  said,  "  If  thou  makest,"  but,  "  Make 
thereby,  and  so  shall  escape  punishment.  This  an  altar,"  and  sacrifice  perpetually  ;  for  thou  art 
law  is  good,  holy,  and  such  as  lays  no  compul-  j  forgetful  and  ungrateful.  Offer  burnt-offerings 
sion  in  things  positive.  For  He  says  :  "  If  thou  j  therefore  continually,  that  thou  mayest  be  mind- 
wilt  make  me  an  altar,  thou  shalt  make    it  of  ful  of  me.     For  since  thou  hast  wickedly  abused 


earth."  '  It  does  not  say,  "  Make  one,"  but, 
"  If  thou  wilt  make."  It  does  not  impose  a 
necessity,  but  gives  leave  to  their  own  free  lib- 
erty. For  God  does  not  stand  in  need  of  sac- 
rifices, being  by  nature  above  all  want.  But 
knowing  that,  as  of  old,  Abel,  beloved  of  God, 
and  Noah  and  Abraham,  and  those  that  suc- 
ceeded, without  being  required,  but  only  moved 


thy  power,  I  lay  a  necessity  upon  thee  for  the 
time  to  come,  and  I  command  thee  to  abstain 
from  certain  meats ;  and  I  ordain  thee  the  dis- 
tinction of  clean  and  unclean  creatures,  although 
every  creature  is  good,  as  being  made  by  me ; 
and  I  appoint  thee  several  separations,  purga- 
tions, frequent  washings  and  sprinklings,  several 
purifications,  and  several  times  of  rest ;    and  if 


of  themselves  by  the  law  of  nature,  did  offer  i  thou  neglectest  any  of  them,  I  determine  that 
sacrifice  to  God  out  of  a  grateful  mind;  so  He  i  punishment  which  is  proper  to  the  disobedient, 
did  now  permit  the  Hebrews,  not  commanding,  j  that  being  pressed  and  galled  by  thy  collar,  thou 
but,  if  they  had  a  mind,  permitting  them ;  and  |  mayest  depart  from  the  error  of  polytheism,  and 
if  they  offered  from  a  right  intention,  showing !  laying  aside  that,  "  These  are  thy  gods,  O  Is- 
Himself  pleased  with  their  sacrifices.  Therefore  1  rael,"  ^  mayest  be  mindful  of  that,  "  Hear,  O 
He  says  :  "  If  thou  desirest  to  offer,  do  not  offer  j  Israel,  the  Lord  thy  God  is  one  Lord  ;  "  ^  and 
to  me  as  to  one  that  stands  in  need  of  it,  for  I   mayest  run  back  again  to  that  law  which  is  in- 


stand  in  need  of  nothing ;  for  the  world  is  mine, 
and  the  fulness  thereof."  ^  But  when  this  peo- 
ple became  forgetful  of  that,  and  called  upon  a 
calf  as  God,  instead  of  the  true  God,  and  to  him 
did  ascribe  the  cause  of  their  coming  out  of 
Egypt,  saying,  "These  are  thy  gods,  O  Israel, 


serted  by  me  in  the  nature  of  all  men,  "  that 
there  is  only  one  God  in  heaven  and  on  earth, 
and  to  love  Him  with  all  thy  heart,  and  all  thy 
might,  and  all  thy  mind,"  and  to  fear  none  but 
Him,  nor  to  admit  the  names  of  other  gods  into 
thy  mind,  nor  to  let  thy  tongue  utter  them  out 


which  have  brought   thee   out   of  the   land   of  j  of  thy  mouth.     He  bound  them  for  the  hardness 
Egypt ; "  3  and  when  these  men  had  committed    of  their  hearts,  that  by  sacrificing,  and  resting, 
wickedness  with  the  "similitude  of  a  calf  that   and  purifying  themselves,  and  by  similar  observ- 
eateth  hay,"  and  denied  God  who  had   visited '  ances,  they  might  come  to  the   knowledge   of 
them    by  Moses  •»  in    their  afflictions,  and  had  i  God,  who  ordained  these  things  for  them, 
done  signs  with  his  hand  and  rod,  and  had  smit- 1 
ten  the  Egyptians  with  ten  plagues  ;   who  had 
divided  the  waters  of  the  Red  Sea  into  two  parts  ; 
who  had  led  them,  in  the  midst  of  the  water,  as 
a  horse  upon  the  ground ;   who    had   drowned 
their  enemies,  and  those  that  laid  wait  for  them  ; 
who  at  Marah  had  made  sweet  the  bitter  foun- 


THAT  WE  WHO  BELIEVE  IN  CHRIST  ARE  UNDER 
GRACE,  AND  NOT  UNDER  THE  SERVITUDE  OF 
TH.\T   ADDITIONAL    LAW. 

XXI.  "  But  blessed  are  your  eyes,  for  they  see  ; 
and  your  ears,  for  they  hear."^  Yours,  I  say, 
who  have  believed  in  the  one  God,  not  by  ne- 
cessity, but  by  a  sound  understanding,  in  obedi- 
ence to  Him  that  called  you.  For  you  are 
released  from  the  bonds,  and  freed  from  the  ser- 
which  enlightened  and  guided  them  when  they  \  vitude.  For  says  He  :  9  "I  call  you  no  longer 
knew  not  which  way  they  were  to  go  ;  who  ga\-e  [  servants,  but  friends ;  for  all  things  that  I  have 
them  manna  from  heaven,  and  gave  them  quails  ,  heard  of  my  Father  have  I  made  known  unto 

you."  '°  For  to  them  that  would  not  see  nor 
hear,  not  for  the  want  of  those  senses,  but  for 
the  excess  of  their  wickedness,  "  I  gave  statutes 


tain  ;  who  had  brought  water  out  of  the  sharp 
rock  till  they  were  satisfied ;  who  had  overshad- 
owed them  with  a  pillar  of  a  cloud  on  account 
of  the  immoderate  heat,  and  with  a  pillar  of  fire 


for  fiesh  from  the  sea  ;  5  who  gave  them  the  law 
in  the  mountain  ;  whose  voice  He  had  vouch- 
safed to  let  them  hear ;  Him  did  they  deny,  and 
said  to  Aaron,  "  Make  us  gods  who  shall  go  be- 
fore us;"*^  and  they  made  a  molten  calf,  and 
sacrificed  to  an  idol ;  —  then  was  God  angry,  as 
being  ungratefully  treated  by  them,  and  bound 
them  with  bonds  which  could   not   be   loosed. 


'  Ex.  XX.  24. 

2  Ps   1.  12. 

3  Ex.  x.xxii.  4. 
*  Ex.  iv.,  etc. 
S  Num.  xi,  31. 
'  Ex.  xxxii.  I. 


that  were  not  good,  and  judgments  whereby 
they  woukl  not  live  ;"  "  they  are  looked  upon 
as  not  good,  as  burnings  and  a  sword,  and  medi- 
cines are  esteemed  enemies  by  the  sick,  and 
impossible  to  be  observed  on  account  of  their 


'  Deut.  vi.  4. 

'  Matt.  xiii.  i6. 

9  One  V.  MS.  reads: 
pies." 

'°  John  XV.  15. 
"  Ezek.  XX.  25. 


'  Thus  also  said  the  Lord  to  us  His  disci- 


460 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  VI. 


obstinacy  :  whence  also  they  brought  death  upon 
them  being  not  obeyed. 

THAT     THE     LAW    FOR     SACRIFICES     IS     ADDITIONAL, 
WHICH    CHRIST    WHEN    HE    CAME    TOOK    AWAY. 

XXII.  You  therefore  are  blessed  who  are  deliv- 
ered from  the  curse.  For  Christ,  the  Son  of 
God,  by  His  coming  has  confirmed  and  com- 
pleted the  law,  but  has  taken  away  the  addi- 
tional precepts,  although  not  all  of  them,  yet  at 
least  the  more  grievous  ones  ;  having  confirmed 
the  former,  and  abolished  the  latter,  and  has 
again  set  the  free-will  of  man  at  liberty,  not  sub- 
jecting him  to  the  penalty  of  a  temporal  death, 
but  giving  laws  to  him  according  to  another 
constitution.  Wherefore  He  says  :  "  If  any  man 
will  come  after  me,  let  him  come."  '  And 
again  :  "  Will  ye  also  go  away  ?  "^  And  besides, 
before  His  coming  He  refused  the  sacrifices  of 
the  people,  while  they  frequently  offered  them, 
when  they  sinned  against  Him,  and  thought  He 
was  to  be  appeased  by  sacrifices,  but  not  by 
repentance.  For  thus  He  speaks  :  "  Why  dost 
thou  bring  to  me  frankincense  from  Saba,  and 
cinnamon  from  a  remote  land?  Your  burnt- 
offerings  are  not  acceptable,  and  your  sacrifices  are 
not  sweet  to  me."  ^  And  afterwards  :  "  Gather 
your  burnt-offerings,  together  with  your  sacri- 
fices, and  eat  flesh.  For  I  did  not  command  you, 
when  I  brought  you  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt, 
concerning  burnt-offerings  and  sacrifices."  "♦  And 
He  says  by  Isaiah  :  "  To  what  purpose  do  ye 
bring  me  a  multitude  of  sacrifices?  saith  the 
Lord.  I  am  full  of  the  burnt-offerings  of  rams, 
and  I  will  not  accept  the  fat  of  lambs,  and  the 
blood  of  bulls  afid  of  goats.  Nor  do  you  come 
and  appear  before  me  ;  for  who  hath  required 
these  things  at  your  hands?  Do  not  go  on  to 
tread  my  courts  any  more.  If  you  bring  me 
fine  flour,  it  is  vain  :  incense  is  an  abomination 
unto  me  :  your  new  moons,  and  your  Sabbaths, 
and  your  great  day,  I  cannot  bear  them  :  your 
fasts,  and  your  rests,  and  your  feasts,  my  soul 
hateth  them ;  I  am  over-full  of  them."  s  And 
He  says  by  another  :  "  Depart  from  me  ;  the 
sound  of  thine  hymns,  and  the  jjsalms  of  thy 
musical  instruments,  I  will  not  hear."  *^  And 
Samuel  says  to  Saul,  when  he  thought  to  sac- 
rifice :  "  Obedience  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and 
hearkening  than  the  fat  of  rams.  For,  behold, 
the  Lord  does  not  so  much  delight  in  sacrifice, 
as  in  obeying  Him."  7  And  He  says  by  David  : 
''  I  will  take  no  calves  out  of  thine  house,  nor 
he-goats  out  of  thy  flock.     If  I  should  be  hun- 


'  Matt.  xvi.  24. 

2  John  vi.  67. 

3  Jer.  vi.  20. 

*  Jer.  vii.  21,  22. 
5   Isa.  i.  II ,  etc. 
''  Amos  V.  23. 
7  I  Sam.  XV.  22. 


gry,  I  would  not  tell  thee  ;  for  the  whole  world 
is  mine,  and  the  fulness  thereof.  Shall  I  eat  the 
flesh  of  bulls,  or  drink  the  blood  of  goats? 
Sacrifice  to  God  the  sacrifice  of  praise,  and  pay 
thy  vows  to  the  Most  High."  ^  And  in  all  the 
Scriptures  in  like  manner  He  refuses  their  sacri- 
fices on  account  of  their  sinning  against  Him. 
For  "  the  sacrifices  of  the  impious  are  an  abomi- 
nation with  the  Lord,  since  they  offer  them  in 
an  unlawful  manner." 9  And  again:  "Their 
sacrifices  are  to  them  as  bread  of  lamentation ; 
all  that  eat  of  them  shall  be  defiled."  '°  If, 
therefore,  before  His  coming  He  sought  for  "a 
clean  heart  and  a  contrite  spirit""  more  than 
sacrifices,  much  rather  would  He  abrogate  those 
sacrifices,  I  mean  those  by  blood,  when  He 
came.  Yet  He  so  abrogated  them  as  that  He 
first  fulfilled  them.  For  He  was  both  circum- 
cised, and  sprinkled,  and  offered  sacrifices  and 
whole  burnt-offerings,  and  made  use  of  the  rest 
of  their  customs.  And  He  that  was  the  Law- 
giver became  Himself  the  fulfilling  of  the  law ; 
not  taking  away  the  law  of  nature,  but  abrogat- 
ing those  additional  laws  that  were  afterwards 
introduced,  although  not  all  of  them  neither. 

HOW  CHRIST  BECAME  A  FULFILLER  OF  THE  LAW, 
AND  WHAT  PARTS  OF  IT  HE  PUT  A  PERIOD  TO, 
OR    CHANGED,    OR   TRANSFERRED. 

XXIII.  For  He  did  not  take  away  the  law  of 
nature,  but  confirmed  it.  For  He  that  said  in 
the  law,  "  The  Lord  thy  God  is  one  Lord  ;  "  '^ 
the  same  says  in  the  Gospel,  "That  they  might 
know  Thee,  the  only  true  God."  '^  And  He 
that  said,  "Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as 
thyself,"  '-*  says  in  the  Gospel,  renewing  the  same 
precept,  "  A  new  commandment  I  give  unto 
you,  that  ye  love  one  another."  'S  He  who  then 
forbade  murder,  does  now  forbid  causeless  anger.'^ 
He  that  forbade  adultery,  does  now  forbid  all 
unlawful  lust.  He  that  forbade  stealing,  now 
pronounces  him  most  happy  who  supplies  those 
that  are  in  want  out  of  his  own  labours. '^  He 
that  forbade  hatred,  now  pronounces  him  blessed 
that  loves  his  enemies."'^  He  that  forbade  re- 
venge, now  commands  long-suffering ;  '^  not  as 
if  just  revenge  were  an  unrighteous  thing,  but 
because  long-suffering  is  more  excellent.  Nor 
did  He  make  laws  to  root  out  our  natural  pas- 
sions, but  only  to  forbid  the  excess  of  them.^° 


*  Ps.  1.  9,  12,  etc. 

9  Prov.  xxi.  27. 
10  Hos.  ix.  4. 
»■  Ps.  li.  10,  17. 
'2  Deut.  vi.  4. 
li  John  xvii.  3. 
'■•  Lev.  xix.  18. 
'5  John  xiii.  34, 
">  Matt.  V.  22. 
''  Acts  XX.  35. 
'8  Matt.  V.  7. 
'9  Matt.  V.  43. 
20  Matt.  V.  38. 


Sec.  v.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


461 


He  who  had  commanded  to  honour  our  parents, 
was  Himself  subject  to  them.'  He  who  had 
commanded  to  keep  the  Sabbath,  by  resting 
thereon  for  the  sake  of  meditating  on  the  laws, 
has  now  commanded  us  to  consider  of  the  law 
of  creation,  and  of  providence  every  day,  and 
to  return  thanks  to  God.  He  abrogated  cir- 
cumcision when  He  had  Himself  fulfilled  it. 
For  He  it  was  "  to  whom  the  inheritance  was 
reserved,  who  was  the  expectation  of  the  na- 
tions." ^  He  who  made  a  law  for  swearing 
rightly,  and  forbade  perjury,  has  now  charged  us 
not  to  swear  at  all.^  He  has  in  several  ways 
changed  baptism,  sacrifice,  the  priesthood,  and 
the  divine  service,  which  was  confined  to  one 
place  :  for  instead  of  daily  baptisms,  He  has 
given  only  one,  which  is  that  into  His  death. 
Instead  of  one  tribe.  He  has  appointed  that  out 
of  every  nation  the  best  should  be  ordained  for 
the  priesthood  ;  and  that  not  their  bodies  should 
be  examined  for  blemishes,  but  their  religion 
and  their  Uves.  Instead  of  a  bloody  sacrifice. 
He  has  appointed  that  reasonable  and  unbloody 
mystical  one  of  His  body  and  blood,  which  is 
performed  to  represent  the  death  of  the  Lord 
by  symbols.  Instead  of  the  divine  service  con- 
fined to  one  place,  He  has  commanded  and 
appointed  that  He  should  be  glorified  from  sun- 
rising  to  sunsetting  in  every  place  of  His  do- 
minion.'* He  did  not  therefore  take  away  the 
law  from  us,  but  the  bonds.  For  concerning 
the  law  Moses  says  :  "  Thou  shalt  meditate  on 
the  word  which  I  command  thee,  sitting  in  thine 
house,  and  rising  up,  and  walking  in  the  way."  s 
And  David  says  :  "  His  delight  is  in  the  law  of 
the  Lord,  and  in  His  law  will  he  meditate  day 
and  night."  ^  For  everywhere  would  he  have 
us  subject  to  His  laws,  but  not  transgressors  of 
them.  For  says  He  :  "  Blessed  are  the  unde- 
filed  in  the  way,  who  walk  in  the  law  of  the 
Lord.  Blessed  are  they  that  search  out  His 
testimonies  ;  with  their  whole  heart  shall  they 
seek  Him."  7  And  again:  "Blessed  are  we,  O 
Israel,  because  those  things  that  are  pleasing  to 
God  are  known  to  us."  ^  And  the  Lord  says  : 
"  If  ye  know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye 
do  them."  9 

THAT  IT  PLEASED  THE  LORD  THAT  THE  LAW  OF 
RIGHTEOUSNESS  SHOULD  HE  DEMONSTRATED  BY 
THE    ROMANS. 

XXIV.  Nor  does   He  desire  that  the   law  of 
righteousness  should  only  be  demonstrated   by 


'  Luke  ii    51. 

2  Gen.  xlix.  10. 

3  Malt.  V.  33. 

*  Ps.  cxiii   3;   Mai.  i.  11. 

S  Deut.  vi.  6. 

b  Ps.  i.  2. 

^  Ps.  cxix.  I,  2. 

^  Ijar.  iv.  4. 

9  John  xiii.  17. 


US  ;  but  He  is  pleased  that  it  should  appear  and 
shine  by  means  of  the  Romans.  For  these 
Romans,  believing  in  the  Lord,  left  off  their 
polytheism  and  injustice,  and  entertain  the  good, 
and  punisli  the  bad.  But  they  hold  the  Jews 
under  tribute,  and  do  not  suffer  them  to  make 
use  of  their  own  ordinances. 

HOW  GOD,  ON  ACCOUNT  OF  THEIR  IMPIETY  TOWARDS 
CHRIST,  MADE  THE  JEWS  CAPTIVES,  AND  PLACED 
THEM    UNDER   TRIBUTE. 

XXV.  Because,  indeed,  they  drew  sei-vitude 
upon  themselves  voluntarily,  when  they  said, 
"  We  have  no  king  but  Caesar  ;  "  "°  and,  "  If  we 
do  not  slay  Christ,  all  men  will  believe  in  Him, 
and  the  Romans  will  come  and  will  take  away 
both  our  place  and  nation."  "  And  so  they  proph- 
esied unwittingly.  For  accordingly  the  nations 
believed  on  Him,  and  they  themselves  were 
deprived  by  the  Romans  of  their  power,  and 
of  their  legal  worship  ;  and  they  have  been  for- 
bidden to  slay  whom  they  please,  and  to  sacrifice 
when  they  will.  Wherefore  they  are  accursed, 
as  not  able  to  perform  the  things  they  are  com- 
manded to  do.  For  says  He  :  "  Cursed  be  he 
that  does  not  continue  in  all  things  that  are  writ- 
ten in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them."  '^  Now 
it  is  impossible  in  their  dispersion,  while  they 
are  among  the  heathen,  for  them  to  perform  all 
things  in  their  law.  For  the  divine  Moses  for- 
bids both  to  rear  an  altar  out  of  Jerusalem,  and 
to  read  the  law  out  of  the  bounds  of  Judea.'^ 
Let  us  therefore  follow  Christ,  that  we  may  in- 
herit His  blessings.  Let  us  walk  after  the  law 
and  the  prophets  by  the  Gospel.  Let  us  eschew 
the  worshippers  of  many  gods,  and  the  murderers 
of  Christ,  and  the  murderers  of  the  prophets, 
and  the  wicked  and  atheistical  heretics.  Let  us 
be  obedient  to  Christ  as  to  our  King,  as  having 
authority  to  change  several  constitutions,  and 
having,  as  a  legislator,  wisdom  to  make  new  con- 
stitutions in  different  circumstances  ;  yet  so  that 
everywhere  the  laws  of  nature  be  immutably 
preserved. 

SEC.  V.  —  THE  TE.ACHING  OF  THE  APOSTLES  IN 
OPPOSITION  TO  JEWISH  AND  GENTILE  SUPERSTI- 
TIONS, ESPECIALLY  IN  REGARD  TO  MARRUGE 
AND    FUNERALS. 

THAT  WE    OUGHT   TO  .AVOID   THE    HERETICS    .AS   THE 
CORRUPPERS   OF   SOULS. 

XXVI.  Do  you  therefore,  O  bishops,  and  ye  of 
the  laity,  avoid  all  heretics  who  abuse  the  law 
and  the  prophets.  For  they  are  enemies  to  God 
Almighty,  and  disobey  Him,  and  do  not  confess 

'"  John  xix.  15. 

"  John  xi.  48. 

■^  lleut.  xxvii.  26;   Gal.  iii.  10. 

"  Dcut.  xii.     [See  on  Liturgies,  I'n/ra.] 


462 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  VI. 


Christ  to  be  the  Son  of  God.  For  they  also 
deny  His  generation  according  to  the  flesh  ;  they 
are  ashamed  of  the  cross ;  they  abuse  His  pas- 
sion and  His  death  ;  they  know  not  His  resur- 
rection ;  they  talce  away  His  generation  before 
all  ages.  Nay,  some  of  them  are  impious  after 
another  manner,  imagining  the  Lord  to  be  a  mere 
man,  supposing  Him  to  consist  of  a  soul  and 
body.  But  others  of  them  suppose  that  Jesus 
Himself  is  the  God  over  all,  and  glorify  Him  as 
His  own  Father,  and  suppose  Him  to  be  both 
the  Son  and  the  Comforter ;  than  which  doc- 
trines what  can  be  more  detestable?  Others, 
again,  of  them  do  refuse  certain  meats,  and  say 
that  marriage  with  the  procreation  of  children 
is  evil,  and  the  contrivance  of  the  devil ;  and 
being  ungodly  themselves,  they  are  not  willing 
to  rise  again  from  the  dead  on  account  of  their 
wickedness.  Wherefore  also  they  ridicule  the 
resurrection,  and  say.  We  are  holy  people,  un- 
willing to  eat  and  to  drink  ;  and  they  fancy  that 
they  shall  rise  again  from  the  dead  demons  with- 
out flesh,  who  shall  be  condemned  for  ever  in 
eternal  fire.  Fly  therefore  from  them,  lest  ye 
perish  with  them  m  their  impieties. 

OF   SOME   JEWISH    AND    GENTILE    OBSERVANCES. 

xxvii.  Now  if  any  persons  keep  to  the  Jewish 
customs  and  'observances  concerning  the  natural 
emission  and  nocturnal  pollutions,  and  the  law- 
ful conjugal  acts,'  let  them  tell  us  whether  in 
those  hours  or  days,  when  they  undergo  any  such 
thing,  they  observe  not  to  pray,  or  to  touch  a 
Bible,  or  to  partake  of  the  Eucharist  ?  And  if 
they  own  it  to  be  so,  it  is  plain  they  are  void  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  which  always  continues  with  the 
faithful.  For  concerning  holy  persons  Solomon 
says:  "That  every  one  may  prepare  himself, 
that  so  when  he  sleeps  it  may  keep  him,  and 
when  he  arises  it  may  talk  with  him." '  For  if 
thou  thinkest,  O  woman,  when  thou  art  seven 
days  in  thy  separation,  that  thou  art  void  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  then  if  thou  shouldest  die  suddenly 
thou  wilt  depart  void  of  the  Spirit,  and  without 
assured  hope  in  God ;  or  else  thou  must  imagine 
that  the  Spirit  always  is  inseparable  from  thee,  as 
not  being  in  a  place.  But  thou  standest  in  need 
of  prayer  and  the  Eucharist,  and  the  coming  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  as  having  been  guilty  of  no  fault 
in  this  matter.  For  neither  lawful  mixture,  nor 
child-bearing,  nor  the  menstrual  purgation,  nor 
nocturnal  i)ollution,  can  defile  the  nature  of  a 
man,  or  separate  the  Holy  Spirit  from  him. 
Nothing  but  impiety  and  unlawful  practice  can 
do  that.  For  the  Holy  Spirit  always  aljides  with 
those  that  are  possessed  of  it,  so  long  as  they 
are  worthy  ;  and  those  from  whom  it  is  departed, 
it   leaves   them   desolate,  and  exposed    to  the 

'  Lev.  XV. 
'  Prov.  vi.  22. 


wicked  spirit.  Now  every  man  is  filled  either 
with  the  holy  or  with  the  unclean  spirit ;  and  it 
is  not  possible  to  avoid  the  one  or  the  other, 
unless  they  can  receive  opposite  spirits.  For  the 
Comforter  hates  every  lie,  and  the  devil  hates  all 
truth.  But  every  one  that  is  baptized  agreeably 
to  the  truth  is  separated  from  the  diabolical 
spirit,  and  is  under  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  the 
Holy  Spirit  remains  with  him  so  long  as  he  is 
doing  good,  and  fills  him  with  wisdom  and  under- 
standing, and  suffers  not  the  wicked  spirit  to 
approach  him,  but  watches  over  his  goings. 
Thou  therefore,  O  woman,  if,  as  thou  sayest,  in 
the  days  of  thy  separation  thou  art  void  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  thou  art  then  filled  with  the  unclean 
one ;  for  by  neglecting  to  pray  and  to  read  thou 
wilt  invite  him  to  thee,  though  he  were  unwilling. 
For  this  spirit,  of  all  others,  loves  the  ungrateful, 
the  slothful,  the  careless,  .and  the  drowsy,  since 
he  himself  by  ingratitude  was  distempered  with 
an  evil  mind,  and  was  thereby  deprived  by  God 
of  his  dignity ;  having  rather  chosen  to  be  a 
devil  than  an  archangel.  Wherefore,  O  woman, 
eschew  such  vain  words,  and  be  ever  mindful  of 
God  that  created  thee,  and  pray  to  Him.  For 
He  is  thy  Lord,  and  the  Lord  of  the  universe  ; 
and  meditate  in  His  laws  without  observing  any 
such  things,  such  as  the  natural  purgation,  lawful 
mixture,  child-birth,  a  miscarriage,  or  a  blemish 
of  the  body ;  since  such  observations  are  the 
vain  inventions  of  foolish  men,  and  such  inven- 
tions as  have  no  sense  in  them.  Neither  the 
burial  of  a  man,  nor  a  dead  man's  bone,  nor  a 
sepulchre,  nor  any  particular  sort  of  food,  nor 
the  nocturnal  pollution,  can  defile  the  soul  of 
man ;  but  only  impiety  towards  God,  and  trans- 
gression, and  injustice  towards  one's  neighbour  ; 
I  mean  rapine,  violence,  or  if  there  be  anything 
contrary  to  His  righteousness,  adultery  or  forni- 
cation. Wherefore,  beloved,  avoid  and  eschew 
such  observations,  for  they  are  heathenish.  F^r 
we  do  not  abominate  a  dead  man,  as  do  they, 
seeing  we  hope  that  he  will  live  again.  Nor  do 
we  hate  lawful  mixture  ;  for  it  is  their  practice 
to  act  impiously  in  such  instances.  For  the  con- 
junction of  man  and  wife,  if  it  be  with  righteous- 
ness, is  agreeable  to  the  mind  of  God.  "  For 
He  that  made  them  at  the  beginning  made  them 
male  and  female  ;  and  He  blessed  them,  and 
said,  Increase  and  multiply,  and  fill  the  earth."  3 
If,  therefore,  the  difference  of  sexes  was  made 
by  the  will  of  God  for  the  generation  of  mul- 
titudes, then  must  the  conjunction  of  male  and 
female  be  also  acceptable  to  His  mind. 

OF  THE  LOVE  OF  BOYS,  ADULTERY,  AND  FORNICATION. 

xxviii.  But  we  do  not  say  so  of  that  mixture 
that  is  contrary  to  nature,  or  of  any  unlawful 


3  Matt.  xix.  4;  Gen.  i.  28. 


Sec.  v.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


46: 


practice  ;  for  such  are  enmity  to  God.  For  the 
sin  of  Sodom  is  contrary  to  nature,  as  is  also  that 
with  brute  beasts.  But  adultery  and  fornication 
are  against  the  law  ;  the  one  whereof  is  impiety, 
the  other  injustice,  and,  in  a  word,  no  other  than 
a  great  sin.  But  neither  sort  of  them  is  without 
its  punishment  in  its  own  proper  nature.  For 
the  practisers  of  one  sort  attempt  the  dissolution 
of  the  world,  and  endeavour  to  make  the  natural 
course  of  things  to  change  for  one  that  is  un- 
natural ;  but  those  of  the  second  sort  —  the 
adulterers  —  are  unjust  by  corrupting  others' 
marriages,  and  dividing  into  two  what  God  hath 
made  one,  rendering  the  children  suspected,  and 
exposing  the  true  husband  to  the  snares  of  others. 
And  fornication  is  the  destruction  of  one's  own 
flesh,  not  being  made  use  of  for  the  procreation 
of  children,  but  entirely  for  the  sake  of  pleasure, 
which  is  a  mark  of  incontinency,  and  not  a  sign 
of  virtue.  All  these  things  are  forbidden  by  the 
laws  ;  for  thus  say  the  oracles  :  "  Thou  shalt  not 
lie  with  mankind  as  with  womankind."  '  "  For 
such  a  one  is  accursed,  and  ye  shall  stone  them 
with  stones  :  they  have  wrought  abomination."  ^ 
"  Every  one  that  lieth  with  a  beast,  slay  ye  him  : 
he  has  wrought  wickedness  in  his  people."  ^ 
*'  And  if  any  one  defile  a  married  woman,  slay 
ye  them  both  :  they  have  wrought  wickedness  ; 
they  are  guilty ;  let  them  die."  •♦  And  after- 
wards :  "  There  shall  not  be  a  fornicator  among 
the  children  of  Israel,  and  there  shall  not  be  an 
whore  among  the  daughters  of  Israel.  Thou 
shalt  not  offer  the  hire  of  an  harlot  to  the  Lord 
thy  God  upon  the  altar,  nor  the  price  of  a  dog."  5 
"  For  the  vows  arising  from  the  hire  of  an  harlot 
are  not  clean.  "^  These  things  the  laws  have  for- 
bidden ;  but  they  have  honoured  marriage,  and 
have  called  it  blessed,  since  God  has  blessed  it, 
who  joined  male  and  female  together.?  And 
wise  Solomon  somewhere  says  :  "  A  wife  is  suited 
to  her  husband  by  the  Lord."  ^  And  David 
says :  "  Thy  wife  is  like  a  flourishing  vine  in  the 
sides  of  thine  house ;  thy  children  like  olive- 
branches  round  about  thy  table.  Behold,  thus 
shall  the  man  be  blessed  that  feareth  the  Lord."  ''' 
Wherefore  "  marriage  is  honourable " '°  and 
comely,  and  the  begetting  of  children  pure,  for 
there  is  no  evil  in  that  which  is  good.  There- 
fore neither  is  the  natural  purgation  abominable 
before  God,  who  has  ordered  it  to  happen  to 
women  within  the  space  of  thirty  days  for  their 
advantage  and  healthful  state,  who  do  less  move 


'  Lev.  xviii.  22. 

2  Lev.  x.\.  13. 

3  Ex.  xxii.  ig. 

*  Lev.  XX.  10;  Dent.  xxii.  22. 
S  Deut.  xxiii.  17,  18. 

*  Prov.  xix.  13,  LXX. 
7  Gen.  i.  28. 

*  Prov.  xix.  14. 

9  Ps.  cxxviii.  3,  4. 
»o  Heb.  xiii.  4. 


about,  and  keep  usually  at  home  in  the  house. 
Nay,  moreover,  even  in  the  Gospel,  when  the 
woman  with  the  perpetual  purgation  of  blood  " 
touched  the  saving  border  of  the  Lord's  garment 
in  hope  of  being  healed.  He  was  not  angry  at 
her,  nor  did  complain  of  her  at  all ;  but,  on  the 
contrary.  He  healed  her,  saying,  "  Thy  faith  hath 
saved  thee."  When  the  natural  purgations  do 
appear  in  the  wives,  let  not  their  husbands  ap- 
proach them,  out  of  regard  to  the  children  to  be 
begotten ;  for  the  law  has  forbidden  it,  for  it 
says  :  "  Thou  shalt  not  come  near  thy  wife  when 
she  is  in  her  separation."  '^  Nor,  indeed,  let 
them  frequent  their  wives'  company  when  they 
are  with  child. '^  For  they  do  this  not  for  the 
begetting  of  children,  but  for  the  sake  of  pleasure. 
Now  a  lover  of  God  ought  not  to  be  a  lover  of 
pleasure. 


HOW  WIVES  OUGHT  TO  BE  SUBJECT  TO  THEIR  0\VN 
HUSBANDS,  AND  HUSB.ANDS  OUGHT  TO  LOVE  THEIR 
OWN   WIVES. 

XXIX.  Ye  wives,  be  subject  to  your  own  hus- 
bands, and  have  them  in  esteem,  and  serve  them 
with  fear  and  love,  as  holy  Sarah  honoured  Abra- 
ham. For  she  could  not  endure  to  call  him  liy 
his  name,  but  called  him  lord,  when  she  said, 
"  My  lord  is  old."  '*  In  like  manner,  ye  hus- 
bands, love  your  own  wives  as  your  own  mem- 
bers, as  partners  in  life,  and  fellow-helpers  for 
the  procreation  of  children.  For  says  He,  "  Re- 
joice with  the  wife  of  thy  youth.  Let  her  con- 
versation be  to  thee  as  a  loving  hind,  and  a 
pleasant  foal ;  let  her  alone  guide  thee,  and  be 
with  thee  at  all  times  :  for  if  thou  beest  every 
way  encompassed  with  her  friendship,  thou  wilt 
be  happy  in  her  society."  '5  Love  them  there- 
fore as  your  own  members,  as  your  very  bodies ; 
for  so  it  is  written,  "  The  Lord  has  testified  be- 
tween thee  and  between  the  wife  of  thy  )outh  ; 
and  she  is  thy  partner,  and  another  has  not  made 
her  :  and  she  is  the  remains  of  thy  spirit ;  "  and, 
"Take  heed  to  your  spirit,  and  do  not  forsake 
the  wife  of  thy  youth."  "^  An  husband,  therefore, 
and  a  wife,  when  they  company  together  in  law- 
ful marriage,  and  rise  from  one  another,  may 
pray  without  any  observations,  and  without  wash- 
ing are  clean.  But  whosoever  corrupts  and  de- 
files another  man's  wife,  or  is  defiled  with  an 
harlot,  when  he  arises  up  from  her,  though  he 
should  wash  himself  in  the  entire  ocean  and  all 
the  rivers,  cannot  be  clean. 


"  Matt.  ix.  22. 

1=  Lev.  xviii.  ig;  Ezek.  xviii.  6. 

'3  [But  if  this  be  otherwise  ijcme,  it  may  be  well  to  compare  I..ic- 
tantius  as  to  a  tiuestion  of  actual  crime.     See  p.  190,  n.  i,  su/ra.\ 
'*  I  Pet.  iii.  6. 
"   Prov.  V.  18,  etc. 
">  Mai.  ii.  14,  15,  16. 


464 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[I500K   VI. 


SEC.    VI. CONCLUSION    OF   THE    WORK. 

THAT  IT  IS  THE  CUSTOM  OF  JEWS  AND  GENTILES 
TO  OBSERVE  NATURAL  PURGATIONS,  AND  TO 
ABOMINATE  THE  REMAINS  OF  THE  DEAD  ;  BUT 
THAT   ALL  THIS   IS   CONTRARY  TO   CHRISTUNITY. 

XXX.  Do  not  therefore  keep  any  such  observ- 
ances about  legal  and  natural  purgations,  as 
thinking  you  are  defiled  by  them.  Neither  do 
you  seek  after  Jewish  separations,  or  perpetual 
washings,  or  purifications  upon  the  touch  of  a 
dead  body.  But  without  such  observations  as- 
semble in  the  dormitories,  reading  the  holy 
books,  and  singing  for  the  martyrs  which  are 
fallen  asleep,  and  for,  all  the  saints  from  the 
beginning  of  the  world,  and  for  your  brethren 
that  are  asleep  in  the  Lord,  and  offer  the  ac- 
ceptable Eucharist,  the  representation  of  the 
royal  body  of  Christ,  both  in  your  churches  and 
in  the  dormitories  ;  and  in  the  funerals  of  the 
departed,  accompany  them  with  singing,  if  they 
were  faithful  in  Christ.  For  "precious  in  the 
sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  His  saints."  ' 
And  again  :  "  O  my  soul,  return  unto  thy  rest, 
for  the  Lord  hath  done  thee  good."^  And 
elsewhere  :  "  The  memory  of  the  just  is  with 
encomiums."  3  And,  "The  souls  of  the  right- 
eous are  in  the  hands  of  God."  4  For  those 
that  have  believed  in  God,  although  they  are 
asleep,  are  not  dead.  For  our  Saviour  says  to 
the  Sadducees  :  "  But  concerning  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  dead,  have  ye  not  read  that  which  is 
written,  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  and  the  God 
of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob?  God,  there- 
fore, is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the 
living;  for  all  live  to  Him."  s  Wherefore,  of 
those  that  live  with  God,  even  their  very  relics 
are  not  without  honour.  For  even  Elisha  the 
prophet,  after  he  was  fallen  asleep,  raised  up  a 
dead  man  who  was  slain  by  the  pirates  of  Syria.^ 
For  his  body  touched  the  bones  of  Elisha,  and 
he  arose  and  revived.     Now  this  would  not  have 


'  Ps.  cxvi.  15. 
^  Ps.  cxvi.  7. 
3  Prov.  X.  7. 
*  Wisd   iii.  i. 

5  Ex.  iii.  6;  Luke  xx.  38. 

6  2  JCings  xiii.  21. 


happened  unless  the  body  of  Elisha  were  holy. 
And  chaste  Joseph  embraced  Jacob  after  he  was 
dead  upon  his  bed ;  7  and  Moses  and  Joshua 
the  son  of  Nun  carried  away  the  relics  of 
Joseph,^  and  did  not  esteem  it  a  defilement. 
Whence  you  also,  O  bishops,  and  the  rest,  who 
without  such  observances  touch  the  departed, 
ought  not  to  think  yourselves  defiled.  Nor 
abhor  the  relics  of  such  persons,  but  avoid  such 
observances,  for  they  are  foolish.  And  adorn 
yourselves  with  holiness  and  chastity,  that  ye 
may  become  partakers  of  immortality,  and 
partners  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  may  re- 
ceive the  promise  of  God,  and  may  rest  for  ever, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour. 

To  Him,  therefore,  who  is  able  to  open  the 
ears  of  your  hearts  to  the  receiving  the  oracles 
of  God  administered  to  you  both  by  the  Gospel 
and  by  the  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazareth  ; 
who  was  crucified  under  Pontius  Pilate  and 
Herod,  and  died,  and  rose  again  from  the  dead, 
and  will  come  again  at  the  end  of  the  world 
with  power  and  great  glory,  and  will  raise  the 
dead,  and  put  an  end  to  this  world,  and  distrib- 
ute to  every  one  according  to  his  deserts :  to 
Him  that  has  given  us  Himself  for  an  earnest 
of  the  resurrection ;  who  was  taken  up  into  the 
heavens  by  the  power  of  His  God  and  Father 
in  our  sight,  who  ate  and  drank  with  Him  for 
forty  days  after  He  arose  from  the  dead  ;  who 
is  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of 
the  majesty  of  Almighty  God  upon  the  cheru- 
bim ;  to  whom  it  was  said,  "  Sit  Thou  on  my 
right  hand,  until  I  make  Thine  enemies  Thy 
footstool ;  "  9  whom  the  most  blessed  Stephen 
saw  standing  at  the  right  hand  of  power,  and 
cried  out,  and  said,  "  Behold,  I  see  the  heavens 
opened,  and  the  Son  of  man  standing  at  the 
right  hand  of  God,"  '°  as  the  High  Priest  of  all 
the  rational  orders,  —  through  Him,  worship, 
and  majesty,  and  glory  be  given  to  Almighty 
God,  both  now  and  for  evermore."     Amen. 


7  Gen.  1.  I. 

*  Ex.  xiii.  19;  Josh.  xxiv.  32. 
9  P.S.  ex.  I. 
1°  Acts  vii.  56. 

"  One  v.  MS.  reads:  "to  Him  be  worship,  and  majesty,  and 
glory,  along  with  the  Father  and  the  co-eternal  Spirit,  for  ever  and 
ever.    Amen." 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 

BOOK   VII. 


CONCERNING  THE   CHRISTIAN    LIFE,   AND  THE   EUCHARIST,  AND   THE 

INITIATION    INTO   CHRIST. 


SEC.     I.  —  ON     THE    TWO     WAYS,' — THE    WAY    OF 
LIFE   AND   THE    WAY    OF    DEATH. 

THAT  THERE  ARE  TWO  WAYS, THE  ONE   NATURAL, 

OF  LIFE,  AND  THE  OTHER  INTRODUCED  AFTER- 
WARDS, OF  DEATH  ;  AND  THAT  THE  FORMER  IS 
FROM  GOD,  AND  THE  LATTER  OF  ERROR,  FROM 
THE   SNARES    OF   THE    ADVERSARY. 

I.  The  lawgiver  Moses  said  to  the  Israelites, 
"  Behold,  I  have  set  before  your  face  the  way 
of  life  and  the  way  of  death  ; "  ^  and  added, 
"  Choose  life,  that  thou  mayest  live."  3  Elijah 
the  prophet  also  said  to  the  people  :  "  How  long 
will  you  halt  with  both  your  legs?  If  the  Lord 
be  God,  follow  Him."  ■♦  The  Lord  Jesus  also 
said  justly  :  "  No  one  can  serve  two  masters  : 
for  either  he  will  hate  the  one,  and  love  the 
other ;  or  else  he  will  hold  to  the  one,  and  de- 
spise the  other."  5  We  also,  following  our  teacher 
Christ,  "who  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  especially 
of  those  that  believe,"  ^  are  obliged  to  say  that 
there  are  two  ways  —  the  one  of  life,  the  other 
of  death  ;  7  which  have  no  comparison  one  with 
another,  for  they  are  very  different,^  or  rather 
entirely  separate ;  and  the  way  of  life  is  that  of 
nature,  but  that  of  death  was  afterwards  intro- 
duced, —  it  not  being  according  to  the  mind  of 
God,  but  from  the  snares  of  the  adversary."^ 

MORAL  EXHORTATIONS  OF  THE  LORD'S  CONSTITU- 
TIONS AGREEING  WITH  THE  ANCIENT  PROHIBI- 
TIONS OF  THE  DIVINE  LAWS.  THE  PROHIBITION 
OF  ANGER,  SPITE,  CORRUPTION,  ADULTERY,  AND 
EVERY   FORBIDDEN   ACTION. 

II.  The  first  way,  therefore,  is  that  of  life  ;  and 
is  this,'°  which  the  law  also  does  appoint :  "  To 

•  [See  pp.  377,  elc,  supra.] 
"  Dent.  xx.\.  15. 

■3  Deut.  xx.\.  19. 

*  I  Kings  xviii.  21. 
5  Matt.  vi.  24. 

•>  1  Tim.  iv.  lo. 

'  [See  Teaching,  i.  i.  —  R.] 

^  \Teacking,  i.  i.  —  R.] 

9  The  Greek  words  properly  mean :  "  Introduced  was  the  wiiy  of 
death;  not  of  that  de.nth  which  exists  according  to  the  mind  of  God, 
but  that  which  has  ari.sen  from  the  plots  of  the  adversary." 

'°  [The  larger  half  of  chap,  i..  Teaching,  is  found  in  the  first  half 
of  this  chapter;  but  the  matter  peculiar  to  each  is  of  about  the  same 
extent.  —  R.] 


love  the  Lord  God  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with 
all  thy  soul,  who  is  the  one  and  only  God,  be- 
sides whom  there  is  no  other;""  "and  thy 
neighbour  as  thyself."  '^  "  And  whatsoever  thou 
wouldest  not  should  be  done  to  thee,  that  do 
not  thou  to  another."'^  "  Bless  them  that  curse 
you  ;  pray  for  them  that  despitefully  use  you."  ■* 
"  Love  your  enemies ;  for  what  thanks  is  it  if 
ye  love  those  that  love  you  ?  for  even  the  Gen- 
tiles do  the  same."  '5  "  But  do  ye  love  those 
that  hate  you,  and  ye  shall  have  no  enemy." 
For  says  He,  "  Thou  shalt  not  hate  any  man  ; 
no,  not  an  Egyptian,  nor  an  Edomite  ;  "  ■''  for 
they  are  all  the  workmanship  of  God.  Avoid 
not  the  persons,  but  the  sentiments,  of  the 
wicked.  "  Abstain  from  fleshly  and  worldly 
lusts."  '7  "  If  any  one  gives  thee  a  stroke  on 
thy  right  cheek,  turn  to  him  the  other  also."  '^^ 
Not  that  revenge  is  evil,  but  that  patience  is 
more  honourable.  For  David  says,  "  If  I  have 
made  returns  to  them  that  repaid  me  evil."  '^ 
"  If  any  one  compel  thee  to  go  a  mile,  go  with 
him  twain."  ^°  And,  "  He  that  will  sue  thee  at 
the  law,  and  take  away  thy  coat,  let  him  have 
thy  cloak  also."  =='  "  And  from  him  that  taketh 
thy  goods,  require  them  not  again."  ^^  "  Give 
to  him  that  asketh  thee,  and  from  him  that 
would  borrow  of  thee  do  not  shut  thy  hand."  ^^ 
For  "the  righteous  man  is  pitiful,  and  lendeth.""'* 
For  your  Father  would  have  you  give  to  all, 
who  Himself  "  maketh  His  sun  to  rise  on  the 
evil  and  on  the  good,  and  sendeth  His  rain  on 
the  just  and  on  the  unjust."  ^5  It  is  therefore 
reasonable  to  give  to  all  out  of  thine  own  labours ; 
for  says  He,  "  Honour  the  Lord  out  of  thy  right- 

"  Deut.  vi.  5)1  Mark  xii.  32. 

'-^  Lev.  xix,  18. 

'3  Tob.  iv.  15. 

'<  Matt.  V.  44. 

•5  Luke  vi.  ;j2;  Matt.  v.  46,  47. 

'*  Deut.  xxiii.  7. 

'^  I  Pet.  ii.  II. 

"  Matt.  V.  39;  Luke  vi.  29. 

'9  Ps.  vii.  4. 

20  M.itt.  v.  41. 

*'  Matt.  V.  4o;vLuke  vi.  29. 

--  Luke  vi.  30. 

23  Matt.  V.  42. 

2*  Ps.  cxii.  5. 

=5  Matt.  V.  45. 

465 


466 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  VII. 


eous  labours,"  '  but  so  that  the  saints  be  pre- 
ferred.^ "  Thou  shalt  not  kill ;  "  3  that  is,  thou 
shalt  not  destroy  a  man  like  thyself:  for  thou 
dissolvest  what  was  well  made.  Not  as  if  all 
killing  were  wicked,  but  only  that  of  the  inno- 
cent :  but  the  killing  which  is  just  is  reserved 
to  the  magistrates  alone.  "Thou  shalt  not  com- 
mit adultery :  "  for  thou  dividest  one  flesh  into 
two.  "  They  two  shall  be  one  flesh  :  "  ■♦  for  the 
husband  and  wife  are  one  in  nature,  in  consent, 
in  union,  in  disposition,  and  the  conduct  of 
life  ;  but  they  are  separated  in  sex  and  number. 
.  "  Thou  shalt  not  corrupt  boys  :  "  5  for  this  wick- 
edness is  contrary  to  nature,  and  arose  from 
Sodom,  which  was  therefore  entirely  consumed 
with  fire  sent  from  God.^  "  Let  such  a  one  be 
accursed  :  and  all  the  people  shall  say.  So  be 
it."  7  "Thou  shalt  not  commit  fornication:" 
for  says  He,  "There  shall  not  be  a  fornicator 
among  the  children  of  Israel."^  "Thou  shalt 
not  steal : "  for  Achan,  when  he  had  stolen  in 
Israel  at  Jericho,  was  stoned  to  death ;  9  and 
Gehazi,  who  stole,  and  told  a  lie,  inherited  the 
leprosy  of  Naaman  ; '°  and  Judas,  who  stole  the 
poor's  money,  betrayed  the  Lord  of  glory  to 
the  Jews,"  and  repented,  and  hanged  himself, 
and  burst  asunder  in  the  midst,  and  all  his  bow- 
els gushed  out ;  '^  and  Ananias,  and  Sapphira  his 
wife,  who  stole  their  own  goods,  and  "  tempted 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,"  were  immediately,  at 
the  sentence  of  Peter  our  fellow-apostle,  struck 
dead.'J 

THE    PROHIBITION   OF   CONJURING,    MURDER    OF    IN- 
FANTS,   PERJURY,    AND    FALSE    WITNESS. 

III.  Thou  shalt  not  use  magic. '4  Thou  shalt  not 
use  witchcraft ;  for  He  says,  "  Ye  shall  not  suffer 
a  witch  to  live."  '5  Thou  shall  not  slay  thy  child 
by  causing  abortion,  nor  kill  that  which  is  begot- 
ten ;  for  "  everything  that  is  shaped,  and  has  re- 
ceived a  soul  from  God,  if  it  be  slain,  shall  be 
avenged,  as  being  unjustly  destroyed."  '^  "  Thou 
shalt  not  covet  the  things  that  belong  to  thy 
neighbour,  as  his  wife,  or  his  servant,  or  his  ox, 
or  his  field."  "  Thou  shalt  not  forswear  thyself ;  " 
for  it  is  said,  "  Thou  shalt  not  swear  at  all."  '?  But 
if  that  cannot  be  avoided,  thou  shalt  swear  truly ; 


'  Prov.  iii.  9. 

2  Gal.  vi.  10. 

3  [Ex.  XX.  13.     Five  brief  precepts,  of  which  this  is  the  first,  are 
common  to  Teacliing,\\.  2,  and  the  rest  of  this  chapter.  —  R.j 

<  Gen.  ii.  24.  ^ 

5  Lev.  xviii.  22. 

6  Gen.  xix. 

7  Deut.  xxvii. 

*  Deut.  xxiii.  17. 
9  Josh.  vii. 
'°  2  Kings  v. 
"  John  xii.  6. 

*2  Matt,  xxvii.  5;  Acts  i.  18. 
'3  Acts  v. 

'■•  [Seven  brief   clauses  of  Teaching,  ii.  2,  3,  are  found  in  this 
chapter.  —  R.] 
■5  Ex.  xxii.  18. 
16  Ex.  xxi.  23,  LXX. 
'7  Matt.  V,  34. 


for  "  every  one  that  swears  by  Him  shall  be  com- 
mended." ''^  "  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  ; " 
for  "  he  that  falsely  accuses  the  needy  provokes 
to  anger  Him  that  made  him."  '9 

THE  PROHIBITION  OF  EVIL-SPEAKING  AND  PASSION, 
OF  DECEITFUL  CONDUCT,  OR  IDLE  WORDS,  LIES, 
COVETOUSNESS,    AND   HYPOCRISY. 

IV.  Thou  shalt  not  speak  evil ;  ^°  for  says  He, 
"  Love  not  to  speak  evil,  lest  thou  beest  taken 
away."  Nor  shalt  thou  be  mindful  of  injuries ; 
for  "  the  ways  of  those  that  remember  injuries 
are  unto  death."  ^'  Thou  shalt  not  be  double- 
minded  nor  double-tongued  ;  for  "  a  man's  own 
lips  are  a  strong  snare  to  him,"  ^^  and  "  a  talkative 
person  shall  not  be  prospered  upon  earth."  ^^  Thy 
words  shall  not  be  vain ;  for  "  ye  shall  give  an 
account  of  every  idle  word."  -+  Thou  shalt  not 
tell  lies  :  for  says  He,  "  Thou  shalt  destroy  all 
those  that  speak  lies." ^5  Thou  shalt  not  be  covet- 
ous nor  rapacious  :  for  says  He,  "  Woe  to  him 
that  is  covetous  towards  his  neighbour  with  an 
evil  covetousness."  ^^ 

THE   PROHIBITION   OF   MALIGNITY,    ACCEPTATION   OF 
PERSONS,    WRATH,    MALICE,    AND    ENVY. 

V.  Thou  shalt  not  be  an  hypocrite,  lest  thy 
"  portion  be  with  them."  ^7  Thou  shalt  not  be 
ill-natured  nor  proud  :  for  "  God  resisteth  the 
proud."  ^'^  "Thou  shalt  not  accept  persons  in 
judgment ;  for  the  judgment  is  the  Lord's." 
"  Thou  shalt  not  hate  any  man  ;  thou  shalt  surely 
reprove  thy  brother,  and  not  become  guilty  on 
his  account ;  "  ^9  and,  "  Reprove  a  wise  man,  and 
he  will  love  thee."  3°  Eschew  all  evil,  and  all  that 
is  like  it :  for  says  He,  "  Abstain  from  injustice, 
and  trembling  shall  not  come  nigh  thee."  3'  Be 
not  soon  angry,  nor  spiteful,  nor  passionate,  nor 
furious,  nor  daring,  lest  thou  undergo  the  fate  of 
Cain,  and  of  Saul,  and  of  Joab  :  for  the  first 
of  these  slew  his  brother  Abel,  because  /Vbel  was 
found  to  \)e  preferred  before  him  with  God,  and 
because  Abel's  sacrifice  was  preferred  ;  ^^  the  sec- 
ond persecuted  holy  David,  who  had  slain  Goliah 
the  Philistine,  being  envious  of  the  praises  of  the 
women  who  danced ;  ^^  the  third  slew  two  gen- 

'8  Ps.  Ixiii.  II. 

'9  Prov.  xiv.  31. 

2°  [Chap.  iv.  also  contains  seven  clauses  found  in  Teaching  (ii. 
3-6),  while  chap.  v.  has  but  five  and  a  verbal  resemblance;  chap.  ii. 
of  the  Teaching'i^,  however,  almost  entirely  given  in  these  passages. 

2'  Prov.  xii.  28,  LXX. 

^^  Prov.  vi.  2. 

"  Ps.  cxl.  II. 

^*  Matt.  xii.  36;   Lev.  xix.  ii. 

25  Ps.  V.  6. 

26  Hab.  ii.  9. 

27  Matt.  XXIV.  51. 

28  I  Pet.  y.  5. 

29  Deut.  i.  17;  Lev.  xix.  17, 

30  Prov.  ix.  8. 
3'  Isa.  liv.  14. 
32  Gen.  iv. 

ii  I  Sam.  xvii.,  xviii. 


Sec.  I.] 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


467 


erals  of  armies  —  Abner  of  Israel,  and  Amasa  of 
Judah.' 

CONCERNING  AUGURY  AND  ENCHANTMENTS. 

VI.  Be  not  a  diviner,  for  that  leads  to  idola- 
try ;  2  for  says  Samuel,  "  Divination  is  sin  ;  "  3 
and,  "There  shall  be  no  divination  in  Jacob, 
nor  soothsaying  in  Israel."  ■*  Thou  shalt  not  use 
enchantments  or  purgations  for  thy  child.  Thou 
shall  not  be  a  soothsayer  nor  a  diviner  by  great 
or  little  birds.  Nor  shalt  thou  learn  wicked 
arts  ;  for  all  these  things  has  the  law  forbidden.s 
Be  not  one  that  wishes  for  evil,  for  thou  wilt  be 
led  into  intolerable  sins.  Thou  shalt  not  speak 
obscenely,  nor  use  wanton  glances,  nor  be  a 
drunkard ;  for  from  such  causes  arise  whore- 
doms and  adulteries.  Be  not  a  lover  of  money, 
lest  thou  "  serve  mammon  instead  of  God."  ^ 
Be  not  vainglorious,  nor  haughty,  nor  high- 
minded.  For  from  all  these  things  arrogance 
does  spring.  Remember  him  who  said  :  "  Lord, 
my  heart  is  not  haughty,  nor  mine  eyes  lofty  :  I 
have  not  exercised  myself  in  great  matters,  nor 
in  things  too  high  for  me  ;  but  I  was  humble."  ^ 

THE     PROHIBITION      OF      MURMURING,     INSOLENCE, 
PRIDE,    AND    ARROGANCE. 

VII.  Be  not  a  murmurer,  remembering  the 
punishment  which  those  underwent  who  mur- 
mured against  Moses.  Be  not  self-willed,  be 
not  malicious,  be  not  hard-hearted,  be  not  pas- 
sionate, be  not  mean-spirited ;  for  all  these 
things  lead  to  blasphemy.  But  be  meek,  as 
were  Moses  and  David,**  since  "  the  meek  shall 
inherit  the  earth."  ^ 

CONCERNING    LONG-SUFFERING,    SIMPLICITY,    MEEK- 
NESS,   AND    PATIENCE. 

VIII.  Be  slow  to  wrath ;  for  such  a  one  is 
very  prudent,  since  "  he  that  is  hasty  of  spirit  is 
a  very  fool."  '°  Be  merciful ;  for  "  blessed  are 
the  merciful:  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy."" 
Be  sincere,  quiet,  good,  "  trembling  at  the  word 
of  God."  "  Thou  shalt  not  exalt  thyself,  as  did 
the  Pharisee  ;  for  "  every  one  that  exalteth  him- 
self shall  be  abased,"  '^  and  "  that  which  is 
of  high  esteem  with  man  is  abomination  with 
God."  '*  Thou  shalt  not  entertain  confidence 
in  thy  soul ;  for  "  a  confident  man  shall  fall  into 


1  2  Sam.  iii.^  xx. 

2  [Chaps,  vi.-viii.  contain  passages  parallel  to  nearly  one-half  of 
chap,  iii.,  Teaching,  and  in  the  same  order.  —  R.] 

3  I  iSam.  XV.  23 

*  Num.  xxiii.  23. 

5  Lev.  xix.  26,  31;  Deut.  xviii.  10,  11. 

6  Matt.  vi.  24. 
">  Ps.  cxxxi.  I. 

8  Num.  xii.  3;  Ps.  cxxxi.  1. 

9  Matt.  V.  5. 

'"  Prov.  xiv.  29,  LXX. 
"  Matt.  V.  7. 
'-  Isa.  Ixvi.  2. 
'3  Luke  xviii.  14. 
'''  Luke  xvi.  15. 


mischief."  '5  Thou  shalt  not  go  along  with  the 
foolish,  but  with  the  wise  and  righteous ;  for 
"  he  that  walketh  '^  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise, 
but  he  that  walketh  with  the  foolish  shall  be 
known."  '7  Receive  the  afflictions  that  fall  upon 
thee  with  an  even  mind,  and  the  chances  of 
life  without  over-much  sorrow,  knowing  that  a 
reward  shall  be  given  to  thee  by  God,  as  was 
given  to  Job  and  to  Laziirus."^ 

THAT  IT  IS  OUR  DUTY  TO  ESTEEM  OUR  CHRISTIAN 
TE.^CHERS  ABOVE  OUR  PARENTS  —  THE  FORMER 
BEING  THE  MEANS  OF  OUR  WELL-BEING,  THE 
OTHER   ONLY   OF   OUR   BEING. 

IX.  Thou  shalt  honour  him  that  speaks  to  thee 
the  word  of  God,  and  be  mindful  of  him  day 
and  night ;  and  thou  shalt  reverence  him,"?  not 
as  the  author  of  thy  birth,  but  as  one  that  is 
made  the  occasion  of  thy  well-being.  For 
where  the  doctrine  concerning  God  is,  there 
God  is  present.  Thou  shalt  every  day  seek  the 
face  of  the  saints,  that  thou  mayest  acquiesce  in 
their  words. 

THAT  WE  OUGHT  NOT  TO  DIVIDE  OURSELVES  FROM 
THE  SAINTS,  BUT  TO  MAKE  PEACE  BETWEEN 
THOSE  THAT  QUARREL,  TO  JUDGE  RIGHTEOUSLY, 
AND    NOT   TO   ACCEPT    PERSONS. 

X.  Thou  shalt  not  make  schisms  among  the 
saints,  but  be  mindful  of  the  followers  of  Corah.^° 
Thou  shalt  make  peace  between  those  that  are 
at  variance,  as  Moses  did  when  he  persuaded 
them  to  be  friends.^'  Thou  shalt  judge  right- 
eously ;  for  "  the  judgment  is  the  Lord's."  ^^ 
Thou  shalt  not  accept  persons  when  thou  reprov- 
est  for  sins  ;  but  do  as  Elijah  and  Micaiah  did 
to  Ahab,  and  Ebedmelech  the  Ethiopian  to 
Zedekiah,  and  Nathan  to  David,  and  John  to 
Herod.23 

CONCERNING     HIM     THAT     IS    DOUBLE-MINDED     AND 
DESPONDING. 

XI.  Be  not  of  a  doubtful  mind  in  thy  prayer, 
whether  it  shall  be  granted  or  no.  For  the 
Lord  said  to  me  Peter  upon  the  sea  :  "  O  thou 
of  little  foith,  wherefore  didst  thou  doubt  ?"-■♦ 
"  Be  not  thou  ready  to  stretch  out  thy  hand  to 
receive,  and  to  shut  it  when  thou  shouldst 
give."  ^5 


15  Prov.  xiii.  17.  LXX. 

">  The  words  from  "  for  he  that  walketh  "  to  "  be  known  "  are 
omitted  in  one  V.  Ms. 

'^  Prov.  xiii.  20. 

'5  Job  xiii. ;   Luke  xvi. 

'9  [Chaps,  ix.-xvii.  contain  nearly  every  clause  of  Teaching,  c\\^p. 
iv.,  in  the  same  order,  and  with  every  appearance  of  a  designed  en- 
largement of  that  passage.  —  R.] 

*"  Num.  xvi. 

2'  Ex.  ii.  13. 

"  Deut.  i.  17. 

23  I  Kings  xviii.,  xxi.,  xxii.;  2  Sam.  xii. ;  Matt.  xiv. 

*•«  Matt.  xiv.  31. 

25  Ecclus.  iv.  31. 


468 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  VII. 


CONCERNING   DOING   GOOD. 

XII.  If  thou  hast  by  the  work  of  thy  hands, 
give,  that  thou  mayest  labour  for  the  redemp- 
tion of  thy  sins ;  for  "  by  alms  and  acts  of  faith 
sins  are  purged  away."  •  Thou  shalt  not  grudge 
to  give  to  the  poor,  nor  when  thou  hast  given 
shalt  thou  murmur ;  for  thou  shalt  know  who 
will  repay  thee  thy  reward.  For  says  he  :  "  He 
that  hath  mercy  on  the  poor  man  lendeth  to 
the  Lord  ;  according  to  his  gift,  so  shall  it  be 
repaid  him  again."  ^  Thou  shalt  not  turn  away 
from  him  that  is  needy  ;  for  says  he  :  "  He  that 
stoppeth  his  ears,  that  he  may  not  hear  the  cry 
of  the  needy,  himself  also  shall  call,  and  there 
shall  be  none  to  hear  him."  3  Thou  shalt  com- 
municate in  all  things  to  thy  brother,  and  shalt 
not  say  thy  goods  are  thine  own ;  for  the  com- 
mon participation  of  the  necessaries  of  life  is 
appointed  to  all  men  by  God.  Thou  shalt  not 
take  off  thine  hand  from  thy  son  or  from  thy 
daughter,  but  shalt  teach  them  the  fear  of  God 
from  their  youth  ;  for  says  he  :  "  Correct  thy 
son,  so  shall  he  afford  thee  good  hope."  •» 

-HOW  M.\STERS  OUGHT  TO  BEHAVE  THEMSELVES  TO 
THEIR  SERVANTS,  AND  HOW  SERVANTS  OUGHT 
TO   BE   SUBJECT. 

XIII.  Thou  shalt  not  command  thy  man-ser- 
vant, or  thy  maid-servant,  who  trust  in  the  same 
God,  with  bitterness  of  soul,  lest  they  groan 
against  thee,  and  wrath  be  upon  thee  from  God. 
And,  ye  servants,  "be  subject  to  your  masters," s 
as  to  the  representatives  of  God,  with  attention 
and  fear,  "  as  to  the  Lord,  and  not  to  men."  ^ 

CONCERNING   HYPOCRISY,    AND   OBEDIENCE   TO    THE 
LAWS,   AND   CONFESSION   OF   SINS. 

XIV.  Thou  shalt  hate  all  hypocrisy ;  and  what- 
soever is  pleasing  to  the  Lord,  that  shalt  thou 
do.  By  no  means  forsake  the  commands  of  the 
Lord.  But  thou  shalt  observe  what  things  thou 
hast  received  from  Him,  neither  adding  to  them 
nor  taking  away  from  them.  "  For  thou  shalt 
not  add  unto  His  words,  lest  He  convict  thee, 
and  thou  becomest  a  liar."^  Thou  shalt  confess 
thy  sins  unto  the  Lord  thy  God  ;  and  thou  shalt 
not  add  unto  them,  that  it  may  be  well  with  thee 
from  the  Lord  thy  God,  who  willeth  not  the 
death  of  a  sinner,  but  his  repentance. 

CONCERNING  THE   OBSERVANCE   DUE  TO   PARENTS. 

XV.  Thou  shalt  be  observant  to  thy  father  and 
mother  as  the  causes  of  thy  being  born,  that 


'  Prov.  xvi.  6;  Dan.  iv.  27. 

*  Prov.  xix.  17. 
3  Prov.  xxi.  13. 

*  Prov.  xix.  18. 
5  Eph.  vi.  5. 

<>  Eph.  vi.  7. 
'  Prov.  X3UC.  6. 


thou  mayest  live  long  on  the  earth  which  the 
Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee.  Do  not  overlook  thy 
brethren  or  thy  kinsfolk  ;  for  "  thou  shalt  not 
overlook  those  nearly  related  to  thee."  ^ 

CONCERNING   THE   SUBJECTION   DUE    TO    THE    KING 
AND    TO    RULERS. 

XVI.  Thou  shalt  fear  the  king,  knowing  that 
his  appointment  is  of  the  Lord.  His  rulers  thou 
shalt  honour  as  the  ministers  of  God,  for  they 
are  the  revengers  of  all  unrighteousness ;  to 
whom  pay  taxes,  tribute,  and  every  oblation  with 
a  willing  mind. 

CONCERNING    THE     PURE     CONSCIENCE     OF     THOSE 
THAT   PRAY. 

XVII.  Thou  shalt  not  proceed  to  thy  prayer  in 
the  day  of  thy  wickedness,  before  thou  hast  laid 
aside  thy  bitterness.  This  is  the  way  of  life,  in 
which  may  ye  be  found,  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord. 

THAT  THE  V^AY  WHICH  WAS  AFTERWARD  INTRO- 
DUCED BY  THE  SNARES  OF  THE  ADVERSARY  IS 
FULL   OF    IMPIETY    AND    WICKEDNESS. 

xviii.  But  the  way  of  death  ^  is  known  by  its 
wicked  practices  :  for  therein  is  the  ignorance  of 
God,  and  the  introduction  of  many  evils,  and 
disorders,  and  disturbances  ;  whereby  come  mur- 
ders, adulteries,  fornications,  perjuries,  unlawful 
lusts,  thefts,  idolatries,  magic  arts,  witchcrafts, 
rapines,  false-witnesses,  hypocrisies,  double-heart- 
edness,  deceit,  pride,  malice,  insolence,  covetous- 
ness,  obscene  talk,  jealousy,  confidence,  haughti- 
ness, arrogance,  impudence,  persecution  of  the 
good,  enmity  to  truth,  love  of  hes,  ignorance  of 
righteousness.  For  they  who  do  such  things  do 
not  adhere  to  goodness,  or  to  righteous  judg- 
ment :  they  watch  not  for  good,  but  for  evil ; 
from  whom  meekness  and  patience  are  far  off, 
who  love  vain  things,  pursuing  after  reward,  hav- 
ing no  pity  on  the  poor,  not  labouring  for  him 
that  is  in  misery,  nor  knowing  Him  that  made 
j  them  ;  murderers  of  infants,  destroyers  of  the 
workmanship  of  God,  that  turn  away  from  the 
needy,  adding  affliction  to  the  afflicted,  the  flat- 
terers of  the  rich,  the  despisers  of  the  poor,  full 
of  sin.  May  you,  children,  be  delivered  from  all 
these. 

THAT  WE  MUST  NOT  TURN  FROM  THE  WAY  OF 
PIETY  EITHER  TO  THE  RIGHT  HAND  OR  TO  THE 
LEFT.       AN    EXHORTATION    OF   THE    LAWGIVER. 

XIX.  See  that  no  one  seduce  thee '°  from  piety  ; 
for  says  He  :  "  Thou  mayst  not  turn  aside  from 


'  Isa.  Iviii.  7. 

9  [For  the  remarkable  agreement  of  this  chapter  with  Teaching, 
chap,  v.,  see  the  latter;  comp.  also  Barnabas,  xx.  —  R.l 

»°  [Chaps,  xix.-xxi.  have  few  parallels  with  the  Teaching.  —  R.] 


Sec.  II.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


469 


it  to  the  right  hand,  or  to  the  left,  that  thou 
niayst  have  understanding  in  all  that  thou  doest." ' 
For  if  thou  dost  not  turn  out  of  the  right  way, 
thou  wilt  not  be  ungodly. 

SEC.    II. ON  THE    FORMATION  OF   THE  CHARACTER 

OF    BELIEVERS,    AND    ON    GIVING    OF    THANKS   TO 
GOD. 

THAT  WE  OUGHT  NOT  TO  DESPISE  ANY  OF  THE 
SORTS  OF  FOOD  THAT  ARE  SET  BEFORE  US,  BUT 
GRATEFULLY  AND  ORDERLY  TO  PARTAKE  OF 
THEM. 

XX.  Now  concerning  the  several  sorts  of  food, 
the  Lord  says  to  thee,  "  Ye  shall  eat  the  good 
things  of  the  earth  ;  "  ^  and,  "  All  sorts  of  flesh 
shall  ye  eat,  as  the  green  herb  ;  "  ^  but,  "  Thou 
shalt  pour  out  the  blood." ■♦  For  "not  those 
things  that  go  into  the  mouth,  but  those  that 
come  out  of  it,  defile  a  man ;  "  s  j  mean  blas- 
phemies, evil-speaking,  and  if  there  be  any  other 
thing  of  the  like  nature.^  But  "  do  thou  eat  the 
fat  of  the  land  with  righteousness."  7  For  "  if 
there  be  anything  pleasant,  it  is  His ;  and  if 
there  be  anything  good,  it  is  His.  Wheat  for 
the  young  men,  and  wine  to  cheer  the  maids." 
For  "  who  shall  eat  or  who  shall  drink  without 
Him?"^  Wise  Ezra 9  does  also  admonish  thee, 
and  say :  "  Go  your  way,  and  eat  the  fat,  and 
drink  the  sweet,  and  be  not  sorrowful."  '° 

THAT  WE  OUGHT  TO  AVOID   THE    EATING    OF   THINGS 
OFFERED    TO    IDOLS. 

XXI.  But  do  ye  abstain  from  things  offered  to 
idols  ;  "  for  they  offer  them  in  honour  of  demons, 
that  is,  to  the  dishonour  of  the  one  God,  that  ye 
may  not  become  partners  with  demons. 

A    CONSTITLTION    OF    OUR     LORD,    HOW   WE     OUGHT 
TO    BAFriZE,    AND    INTO    WHOSE    DEATH. 

XXII.  Now  concerning  baptism,'^  O  bishop,  or 
presbyter,  we  have  already  given  direction,  and 
we  now  say,  that  thou  shalt  so  baptize  as  the 
Lord  commanded  us,  saying  :  "  Go  ye,  and  teach 
all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
(teaching  them  to  observe  all  things  whatsoever 
I  have  commanded  you)  :  "  '^  of  the  Father  who 
sent,  of  Christ  who  came,  of  the  Comforter  who 


'  Deut.  V.  32. 
^  Isa.  i.  19. 
^  (Jen.  ix.  3. 
*  Deut.  XV.  23. 
5  Matt.  XV.  II. 
•>  Mark  vii.  22. 
'  Zech.  ix.  17. 

8  Eccles.  ii.  25,  LXX. 

9  The  words  from  "  Wise  Ezra  "  to  "  sorrowful "  are  not  in  one  V. 
s. 

'°  Neh.  viii.  10. 

"  T  Cor.  X.  20. 

'     [Comp.,  with  this  chapter,  Teaching,  chap.  vii.  — R.J 

*•>  Matt,  xxviii.  ly. 


testified.  But  thou  shalt  beforehand  anoint  the 
person  with  the  holy  oil,  and  afterward  baptize 
him  with  the  water,  and  in  the  conclusion  shalt 
seal  him  with  the  ointment ;  that  the  anointing 
with  oil  may  be  the  participation  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  the  water  the  symbol  of  the  death  of 
Christ,  and  the  ointment  the  seal  of  the  cove- 
nants. But  if  there  be  neither  oil  nor  ointment, 
water  is  sufficient  both  for  the  anointing,  and  for 
the  seal,  and  for  the  confession  of  Him  that  is 
dead,  or  indeed  is  dying  together  with  Christ. 
But  before  baptism,  let  him  that  is  to  be  baptized 
fast ;  for  even  the  Lord,  when  He  was  first  bap- 
tized by  John,  and  abode  in  the  wilderness,  did 
afterward  fast  forty  days  and  forty  nights.'-*  But 
He  was  baptized,  and  then  fasted,  not  having 
Himself  any  need  of  cleansing,  or  of  fasting,  or 
of  purgation,  who  was  by  nature  pure  and  holy  ; 
but  that  He  might  testify  the  truth  to  John,  and 
afford  an  example  to  us.  Wherefore  our  Lord 
was  not  baptized  into  His  own  passion,  or 
death,  or  resurrection  —  for  none  of  those  things 
had  then  happened — but  for  another  purpose. 
Wherefore  He  by  His  own  authority  fasted  after 
His  baptism,  as  being  the  Lord  of  John.  But 
he  who  is  to  be  initiated  into  His  death  ought 
first  to  fast,  and  then  to  be  baptized.  For  it  is 
not  reasonable  that  he  who  has  been  buried  tvith 
Christ,  and  is  risen  again  with  Him,  should  ap- 
pear dejected  at  His  very  resurrection.  For 
man  is  not  lord  of  our  Saviour's  constitution, 
since  one  is  the  Master  and  the  other  the  servant. 


WHICH    D.\YS    OF   THE  WEEK  WE  ARE   TO    FAST,  AND 
WHICH    NOT,    AND    FOR    WHAT    REASONS. 

XXIII.  But  let  not  your  fasts  be  with  the  hypo- 
crites ;  '5  for  they  fast  on  the  second  and  fifth  days 
of  the  week.  But  do  you  either  fast  the  entire 
five  days,  or  on  the  fourth  day  of  the  week,  and 
on  the  day  of  the  Preparation,  because  on  the 
fourth  day  the  condemnation  went  out  against 
the  Lord,  Judas  then  promising  to  betray  Him 
for  money  ;  and  you  must  fast  on  the  day  of  the 
Preparation,  because  on  that  day  the  Lord  suf- 
fered the  death  of  the  cross  under  Pontius 
Pilate.  But  keep  the  Sabbath,  and  the  Lord's 
day  festival ;  because  the  former  is  the  memorial 
of  the  creation,  and  the  latter  of  the  resurrection. 
But  there  is  one  only  Sabbath  to  be  observed  by 
you  in  the  whole  year,  which  is  that  of  our  Lord's 
burial,  on  which  men  ought  to  keep  a  fast,  but 
not  a  festival.  For  inasmuch  as  the  Creator  was 
then  under  the  earth,  the  sorrow  for  Him  is  more 
forcible  than  the  joy  for  the  creation  ;  for  the 
Creator  is  more  honourable  by  nature  and  dignity 
than  His  own  creatures. 


'<  Matt,  iii.,  iv. 

'5  [Comp  the  few  but  remarkable  resemblances  of  7Vut/i/K^,  chap, 
viii.,  with  chaps,  xxiii.,  xxiv.,  here.  —  R.j 


470 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  VIL 


WHAT     SORT     OF     PEOPLE     OUGHT     TO     PRAY     THAT 
PRAYER   THAT   WAS    GIVEN    BY   THE    LORD. 

XXIV.  Now,  "  when  ye  pray,  be  not  ye  as  the 
hypocrites  ;  "  '  but  as  the  Lord  has  appointed 
us  in  the  Gospel,  so  pray  ye  :  "  Our  Father  which 
art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be  Thy  name  ;  Thy  king- 
dom come ;  Thy  will  be  done,  as  in  heaven,  so 
on  earth  ;  give  us  this  day  our  daily  bread  ;  and 
forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  forgive  our  debtors ; 
and  lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver  us 
from  evil ;  for  Thine  is  the  kingdom  for  ever. 
Amen."^  Pray  thus  thrice  in  a  day,  preparing 
yourselves  beforehand,  that  ye  may  be  worthy 
of  the  adoption  of  the  Father ;  lest,  when  you 
call  Him  Father  unworthily,  you  be  reproached 
by  Him,  as  Israel  once  His  first-born  son  was 
told:  "If  I  be  a  Father,  where  is  my  glory? 
And  if  I  be  a  Lord,  where  is  my  fear?"^  For 
the  glory  of  fathers  is  the  holiness  of  their  chil- 
dren, and  the  honour  of  masters  is  the  fear  of 
their  servants,  as  the  contrary  is  dishonour  and 
confusion.  For  says  He :  "  Through  you  my 
name  is  blasphemed  among  the  Gentiles."  ■* 

A   MYSTICAL   THANKSGIVING. 

XXV.  Be  ye  always  thankful,  as  faithful  and 
honest  servants  ;  and  concerning  the  eucharisti- 
cal  thanksgiving  say  thus  :  5  We  thank  Thee,  our 
Father,  for  that  life  which  Thou  hast  made 
known  to  us  by  Jesus  Thy  Son,  by  whom  Thou 
madest  all  things,  and  takest  care  of  the  whole 
world ;  whom  Thou  hast  sent  to  become  man 
for  our  salvation  ;  whom  Thou  hast  permitted 
to  suffer  and  to  die  ;  whom  Thou  hast  raised  up, 
and  been  pleased  to  glorify,  and  hast  set  Him 
down  on  Thy  right  hand  ;  by  whom  Thou  hast 
promised  us  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  Do 
thou,  O  Lord  Almighty,  everlasting  God,  so 
gather  together  Thy  Church  from  the  ends  of 
the  earth  into  Thy  kingdom,  as  this  corn  was 
once  scattered,  and  is  now  become  one  loaf. 
We  also,  our  Father,  thank  Thee  for  the  precious 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  was  shed  for  us, 
and  for  His  precious  body,  whereof  we  celebrate 
this  representation,  as  Himself  appointed  us, 
"  to  show  forth  His  death."  ^  For  through  Him 
glory  is  to  be  given  to  Thee  for  ever.  Amen. 
Let  no  one  eat  of  these  things  that  is  not  initi- 
ated ;  but  those  only  who  have  been  baptized 
into  the  death  of  the  Lord.  But  if  any  one  that 
is  not  initiated  conceal  himself,  and  partake  of 
the  same,  "  he  eats  eternal  damnation ;  "  ?  be- 


'  Matt.  vi.  5. 

^  Matt.  vi.  9,  etc. 

3  Mai.  i.  6. 

■*  Isa.  Hi.  s. 

5  [See  the  eucharistic  prayer  in  Teaching,  chap.  ix.     The  corre- 
spondences and  divergences  are  alike  interesting.  —  R.J 

^  I  Cor   xi.  26. 

^  I  Cor.  xi.  59      [See  Elucidation  I.  p.  382,  supra.\ 


cause,  being  not  of  the  faith  of  Christ,  he  has 
partaken  of  such  things  as  it  is  not  lawful  for 
him  to  partake  of,  to  his  own  punishment.  But 
if  any  one  is  a  partaker  through  ignorance,  in- 
struct him  quickly,  and  initiate  him,  that  he  may 
not  go  out  and  despise  you. 

A  THANKSGIVING   AT   THE   DIVINE   PARTICIPATION. 

XXVI.  After  the  participation,-  give  thanks  in 
this  manner  :  We  thank  thee,  O  God  and  Father 
of  Jesus  our  Saviour,  for  Thy  holy  name,  which 
Thou  hast  made  to  inhabit  among  us  ;  and  that 
knowledge,  faith,  love,  and  immortality  which 
Thou  hast  given  us  through  Thy  Son  Jesus. 
Thou,  O  Almighty  Lord,  the  God  of  the  universe, 
hast  created  the  world,  and  the  things  that  are 
therein,  by  Him  ;  and  hast  planted  a  law  in  our 
souls,  and  beforehand  didst  prepare  things  for 
the  convenience  of  men.  O  God  of  our  holy 
and  blameless  fathers,  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and 
Jacob,  Thy  faithful  servants  ;  Thou,  O  God,  who 
art  powerful,  faithful,  and  true,  and  without 
deceit  in  Thy  promises ;  who  didst  send  upon 
earth  Jesus  Thy  Christ  to  live  with  men,  as  a 
man,  when  He  was  God  the  Word,  and  man,  to 
take  away  error  by  the  roots  :  do  Thou  even 
now,  through  Him,  be  mindful  of  this  Thy  holy 
Church,  which  Thou  hast  purchased  with  the 
precious  blood  of  Thy  Christ,  and  deliver  it 
from  all  evil,  and  perfect  it  in  Thy  love  and  Thy 
truth,  and  gather  us  all  together  into  Thy  king- 
dom which  Thou  hast  prepared.  Let  this  Thy 
kingdom  come.^  "  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David. 
Blessed  be  He  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord"'°  —  God  the  Lord,  who  was  manifested 
to  us  in  the  flesh.  If  any  one  be  holy,  let  him 
draw  near ;  but  if  any  one  be  not  such,  let  him 
become  such  by  repentance.  Permit  also  to 
your  presbyters  to  give  thanks. 

A  THANKSGIVING   ABOUT  THE   MYSTICAL   OINTMENT. 

xxvii.  Concerning  the  ointment  give  thanks 
in  this  manner :  We  give  Thee  thanks,  O  God, 
the  Creator  of  the  whole  world,  both  for  the  fra- 
grancy  of  the  ointment,  and  for  the  immortality 
which  Thou  hast  made  known  to  us  by  Thy  Son 
Jesus.  For  Thine  is  the  glory  and  the  power  for 
ever.  Amen.  Whosoever  comes  to  you,"  and 
gives  thanks  in  this  manner,  receive  him  as  a 
disciple  of  Christ.  But  if  he  preach  another 
doctrine,  different  from  that  which  Christ  by  us 
has  delivered  to  you,  such  a  one  you  must  not 
permit  to  give  thanks ;  for  such  a  one  rather 
affronts  God  than  glorifies  Him. 


8  [Comp.  Teaching,  chap.  x.  —  R.] 

9  ["  Maran  atha,"  as  in  Teaching.  —  R.] 

'°  I  Cor.  xvi.  22;  Matt.  xxi.  9;  Mark  xi.  10.  [Comp.  John  xii. 
13. -R.] 

"  [Comp.  Teaching,  chap,  xi.,  where,  however,  only  a  few  phrases 
correspond.  — R.] 


Sec.  II.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


471 


THAT  WE   OUGHT   NOT   TO   BE   INDIFFERENT  ABOUT 
COMMUNICATING. 

XXVIII.  But  whosoever  comes  to  you,  let  him 
be  first  examined,  and  then  received  ;  for  ye 
have  understanding,  and  are  able  to  know  the 
right  hand  from  the  left,'  and  to  distinguish  false 
teachers  from  true  teachers.  But  when  a  teach- 
er comes  to  you,  supply  him  with  what  he  wants 
with  all  readiness.  And  even  when  a  false 
teacher  comes,  you  shall  give  him  for  his  neces- 
sity, but  shall  not  receive  his  error.  Nor  indeed 
may  ye  pray  together  with  him,  lest  ye  be  pol- 
luted as  well  as  he.  Every  true  prophet  or 
teacher  2  that  comes  to  you  is  worthy  of  his 
maintenance,  as  being  a  labourer  in  the  word  of 
righteousness.^ 

A   CONSTITUTION   CONCERNING   OBLATIONS. 

XXIX.  All  the  first-fruits  of  the  winepress,  the 
threshing-floor,  the  oxen,  and  the  sheep,  shalt 
thou  give  to  the  priests,-*  that  thy  storehouses  and 
garners  and  the  products  of  thy  land  may  be 
blessed,  and  thou  mayst  be  strengthened  with 
corn  and  wine  and  oil,  and  the  herds  of  thy  cattle 
and  flocks  of  thy  sheep  may  be  increased.  Thou 
shalt  give  the  tenth  of  thy  increase  to  the  orphan, 
and  to  the  widow,  and  to  the  poor,  and  to  the 
stranger.  All  the  first-fruits  of  thy  hot  bread,  of 
thy  barrels  of  wine,  or  oil,  or  honey,  or  nuts,  or 
grapes,  or  the  first-fruits  of  other  things,  shalt 
thou  give  to  the  priests ;  but  those  of  silver,  and 
of  garments,  and  of  all  sort  of  possessions,  to  the 
orphan  and  to  the  widow. 

HOW  WE  OUGHT  TO  ASSEMBLE  TOGETHER,  AND  TO 
CELEBRATE  THE  FESTIVAL  DAY  OF  OUR  S.WIOUR'S 
RESURRECTION. 

XXX.  On  the  day  of  the  resurrection  of  the 
Lord, 5  that  is,  the  Lord's  day,  assemble  your- 
selves together,  without  fail,  giving  thanks  to 
God,  and  praising  Him  for  those  mercies  God 
has  bestowed  upon  you  through  Christ,  and  has 
delivered  you  from  ignorance,  error,  and  bond- 
age, that  your  sacrifice  may  be  unspotted,  and 
acceptable  to  God,  who  has  said  concerning  His 
universal  Church  :  "  In  every  place  shall  incense 
and  a  pure  sacrifice  be  offered  unto  me ;  for  I 
am  a  great  King,  saith  the  Lord  Almighty,  and 
my  name  is  wonderful  among  t<lie  heathen."  '^ 

WHAT  QUALIFICATIONS   THEY    OUGHT   TO    HAVE  WHO 
ARE   TO    BE    ORDAINED. 

XXXI.  Do  you  first  ordain  bishops  worthy  of 
the   Lord,7  and  presbyters  and  deacons,   pious 

'  [This  sentence  is  found  in  Teaching,  chap.  xii.  —  R.] 

2  [Part  of  this  sentence  has  a  parallel  in  Teaching,  chap,  xiii., 
but  there  is  an  obvious  difference  of  circumstances.  Chap.  xxix. 
presents  more  parallel  passages.  — R.] 

3  Matt.  X.  41. 
*  Num.  xviii. 

5  [The  resemblance  to  Teaching,  chap,  xiv.,  is  marked.  —  R.] 

*>  Mai.  i.  II,  14. 

'  [Comp.  text  and  notes,  Teaching,  chap.  xv.  —  R.] 


men,  righteous,  meek,  free  from  the  love  of 
money,  lovers  of  truth,  approved,  holy,  not  ac- 
cepters of  persons,  who  are  able  to  teach  the 
word  of  piety,  and  rightly  dividing  the  doctrines 
of  the  Lord.**  And  do  ye  honour  such  as  your 
fathers,  as  your  lords,  as  your  benefactors,  as  the 
causes  of  your  well-being.  Reprove  ye  one  an- 
other, not  in  anger,  but  in  mildness,  with  kind- 
ness and  peace.  Observe  all  things  that  are 
commanded  you  by  the  Lord.  Be  watchful  for 
your  life.9  ''  Let  your  loins  be  girded  about, 
and  your  lights  burning,  and  ye  like  unto  men 
who  wait  for  their  Lord,  when  He  will  come,  at 
even,  or  in  the  morning,  or  at  cock-crowing,  or 
at  midnight.  For  at  what  hour  they  think  not, 
the  Lord  will  come  ;  and  if  they  open  to  Him, 
blessed  are  those  servants,  because  they  were 
found  watching.  For  He  will  gird  Himself,  and 
will  make  them  to  sit  down  to  meat,  and  will 
come  forth  and  serve  them."  '°  Watch  therefore, 
and  pray,  that  ye  do  not  sleep  unto  death.  For 
your  former  good  deeds  will  not  profit  you,  if  at 
the  last  part  of  your  life  you  go  astray  from  the 
true  faith. 

A    PREDICTION    CONCERNING    FUTURITIES. 

XXXII.  For  in  the  last  days  false  prophets  shall 
be  multiplied,  and  such  as  corrupt  the  word  ; 
and  the  sheep  shall  be  changed  into  wolves,  and 
love  into  hatred  :  for  through  the  abounding  of 
iniquity  the  love  of  many  shall  wax  cold.  For 
men  shall  hate,  and  persecute,  and  betray  one 
another.  And  then  shall  appear  the  deceiver  of 
the  world,  the  enemy  of  the  truth,  the  prince 
of  lies,"  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  "shall  destroy  with 
the  spirit  of  His  mouth,  who  takes  away  the 
wicked  with  His  lips  ;  and  many  shall  be  offended 
at  Him.  But  they  that  endure  to  the  end,  the 
same  shall  be  saved.  And  then  shall  appear  the 
sign  of  the  Son  of  man  in  heaven  ;  "  '^  and  after- 
wards shall  be  the  voice  of  a  trumpet  by  the 
archangel ;  '^  and  in  that  interval  shall  be  the 
revival  of  those  that  were  asleep.  And  then  shall 
the  Lord  come,  and  all  His  saints  with  Him,'* 
with  a  great  concussion  above  the  clouds,  with 
the  angels  of  His  power,'5  in  the  throne  of  His 
kingdom,  to  condemn  the  devil,  the  deceiver  of 
the  world,  and  to  render  to  every  one  according 
to  his  deeds.  "  Then  shall  the  wicked  go  away 
into  everlasting  punishment,  but  the  righteous 
shall  go  into  life  eternal,"  '^  to  inherit  those  things 
"  which  eye  hath   not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor 


*  2  Tim.  ii.  15. 

9  [This  clause  is  found  7icrhatim  in  Teaching,  chap.  xvi.  There 
is  a  resemblance  also,  in  order  of  topics,  from  this  point  down  to  the 
phrase  "above  the  clouds;  "  see  chap,  xxxii.  No  further  correspond- 
ences appear.  —  R.J 

'°  Luke  xii.  35,  37;  Mark  xiii.  35. 

"  2  Thess.  ii. 

'2  Isa.  xi.  4;  Matt.  xxiv. 

'^  I  Thess.  iv.  16. 

■'I  [Zech.  xiv.  5. —  R.J 

■5   Matt.  xvi.  27. 

■*>  Matt.  XXV.  46. 


472 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  VII. 


have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  such  things 
as  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him  ; " ' 
and  they  shall  rejoice  in  the  kingdom  of  God, 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  Since  we  are  vouch- 
safed such  great  blessings  from  Him,  let  us  be- 
come His  suppliants,  and  call  upon  Him  by 
continual  prayer,  and  say  :  — 

A  PRAYER   DECL.\R.\TIVE   OF   GOD'S   VARIOUS   PROVI- 
DENCE. 

XXXIII.  Our  eternal  Saviour,  the  King  of  gods, 
who  alone  art  almighty,  and  the  Lord,  the  God  of 
all  beings,  and  the  God  of  our  holy  and  blameless 
fathers,  and  of  those  before  us ;  the  God  of 
Abraham,  and  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob ;  who  art 
merciful  and  compassionate,  long-suffering,  and 
al)undant  in  mercy ;  to  whom  every  heart  is 
naked,  and  by  whom  every  heart  is  seen,  and  to 
whom  every  secret  thought  is  revealed  :  to  Thee 
do  the  souls  of  the  righteous  cry  aloud,  upon 
Thee  do  the  hopes  of  the  godly  trust,  Thou 
Father  of  the  blameless.  Thou  hearer  of  the 
supplication  of  those  that  call  upon  Thee  with 
uprightness,  and  who  knowest  the  supplications 
that  are  not  uttered  :  for  Thy  providence  reaches 
as  far  as  the  inmost  parts  of  mankind ;  and  by 
Thy  knowledge  Thou  searchest  the  thoughts  of 
every  one,  and  in  every  region  of  the  whole 
earth  the  incense  of  prayer  and  supplication  is 
sent  up  to  Thee.  O  Thou  who  hast  appointed 
this  present  world  as  a  place  of  combat  to  right- 
eousness, and  hast  opened  to  all  the  gate  of 
mercy,  and  hast  demonstrated  to  every  man  by 
implanted  knowledge,  and  natural  judgment,  and 
the  admonitions  of  the  law,  how  the  possession 
of  riches  is  not  everlasting,  the  ornament  of 
beauty  is  not  perpetual,  our  strength  and  force 
are  easily  dissolved ;  and  that  all  is  vapour  and 
vanity ;  and  that  only  the  good  conscience  of 
faith  unfeigned  passes  through  the  midst  of  the 
heavens,  and  returning  with  truth,  takes  hold  of 
the  right  hand  of  the  joy^  which  is  to  come. 
And  withal,  before  the  promise  of  the  restoration 
of  all  things  is  accomplished,  the  soul  itself  ex- 
ults in  hope,  and  is  joyful.  For  from  that  truth 
which  was  in  our  forefather  Abraham,  when  he 
changed  his  way  Thou  didst  guide  him  by  a 
vision,  and  didst  teach  him  what  kind  of  state 
this  world  is ;  and  knowledge  went  before  his 
faith,  and  faith  was  the  consequence  of  his  knowl- 
edge ;  and  the  covenant  did  follow  after  his 
faith.  For  Thou  saidst :  "  I  will  make  thy  seed 
as  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  as  the  sand  which  is 
by  the  sea-shore."  3  Moreover,  when  Thou  hadst 
given  him  Isaac,  and  knewest  him  to  be  like  him 
in  his  mode  of  life.  Thou  wast  then  called  his 


■  I  Cor.  ii.  9. 

*  A  conjecture  of  Cotelerius  is  adopted.     The  MSS.  read  "  nour- 
ishment" instead  of  "joy." 
■5  Gen.  xiii.  i6,  xxii.  17. 


God,  saying :  "  I  will  be  a  God  to  thee,  and  to 
thy  seed  after  thee."-*  And  when  our  father 
Jacob  was  sent  into  Mesopotamia,  Thou  showedst 
him  Christ,  and  by  him  speakest,  saying  :  "  Be- 
hold, I  am  with  thee,  and  I  will  increase  thee, 
and  multiply  thee  exceedingly."  5  And  so  spakest 
Thou  to  Moses,  Thy  faithful  and  holy  servant,  at 
the  vision  of  the  bush  :  "  I  am  He  that  is  ;  this 
is  my  name  for  ever,  and  my  memorial  for  gen- 
erations of  generations."^  O  Thou  great  pro- 
tector of  the  posterity  of  Abraham,  Thou  art 
blessed  for  ever. 

A   PRAYER   DECLAR.'^TIVE   OF   GOD'S   VARIOUS    CREA- 
TION. 

xxxiv.  Thou  art  blessed,  O  Lord,  the  King  of 
ages,  who  by  Christ  hast  made  the  whole  world, 
and  by  Him  in  the  beginning  didst  reduce  into 
order  the  disordered  parts ;  who  dividedst  the 
waters  from  the  waters  by  a  firmament,  and  didst 
put  into  them  a  spirit  of  life  ;  who  didst  fix  the 
earth,  and  stretch  out  the  heaven,  and  didst  dis- 
pose every  creature  by  an  accurate  constitution. 
For  by  Thy  power,  O  Lord,  the  world  is  beauti- 
fied, the  heaven  is  fixed  as  an  arch  over  us,  and 
is  rendered  illustrious  with  stars  for  our  comfort 
in  the  darkness.  The  light  also  and  the  sun  were 
begotten  for  days  and  the  production  of  fruit, 
and  the  moon  for  the  change  of  seasons,  by  its 
increase  and  diminutions  ;  and  one  was  called 
Night,  and  the  other  Day.  And  the  firmament 
was  exhibited  in  the  midst  of  the  abyss,  and 
Thou  commandedst  the  waters  to  be  gathered 
together,  and  the  dry  land  to  appear.  But  as  for 
the  sea  itself,  who  can  possibly  describe  it,  which 
comes  with  fury  from  the  ocean,  yet  runs  back 
again,  being  stopped  by  the  sand  at  Thy  com- 
mand ?  For  Thou  hast  said  :  "  Thereby  shall 
her  waves  be  broken."  7  Thou  hast  also  made 
it  capable  of  supporting  little  and  great  creatures, 
and  made  it  navigable  for  ships.  Then  did  the 
earth  become  green,  and  was  planted  with  all 
sorts  of  flowers,  and  the  variety  of  several  trees  ; 
and  the  shining  luminaries,  the  nourishers  of 
those  plants,  preserve  their  unchangeable  course, 
and  in  nothing  depart  from  Thy  command.  But 
where  Thou  biddest  them,  there  do  they  rise 
and  set  for  signs»of  the  seasons  and  of  the  years, 
making  a  constant  return  of  the  work  of  men. 
Afterwards  the  kinds  of  the  several  animals  were 
created  —  those  belonging  to  the  land,  to  the 
water,  to  the  air,  and  both  to  air  and  water ;  and 
the  artificial  wisdom  of  Thy  providence  does 
still  impart  to  every  one  a  suitable  providence. 
For  as  He  was  not  unable  to  produce  different 
kinds,  so  neither  has  He  disdained  to  exercise  a 


*  Gen.  xxvi.  3. 

5  Gen.  xvii.  7,  xxviii.  15,  xlviii.  4. 

*  Ex.  iii.  i.^,  15. 

'  Job  xxxviii.  II. 


Sec.  II.] 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


473 


different  providence  towards  every  one.  And  at 
the  conclusion  of  the  creation  Thou  gavest  direc- 
tion to  Thy  Wisdom,  and  formedst  a  reasonable 
creature  as  the  citizen  of  the  world,  saying, 
"  Let  us  make  man  after  our  image,  and  after 
our  likeness ;  "  '  and  hast  exhibited  him  as  the 
ornament  of  the  world,  and  formed  him  a  body 
out  of  the  four  elements,  those  primary  bodies, 
but  hadst  prepared  a  soul  out  of  nothing,  and 
bestowedst  upon  him  his  five  senses,  and  didst 
set  over  his  sensations  a  mind  as  the  conductor 
of  the  soul.  And .  besides  all  these  things,  O 
Lord  God,  who  can  worthily  declare  the  motion 
of  the  rainy  clouds,  the  shining  of  the  lightning, 
the  noise  of  the  thunder,  in  order  to  the  supply 
of  proper  food,  and  the  most  agreeable  temper- 
ature of  the  air?  But  when  man  was  disobedient. 
Thou  didst  deprive  him  of  the  life  which  should 
have  been  his  reward.  Yet  didst  Thou  not 
destroy  him  for  ever,  but  laidst  him  to  sleep  for 
a  time ;  and  Thou  didst  by  oath  call  him  to  a 
resurrection,  and  loosedst  the  bond  of  death,  O 
Thou  reviver  of  the  dead,  through  Jesus  Christ, 
who  is  our  hope. 

A  PRAYER,  WITH  THANKSGIVING,  DECLARATIVE  OF 
god's  providence  over  the  beings  he  H^iVS 
MADE. 

XXXV.  Great  art  thou,  O  Lord  Almighty,  and 
great  is  Thy  power,  and  of  Thy  understanding 
there  is  no  number.  Our  Creator  and  Saviour, 
rich  in  benefits,  long-suffering,  and  the  bestower 
of  mercy,  who  dost  not  take  away  Thy  salvation 
from  Thy  creatures :  for  Thou  art  good  by 
nature,  and  sparest  sinners,  and  invitest  them  to 
repentance  ;  for  admonition  is  the  effect  of  Thy 
bowels  of  compassion.  For  how  should  we 
abide  if  we  were  required  to  come  to  judgment 
immediately,  when,  after  so  much  long-suffering, 
we  hardly  get  clear  of  our  miserable  condition  ? 
The  heavens  declare  Thy  dominion,  and  the 
earth  shakes  with  earthquakes,  and,  hanging 
upon  nothing,  declares  Thy  unshaken  stedfast- 
ness.  The  sea  raging  with  waves,  and  feeding  a 
flock  of  ten  thousand  creatures,  is  bounded  with 
sand,  as  standing  in  awe  at  Thy  command,  and 
compels  all  men  to  cry  out :  "  How  great  are 
Thy  works,  O  Lord  !  in  wisdom  hast  Thou  made 
them  all :  the  earth  is  full  of  Thy  creation,"  ^ 
And  the  bright  host  of  angels  and  the  intel- 
lectual spirits  say  to  Palmoni,^  "  There  is  but  one 
holy  Being  ;  "  ■*  and  the  holy  seraphim,  together 
with  the  six-winged  cherubim,  who  sing  to  Thee 
their  triumphal  song,  cry  out  with  never-ceasing 
voices,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord  God  of  hosts  ! 
heaven   and   earth   are  full    of    Thy   glory ;  "  s 


'  Gen.  i.  26. 

^  Ps.  civ.  24. 

^  [i  e.,  "  the  wonderful  Numberer;  "  Etig.,  »iarg.\ 

*  I)an.  viii.  13.     [Not  according  to  Heb.  nor  LXX.  as  now.] 

S  Isa.  vi.  3. 


and  the  other  multitudes  of  the  orders,  angels, 
archangels,  thrones,  dominions,  principalities, 
authorities,  and  powers  cry  aloud,  and  say, 
"  Blessed  be  the  glory  of  the  Lord  out  of  His 
place."  ^  But  Israel,  Thy  Church  on  earth, 
taken  out  of  the  Gentiles,  emulating  the  heav- 
enly powers  night  and  day,  with  a  full  heart  and 
a  willing  soul  sings,  "  The  chariot  of  God  is 
ten  thousandfold  thousands  of  them  that  re- 
joice :  the  Lord  is  among  them  in  Sinai,  in  the 
holy  place."  ^  The  heaven  knows  Him  who 
fixed  it  as  a  cube  of  stone,  in  the  form  of  an 
arch,  upon  nothing,  who  united  the  land  and 
water  to  one  another,  and  scattered  the  vital  air 
all  abroad,  and  conjoined  fire  therewith  for 
warmth,  and  the  comfort  against  darkness.  The 
choir  of  stars  strikes  us  with  admiration,  declar- 
ing Him  that  numbers  them,  and  showing  Him 
that  names  them;  the  animals  declare  Him 
that  puts  life  into  them  ;  the  trees  show  Him  that 
makes  them  grow :  all  which  creatures,  being 
made  by  Thy  word,  show  forth  the  greatness  of 
Thy  power.  Wherefore  every  man  ought  to 
send  up  an  hymn  from  his  very  soul  to  Thee, 
through  Christ,  in  the  name  of  all  the  rest,  since 
He  has  power  over  them  all  by  Thy  appoint- 
ment. For  Thou  art  kind  in  Thy  benefits,  and 
beneficent  in  Thy  bowels  of  compassion,  who 
alone  art  almighty  :  for  when  Thou  wiliest,  to  be 
able  is  present  with  Thee  ;  for  Thy  eternal  power 
both  quenches  flame,  and  stops  the  mouths  of 
lions,  and  tames  whales,  and  raises  up  the  sick, 
and  overrules  the  power  of  all  things,  and  over- 
turns the  host  of  enemies,  and  casts  down  a 
people  numbered  in  their  arrogance.  Thou  art 
He  who  art  in  heaven.  He  who  art  on  earth.  He 
who  art  in  the  sea.  He  who  art  in  finite  things, 
Thyself  unconfined  by  anything.  For  of  Thy 
majesty  there  is  no  boundary  ;  for  it  is  not  ours, 
O  Lord,  but  the  oracle  of  Thy  servant,  who 
said,  "  And  thou  shalt  know  in  thine  heart  that 
the  Lord  thy  God  He  is  God  in  heaven  above, 
and  on  earth  beneath,  and  there  is  none  other 
besides  Thee  :  "  **  for  there  is  no  God  besides 
Thee  alone,  there  is  none  holy  besides  Thee, 
the  Lord,  the  God  of  knowledge,  the  God  of 
the  saints,  holy  above  all  holy  beings ;  for  they 
are  sanctified  by  Thy  hands.  Thou  art  glorious, 
and  highly  exalted,  invisible  by  nature,  and  un- 
searchable in  Thy  judgments  ;  whose  life  is  with- 
out want,  whose  duration  can  never  alter  or  fail, 
whose  operation  is  without  toil,  whose  great- 
ness is  unlimited,  whose  excellency  is  perpetual, 
whose  habitation  is  inaccessible,  whose  dwelling 
is  unchangeable,  whose  knowledge  is  without  be- 
ginning, whose  truth  is  immutable,  whose  work 
is  without  assistants,  whose  dominion  cannot  be 


*  Ezek.  iii.  12. 

^  I's.  l.vvil.  17. 
"  Deut.  iv.  39. 


474 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  VII. 


taken  away,  whose  monarchy  is  without  succes- 
sion, whose  kingdom  is  without  end,  whose 
strength  is  irresistible,  whose  army  is  very  nu- 
merous :  for  Thou  art  the  Father  of  wisdom, 
the  Creator  of  the  creation,  by  a  Mediator,  as 
the  cause ;  the  Bestower  of  providence,  the 
Giver  of  laws,  the  Supplier  of  want,  the  Pun- 
isher  of  the  ungodly,  and  the  Rewarder  of  the 
righteous ;  the  God  and  Father  of  Christ,  and 
the  Lord  of  those  that  are  pious  towards  Him, 
whose  promise  is  infallible,  whose  judgment  with- 
out bribes,  whose  sentiments  are  immutable, 
whose  piety  is  incessant,  whose  thanksgiving  is 
everlasting,  through  whom  '  adoration  is  worthily 
due  to  Thee  from  every  rational  and  holy  nature. 

A  PRAYER  COMMEMORATIVE  OF  THE  INCARNATION 
OF  CHRIST,  AND  HIS  VARIOUS  PROVIDENCE  TO 
THE   SAINTS. 

XXXVI.  O  Lord  Almighty,  Thou  hast  created 
the  world  by  Christ,  and  hast  appointed  the 
Sabbath  in  memory  thereof,  because  that  on 
that  day  Thou  hast  made  us  rest  from  our  works, 
for  the  meditation  upon  Thy  laws.  Thou  hast 
also  appointed  festivals  for  the  rejoicing  of  our 
souls,  that  we  might  come  into  the  remembrance 
of  that  wisdom  which  was  created  by  Thee  ; 
how  He  submitted  to  be  made  of  a  woman  on 
our  account ;  ^  He  appeared  in  life,  and  demon- 
strated Himself  in  His  baptism  ;  how  He  that 
appeared  is  both  God  and  man ;  He  suffered 
for  us  by  Thy  permission,  and  died,  and  rose 
again  by  Thy  power  :  on  which  account  we  sol- 
emnly assemble  to  celebrate  the  feast  of  the 
resurrection  on  the  Lord's  day,  and  rejoice  on 
account  of  Him  who  has  conquered  death,  and 
has  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light.  For 
by  Him  Thou  hast  brought  home  the  Gentiles 
to  Thyself  for  a  peculiar  people,  the  true  Israel, 
beloved  of  God,  and  seeing  God.  For  Thou, 
O  Lord,  broughtest  our  fathers  out  of  the  land 
of  Egypt,  and  didst  deliver  them  out  of  the  iron 
furnace,  from  clay  and  brick-making,  and  didst 
redeem  them  out  of  the  hands  of  Pharaoh,  and 
of  those  under  him,  and  didst  lead  them  through 
the  sea  as  through  dry  land,  and  didst  bear  their 
manners  in  the  wilderness,  and  bestow  on  them 
all  sorts  of  good  things.  Thou  didst  give  them 
the  law  or  decalogue,  which  was  pronounced  by 
Thy  voice  and  written  with  Thy  hand.  Thou 
didst  enjoin  the  observation  of  the  Sabbath,  not 
affording  them  an  occasion  of  idleness,  but  an 
opportimity  of  piety,  for  their  knowledge  of 
Thy  power,  and  the  prohibition  of  evils ;  having 
limited  them  as  within  an  holy  circuit  for  the 
sake  of  doctrine,  for  the  rejoicing  upon  the 
seventh  period.     On  this  account  was  there  ap- 


'  One  V.  MS.  reads,  "  with  whom." 
2  Prov.  viii.  22,  LXX. 


pointed  one  week,  and  seven  weeks,  and  the 
seventh  month,  and  the  seventh  year,  and  the 
revolution  of  these,  the  jubilee,  which  is  the  fif- 
tieth year  for  remission,  that  men  might  have 
no  occasion  to  pretend  ignorance.^  On  this 
account  He  permitted  men  every  Sabbath  to 
rest,  that  so  no  one  might  be  willing  to  send  one 
word  out  of  his  mouth  in  anger  on  the  day  of 
the  Sabbath.  For  the  Sabbath  is  the  ceasing 
of  the  creation,  the  completion  of  the  world,  the 
inquiry  after  laws,  and  the  grateful  praise  to  God 
for  the  blessings  He  has  bestowed  upon  men. 
All  which  the  Lord's  day  excels,'*  and  shows  the 
Mediator  Himself,  the  Provider,  the  Lawgiver, 
the  Cause  of  the  resurrection,  the  First-born  of 
the  whole  creation,  God  the  Word,  and  man, 
who  was  bom  of  Mary  alone,  without  a  man, 
who  lived  holily,  who  was  crucified  under  Pontius 
Pilate,  and  died,  and  rose  again  from  the  dead. 
So  that  the  Lord's  day  commands  us  to  offer 
unto  Thee,  O  Lord,  thanksgiving  for  all.s  For 
this  is  the  grace  afforded  by  Thee,  which  on  ac- 
count of  its  greatness  has  obscured  all  other 
blessings. 

A  PRAYER  CONTAINING  THE  MEMORIAL  OF  HIS 
PROVIDENCE,  AND  AN  ENUMERATION  OF  THE 
VARIOUS  BENEFITS  AFFORDED  THE  SAINTS  BY 
THE    PROVIDENCE    OF    GOD    THROUGH    CHRIST. 

xxxvii.  Thou  who  hast  fulfilled  Thy  promises 
made  by  the  prophets,  and  hast  had  mercy  on 
Zion,  and  compassion  on  Jerusalem,  by  exalt- 
ing the  throne  of  David,  Thy  servant,  in  the 
midst  of  her,  by  the  birth  of  Christ,  who  was 
born  of  his  seed  according  to  the  flesh,  of  a  vir- 
gin alone ;  do  Thou  now,  O  Lord  God,  accept 
the  prayers  which  proceed  from  the  lips  of  Thy 
people  which  are  of  the  Gentiles,  which  call  upon 
Thee  in  truth,  as  Thou  didst  accept  of  the  gifts 
of  the  righteous  in  their  generations.  In  the  first 
place  Thou  did  respect  the  sacrifice  of  Abel,^  and 
accept  it  as  Thou  didst  accept  of  the  sacrifice  of 
Noah  when  he  went  out  of  the  ark  ;  ^  of  Abra- 
ham, when  he  went  out  of  the  land  of  the  Chal- 
deans ;  ^  of  Isaac  at  the  Well  of  the  Oath ;  9 
of  Jacob  in  Bethel ;  •°  of  Moses  in  the  desert ;  " 
of  Aaron  between  the  dead  and  the  living  ;  '^  of 
Joshua  the  son  of  Nun  in  Gilgal ;  '3  of  Gideon 
at  the  rock,  and  the  fleeces,  before  his  sin  ;  "'*  of 
Manoah  and  his  wife  in  the  field  ;  of  Samson  in 
his  thirst  before  the  transgression ;  's  of  Jephtha 


3  Lev.  xxiii.,  xxv. 

*  [Vol.  vi.  p.  149,  note  8,  this  series.] 

5   [Justin  Martyr,  vol.  i.  p.  i86,  this  series.] 

*  Gen.  iv. 

7  Gen.  viii. 

*  Gen.  xii. 

9  Gen.  xxvi. 
'°  Gen.  XXXV. 
"  Ex.  iii. 
*2  Num.  xvi. 
»  Josh.  V. 
'*  Judg.  vi.,  viii. 
'5  Judg.  xiii.,  XV.,  xvi. 


Sec.  III.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


475 


in  the  war  before  his  rash  vow ;  of  Barak  and 
Deborah  in  the  days  of  Sisera ;  •  of  Samuel  in 
Mizpeh ;  ^  of  David  in  the  threshing-floor  of 
Oman  the  Jebusite  ;  3  of  Solomon  in  Gibeon 
and  in  Jerusalem  :  ■*  of  Elijah  in  Mount  Car- 
mel ;  s  of  Elisha  at  the  barren  fountain ;  ^  of 
Jehoshaphat  in  war ;  7  of  Hezekiah  in  his  sick- 
ness, and  concerning  Sennacherib ;  ^  of  Manas- 
seh  in  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans,  after  his 
transgression  ;  9  of  Josiah  in  Phassa  ; '°  of  Ezra 
at  the  return  ;  "  of  Daniel  in  the  den  of  lions  ;  '^ 
of  Jonah  in  the  whale's  belly ;  '^  of  the  three 
children  in  the  fiery  furnace ;  '■♦  of  Hannah  in 
the  tabernacle  before  the  ark ;  's  of  Nehemiah 
at  the  rebuilding  of  the  walls  ;  '^  of  Zerubbabel ; 
of  Mattathias  and  his  sons  in  their  zeal ;  '7  of 
Jael  in  blessings.  Now  also  do  Thou  receive 
the  prayers  of  Thy  people  which  are  offered  to 
Thee  with  knowledge,  through  Christ  in  the 
Spirit. 

A    PRAYER     FOR    THE    ASSISTANCE     OF    THE     RIGHT- 
EOUS. 

xxxviiT.  We  give  Thee  thanks  for  all  things, 
O  Lord  Almighty,  that  Thou  hast  not  taken 
away  Thy  mercies  and  Thy  compassions  from 
us ;  but  in  every  succeeding  generation  Thou 
dost  save,  and  deliver,  and  assist,  and  protect : 
for  Thou  didst  assist  in  the  days  of  Enos  and 
Enoch,  in  the  days  of  Moses  and  Joshua,  in  the 
days  of  the  judges,  in  the  days  of  Samuel  and 
of  Elijah  and  of  the  prophets,  in  the  days  of 
David  and  of  the  kings,  in  the  days  of  Esther 
and  Mordecai,  in  the  days  of  Judith,  in  the  days 
of  Judas  Maccabeus  and  his  brethren,  and  in  our 
days  hast  Thou  assisted  us  by  Thy  great  High 
Priest,  Jesus  Christ  Thy  Son.  For  He  has  de- 
livered us  from  the  sword,  and  hath  freed  us 
from  famine,  and  sustained  us  ;  has  delivered 
us  from  sickness,  has  preserved  us  from  an  evil 
tongue.  For  all  which  things  do  we  give  Thee 
thanks  through  Christ,  who  has  given  us  an  ar- 
ticulate voice  to  confess  withal,  and  added  to  it 
a  suitable  tongue  as  an  instrument  to  modulate 
withal,  and  a  proper  taste,  and  a  suitable  touch, 
and  a  sight  for  contemplation,  and  the  hearing 


'  Judg.  xi.,  iv. 

2  I  Sara.  vii. 

3  I  Chron.  xxi. 

*  I  Kings  iii.,  viii. 
5  I  Kings  xviii. 

*  2  Kings  ii. 

7  2  Chron.  xviii. 

*  2  Kings  XX.,  xix.  fCuriousIy  enough,  the  chronological  order, 
according  to  the  best  recent  authorities,  is  that  indicated  above;  the 
sickness  (2  Kings  xx.)  preceded  the  invasion  of  Sennacherib  (chap, 
xix.) .     Monumental  evidence  confirms  this  view.  —  R.] 

9  2  Chron.  xxxiii. 

■°  2  Chron.  xxxv.     Cotelerius  conjectures  "  in  his  passover,"  in- 
stead of  "  in  Phassa."     [A  very  probable  textual  emendation.  —  R.J 
"  Ezra  viii. 
*^  Dan.  vi.  16. 
'■^  Jonah  ii. 
•*  Dan.  iii. 
'5  1  Sam.  i. 
'*  Neh.  iii. 
«'  I  Mace.  i.,etc. 


of  sounds,  and  the  smelling  of  vapours,  and 
hands  for  work,  and  feet  for  walking.  And  all 
these  members  dost  Thou  form  from  a  little 
drop  in  the  womb  ;  and  after  the  formation  dost 
Thou  bestow  on  it  an  immortal  soul,  and  pro- 
ducest  it  into  the  light  as  a  rational  creature, 
even  man.  Thou  hast  instructed  him  by  Thy 
laws,  improved  him  by  Thy  statutes  ;  and  when 
Thou  bringest  on  a  dissolution  for  a  while.  Thou 
hast  promised  a  resurrection.  \Mierefore  what 
life  is  sufficient,  what  length  of  ages  will  be  long 
enough,  for  men  to  be  thankful?  To  do  it 
worthily  it  is  impossible,  but  to  do  it  according 
to  our  ability  is  just  and  right.  For  Thou  hast 
delivered  us  from  the  impiety  of  polytheism, 
and  from  the  heresy  of  the  murderers  of  Christ ; 
Thou  hast  delivered  us  from  error  and  igno- 
rance ;  Thou  hast  sent  Christ  among  men  as  a 
man,  being  the  only  begotten  God ;  Thou  hast 
made  the  Comforter  to  inhabit  among  us  ;  Thou 
hast  set  angels  over  us  ;  Thou  hast  put  the  devil 
to  shame ;  Thou  hast  brought  us  into  being 
when  we  were  not ;  Thou  takest  care  of  us  when 
made ;  Thou  measurest  out  life  to  us ;  Thou 
affordest  us  food ;  Thou  hast  promised  repent- 
ance. Glory  and  worship  be  to  Thee  for  all 
these  things,  through  Jesus  Christ,''^  now  and 
ever,  and  through  all  ages.  Amen.  Meditate 
on  these  things,  brethren ;  and  the  Lord  be 
with  you  upon  earth,  and  in  the  kingdom  of  His 
Father,  who  both  sent  Him,  and  has  "  delivered 
us  by  Him  from  the  bondage  of  corruption  into 
His  glorious  liberty ;  "  "?  and  has  promised  life 
to  those  who  through  Him  have  believed  in  the 
God  of  the  whole  world. 

SEC.     III. ON     THE     INSTRUCTION     OF     CATECHU- 
MENS,   AND   THEIR    INITIATION    INTO    BAPTISM. 

Now,  after  what  manner  those  ought  to  live 
that  are  initiated  into  Christ,  and  what  thanks- 
givings they  ought  to  send  up  to  God  through 
Christ,  has  been  said  in  the  foregoing  directions. 
But  it  is  reasonable  not  to  leave  even  those  who 
are  not  yet  initiated  without  assistance. 

HOW    THE    CATECHUMENS    ARE   TO     BE     INSTRUCTED 
IN    THE    ELEMENTS. 

XXXIX.  Let  him,  therefore,  who  is  to  be  taught 
the  truth  in  regard  to  piety  be  instructed  before 
his  baptism  in  the  knowledge  of  the  unbegotten 
God,  in  the  understanding  of  His  only  begotten 
Son,  in  the  assured  acknowledgment  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Let  him  learn  the  order  of  the  several 
parts  of  the  creation,  the  series  of  providence, 
the  different  dispensations  of  Thy  laws.  Let 
him  be  instructed  why  the  world  was  made,  and 
why  man  was  appointed  to  be  a  citizen  therein  ; 


'8  One  V.  MS.  reads,  "  with  Christ  and  tlie  Holy  Spint." 
'9  Rom.  viii.  21. 


476 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  VII. 


let  him  also  know  his  o\vn  nature,  of  what  sort 
it  is ;  let  him  be  taught  how  God  punished  the 
wicked  with  water  and  fire,  and  did  glorify  the 
saints  in  every  generation  —  I  mean  Seth,  and 
Enos,  and  Enoch,  and  Noah,  and  Abraham 
and  his  posterity,  and  Melchizedek,  and  Job, 
and  Moses,  and  Joshua,  and  Caleb,  and  Phineas 
the  priest,  and  those  that  were  holy  in  every 
generation ;  and  how  God  still  took  care  of  and 
did  not  reject  mankind,  but  called  them  from 
their  error  and  vanity  to  the  acknowledgment  of 
the  truth  at  various  seasons,  reducing  them  from 
bondage  and  impiety  unto  liberty  and  piety, 
from  injustice  to  righteousness,  from  death  eternal 
to  everlasting  life.  Let  him  that  offers  himself  to 
baptism  learn  these  and  the  like  things  during 
the  time  that  he  is  a  catechumen  ;  and  let  him 
who  lays  his  hands  upon  him  adore  God,  the 
Lord  of  the  whole  world,  and  thank  Him  for 
His  creation,  for  His  sending  Christ  His  only 
begotten  Son,  that  He  might  save  man  by  blot- 
ting out  his  transgressions,  and  that  He  might 
remit  ungodliness  and  sins,  and  might  "  purify 
him  from  all  filthiness  of  flesh  and  spirit,"  '  and 
sanctify  man  according  to  the  good  pleasure  of 
His  kindness,  that  He  might  inspire  him  with 
the  knowledge  of  His  will,  and  enlighten  the 
eyes  of  his  heart  to  consider  of  His  wonderful 
works,  and  make  known  to  him  the  judgments 
of  righteousness,  that  so  he  might  hate  every 
way  of  iniquity,  and  walk  in  the  way  of  truth, 
that  he  might  be  thought  worthy  of  the  laver 
of  regeneration,  to  the  adoption  of  sons,  which 
is  in  Christ,  that  "  being  planted  together  in  the 
likeness  of  the  death  of  Christ,"  ^  in  hopes  of 
a  glorious  communication,  he  may  be  mortified 
to  sin,  and  may  live  to  God,  as  to  his  mind,  and 
word,  and  deed,  and  may  be  numbered  together 
in  the  book  of  the  living.  And  after  this  thanks- 
giving, let  him  instruct  him  in  the  doctrines 
concerning  our  Lord's  incarnation,  and  in  those 
concerning  His  passion,  and  resurrection  from 
the  dead,  and  assumption. 

A  CONSTITUTION  HOW  THE  CATECHUMENS  ARE  TO 
BE  BLESSED  BY  THE  PRIESTS  IN  THEIR  INITIA- 
TION, AND  WIL\T  THINGS  ARE  TO  BE  TAUGHT 
THEM. 

XL.  And  when  it  remains  that  the  catechumen 
is  to  be  baptized,  let  him  learn  what  concerns  the 
renunciation  of  the  devil,  and  the  joining  himself 
with  Christ ;  for  it  is  fit  that  he  should  first  ab- 
stain from  things  contrary,  and  then  be  admitted 
to  the  mysteries.  He  must  beforehand  purify 
his  heart  from  all  wickedness  of  disposition,  from 
all  spot  and  wrinkle,  and  then  partake  of  the  holy 
things ;  for  as  the  skilfullest  husbandman  does 
first  purge  his  ground  of  the  thorns  which  are 


'  2  Cor.  vii.  I. 
2  Rom.  vi.  5. 


grown  up  therein,  and  does  then  sow  his  wheat, 
so  ought  you  also  to  take  away  all  impiety  from 
them,  and  then  to  sow  the  seeds  of  piety  in  them, 
and  vouchsafe  them  baptism.  For  even  our  Lord 
did  in  this  manner  exhort  us,  saying  first,  "  Make 
disciples  of  all  nations ; "  ^  and  then  He  adds 
this,  "and  baptize  them  into  the  name  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 
Let,  therefore,  the  candidate  for  baptism  declare 
thus  in  his  renunciation  :  *  — 

THE   RENUNCIATION   OF   THE   ADVERSARY,  AND   THE 
DEDICATION   TO   THE   CHRIST   OF   GOD. 

XLi.  I  renounce  Satan,  and  his  works,  and  his 
pomps,  and  his  worships,  and  his  angels,  and 
his  inventions,  and  all  things  that  are  under  him. 
And  after  his  renunciation  let  him  in  his  conso- 
ciation say :  And  I  associate  myself  to  Christ, 
and  believe,  and  am  baptized  into  one  unbegotten 
Being,  the  only  true  God  Almighty,  the  Father 
of  Christ,  the  Creator  and  Maker  of  all  things, 
from  whom  are  all  things  ;  and  into  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  His  only  begotten  Son,  the  First- 
born of  the  whole  creation,  who  before  the  ages 
was  begotten  by  the  good  pleasure  of  the  Father, 
by  whom  all  things  were  made,  both  those  in 
heaven  and  those  on  earth,  visible  and  invisible ; 
who  in  the  last  days  descended  from  heaven,  and 
took  flesh,  and  was  born  of  the  holy  Virgin  Mary, 
and  did  converse  holily  according  to  the  laws  of 
His  God  and  Father,  and  was  crucified  under 
Pontius  Pilate,  and  died  for  us,  and  rose  again 
from  the  dead  after  His  passion  the  third  day, 
and  ascended  into  the  heavens,  and  sitteth  at  the 
right  hand  of  the  Father,  and  again  is  to  come 
at  the  end  of  the  world  with  glory  to  judge  the 
quick  and  the  dead,  of  whose  kingdom  there 
shall  be  no  end.  And  I  am  baptized  into  the 
Holy  Ghost,  that  is,  the  Comforter,  who  wrought 
in  all  the  saints  from  the  beginning  of  the  world, 
but  was  afterwards  sent  to  the  apostles  by  the 
Father,  according  to  the  promise  of  our  Saviour 
and  Lord,  Jesus  Christ ;  and  after  the  apostles, 
to  all  those  that  believe  in  the  Holy  Catholic 
Church  ;  into  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh,  and 
into  the  remission  of  sins,  and  into  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,  and  into  the  life  of  the  world  to  come. 
And  after  this  vow,  he  comes  in  order  to  the 
anointing  with  oil. 

A     THANKSGIVING      CONCERNING      THE      ANOINTING 
WITH   THE   MYSTICAL   OIL. 

XLii.  Now  this  is  blessed  by  the  high  priest 
for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  the  first  prepara- 
tion for  baptism.  For  he  calls  thus  upon  the 
unbegotten  God,  the  Father  of  Christ,  the  King 
of  all  sensible  and  intelligible  natures,  that  He 
would  sanctify  the  oil  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 


S  Matt,  xxviii.  19. 

*  [Compare  Justin  Martyr,  vol.  i.  p.  183,  this  series.] 


Sec.  IV.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


477 


Jesus,  and  impart  to  it  spiritual  grace  and  eiifica- 
cious  strength,  the  remission  of  sins,  and  the  first 
preparation  for  the  confession  of  baptism,  that 
so  the  candidate  for  baptism,  when  he  is  anointed, 
may  be  freed  from  all  ungodliness,  and  may  be- 
come worthy  of  initiation,  according  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  Only-begotten. 

A  THANKSGIVING  CONCERNING  THE  MYSTICAL  WATER. 

XLiii.  After  this  he  comes  to  the  water,  and 
blesses  and  glorifies  the  Lord  God  Almighty, 
the  Father  of  the  only  begotten  God  ; '  and  the 
priest  returns  thanks  that  He  has  sent  His  Son 
to  become  man  on  our  account,  that  He  might 
save  us ;  that  He  has  permitted  that  He  should 
in  all  things  become  obedient  to  the  laws  of  that 
incarnation,  to  preach  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
the  remission  of  sins,  and  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead.  Moreover,  he  adores  the  only  begotten 
God  Himself,  after  His  Father,  and  for  Him, 
giving  Him  thanks  that  He  undertook  to  die  for 
all  men  by  the  cross,  the  type  of  which  He  has 
appointed  to  be  the  baptism  of  regeneration. 
He  glorifies  Him  also,  for  that  God  who  is  the 
Lord  of  the  whole  world,  in  the  name  of  Christ, 
and  by  His  Holy  Spirit,  has  not  cast  off  mankind, 
but  has  suited  His  providence  to  the  difference 
of  seasons  :  at  first  giving  to  Adam  himself  para- 
dise for  an  habitation  of  pleasure,  and  afterwards 
giving  a  command  on  account  of  providence,  and 
casting  out  the  offender  justly,  but  through  His 
goodness  not  utterly  casting  him  off,  but  instruct- 
ing his  posterity  in  succeeding  ages  after  various 
manners ;  on  whose  account,  in  the  conclusion 
of  the  world,  He  has  sent  His  Son  to  become 
man  for  man's  sake,  and  to  undergo  all  human 
passions  without  sin.  Him,  therefore,  let  the 
priest  even  now  call  upon  in  baptism,  and  let 
him  say  :  Look  down  from  heaven,  and  sanctify 
this  water,  and  give  it  grace  and  power,  that  so 
he  that  is  to  be  baptized,  according  to  the  com- 
mand of  Thy  Christ,  may  be  crucified  with  Him, 
and  may  die  with  Him,  and  may  be  buried  with 
Him,  and  may  rise  with  Him  to  the  adoption 
which  is  in  Him,  that  he  may  be  dead  to  sin 
and  live  to  righteousness.  And  after  this,  when 
he  has  baptized  him  in  the  name  of  the  Father, 
and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  shall 
anoint  him  with  ointment,  and  shall  add  as 
follows  :  — 

A  THANKSGIVING  CONCERNING  THE    MYSTICAL  OINT- 
MENT. 

XLiv.  O  Lord  God,  who  art  without  genera- 
tion, and  without  a  superior,  the  Lord  of  the 


'  One  V.  MS.  has  "  Son  "  instead  of  "  God."  Cotelerius  remarks 
that  this  change  was  made  in  the  interests  of  orthodoxy;  for  the  ex- 
pression "  only  begotten  God"  had  become  common  with  the  Arians. 
[Comp.  John  i.  i8,  where  the  most  weighty  ancient  authorities  read 
noi-oyen)?  Sto?  instead  of  6  ^o;'oye^i)s  uios;  see  Revised  Version, 
margin,  in  loco.  —  R.] 


whole  world,  who  hast  scattered  the  sweet  odour 
of  the  knowledge  of  the  Gospel  among  all 
nations,  do  Thou  grant  at  this  time  that  this 
ointment  may  be  efficacious  upon  him  that  is 
baptized,  that  so  the  sweet  odour  of  Thy  Christ 
may  continue  upon  him  firm  and  fixed ;  and 
that  now  he  has  died  with  Him,  he  may  arise 
and  live  with  Him.  Let  him  say  these  and  the 
like  things,  for  this  is  the  efficacy  of  the  laying 
on  of  hands  on  every  one  ;  for  unless  there  be 
such  a  recital  made  by  a  pious  priest  over  every 
one  of  these,  the  candidate  for  baptism  does 
only  descend  into  the  water  as  do  the  Jews,  and 
he  only  puts  off  the  filth  of  the  body,  not  the 
filth  of  the  soul.  After  this  let  him  stand  up, 
and  pray  that  prayer  which  the  Lord  taught  us. 
But,  of  necessity,  he  who  is  risen  again  ought 
to  stand  up  and  pray,  because  he  that  is  raised 
up  stands  upright.  Let  him,  therefore,  who  has 
been  dead  with  Christ,  and  is  raised  up  with 
Him,  stand  up.  But  let  him  pray  towards  the 
east.^  For  this  also  is  written  in  the  second 
book  of  the  Chronicles,  that  after  the  temple  of 
the  Lord  was  finished  by  King  Solomon,  in  the 
very  feast  of  dedication  the  priests  and  the  Le- 
vites  and  the  singers  stood  up  towards  the  east, 
praising  and  thanking  God  with  cymbals  and 
psalteries,  and  saying,  "  Praise  the  Lord,  for  He 
is  good ;  for  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever."  ^ 

A    PR.WER    FOR   THE    NEW    FRUITS. 

XLV.  But  let  him  pray  thus  after  the  foregoing 
prayer,  and  say  :  O  God  Almighty,  the  Father 
of  Thy  Christ,  Thy  only  begotten  Son,  give  me 
a  body  undefiled,  a  heart  pure,  a  mind  watchful, 
an  unerring  knowledge,  the  influence  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  for  the  obtaining  and  assured  en- 
joying of  the  truth,  through  Thy  Christ,  by 
whom  •*  glory  be  to  Thee,  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  for 
ever.  Amen.  We  have  thought  it  reasonable 
to  make  these  constitutions  concerning  the  cate- 
chumens. 

SEC.    IV.  —  ENUMERATION    ORDAINED    BY    APOSTLES. 

WHO  WERE  THEY    THAT   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES    SENT 
AND    ORDAINED? 

XLVi.  Now  concerning  those  bishops  which 
have  been  ordained  in  our  lifetime,  we  let  you 
know  that  they  are  these: — James  the  bishop 
of  Jerusalem,  the  brother  of  our  Lord  ;  5  upon 
whose  death  the  second  was  Simeon  the  son  of 
Cleopas  ;  after  whom  the  third  was  Judas  the 
son  of  James.     Of  Caesarea   of  Palestine,  the 


2  [Compare  vol.  ii.  p.  535  and  vol.  iii.  p.  31.] 

3  2  Chron.  v.  13. 

•»  One  V.  MS.  reads,  "  with  whom  glory  be  to  Thee,  along  with 
the  Holy  Spirit."  _   ,  ... 

S  [An  incidental  proof  of  the  early  oritrin  of  this  compilation  is 
furnished  by  the  clear  distinction  it  makes  Between  James  the  son  of 
Alphaeus  and  James  the  brother  of  our  Lord.  The  theory  of  Jerome, 
which  identifies  them,  was  later.  —  R.] 


478 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  VII. 


first  was  Zacchreus,  who  was  once  a  publican ; 
after  whom  was  Cornelius,  and  the  third  The- 
ophilus.  Of  Antioch,  Euodius,  ordained  by  me 
Peter;  and  Ignatius  by  Paul.  Of  Alexandria, 
Annianus  was  the  first,  ordained  by  Mark  the 
evangelist;  the  second  Avilius  by  Luke,  who 
was  also  an  evangelist.  Of  the  church  of  Rome, 
Linus  the  son  of  Claudia  was  the  first,  ordained 
by  Paul ; '  and  Clemens,  after  Linus'  death,  the 
second,  ordained  by  me  Peter.^  Of  Ephesus, 
Timotheus,  ordained  by  Paul ;  and  John,  by  me 
John.  Of  Smyrna,  Aristo  the  first ;  after  whom 
Stratieas  the  son  of  Lois ;  ^  and  the  third  Aristo. 
Of  Pergamus,  Gaius.  Of  Philadelphia,  Deme- 
trius, by  me.  Of  Cenchrea,  Lucius,  by  Paul. 
Of  Crete,  Titus.  Of  Athens,  Dionysius.  Of 
Tripoli  in  Phoenicia,  Marathones.  Of  Laodicea 
in  Phrygia,  Archippus.'*  Of  Colossse,  Philemon.s 
Of  Borea  in  Macedonia,  Onesimus,  once  the 
ser\'ant  of  Philemon.^  Of  the  churches  of  Ga- 
latia,  Crescens.7  Of  the  parishes  of  Asia,  Aquila 
and  Nicetas.  Of  the  church  of  ^gin?e,  Crispus. 
These  are  the  bishops  who  are  entrusted  by  us 
with  the  parishes  in  the  Lord  ;  whose  doctrine 
keep  ye  always  in  mind,  and  observe  our  words. 
And  may  the  Lord  be  with  you  now,  and  to 
endless  ages,  as  Himself  said  to  us  when  He 
was  about  to  be  taken  up  to  His  own  God  and 
Father.  For  says  He,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  all 
the  days,  until  the  end  of  the  world.     Amen."  ^ 

SEC.    V.  —  DAILY   PR.\YERS. 
A    MORNING    PRAYER. 

XLVii.  "  Glory  be  to  God  in  the  highest,  and 
upon  earth  peace,  good-will  among  men."  9  We 
praise  Thee,  we  sing  hymns  to  Thee,  we  bless 
Thee,  we  glorify  Thee,  we  worship  Thee  by  Thy 

'  2  Tim.  iv.  21. 

*  [Noteworthy,  and  to  be  recalled  hereafter.     See  vol.  iii.  p.  258.] 
3  2  Tim.  i.  5. 

*  (Comp.  Col.  iv.  16,  17,  whence  this  is  probably  derived.  —  R.] 

5  Philem.  I. 

6  [Philem.  10.  — R.] 

7  [Comp.  2  Tim.  iv.  10.  —  R.] 

8  Matt,  xxviii.  20. 

9  Luke  ii.  14. 


great  High  Priest ;  Thee  who  art  the  true  God, 
who  art  the  One  Unbegotten,  the  only  inaccess- 
ible Being.  For  Thy  great  glory,  O  Lord  and 
heavenly  King,  O  God  the  Father  Almighty,  O 
Lord  God,'°  the  Father  of  Christ  the  immaculate 
Lamb,  who  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world, 
receive  our  prayer.  Thou  that  sittest  upon  the 
cherubim.  For  Thou  only  art  holy.  Thou  only 
art  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  Christ  of  the  God  of  all 
created  nature,  and  our  King,  by  whom  glory, 
honour,  and  worship  be  to  Thee. 

AN   EVENING   PRAYER. 

XLViii.  "  Ye  children,  praise  the  Lord  :  praise 
the  name  of  the  Lord."  "  We  praise  Thee,  we 
sing  hymns  to  Thee,  we  bless  Thee  for  Thy  great 
glory,  O  Lord  our  King,  the  Father  of  Christ  the 
immaculate  Lamb,  who  taketh  away  the  sin  of 
the  world.  Praise  becomes  Thee,  hymns  become 
Thee,  glory  becomes  Thee,  the  God  and  Father,'^, 
through  the  Son,  in  the  most  holy  Spirit,  for  ever 
and  ever.  Amen.  "  Now,  O  Lord,  lettest  Thou 
Thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  according  to  Thy 
word  ;  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  Thy  salvation, 
which  Thou  hast  prepared  before  the  face  of 
all  people,  a  light  for  the  revelation  to  the  Gen- 
tiles, and  the  glory  of  Thy  people  Israel."  '^ 

A    PRAYER   AT    DINNER. 

XLix.  Thou  art  blessed,  O  Lord,  who  nour- 
ishest  me  from  my  youth,  who  givest  food  to  all 
flesh.  Fill  our  hearts  with  joy  and  gladness,  that 
having  always  what  is  sufficient  for  us,  we  may 
abound  to  every  good  work,  in  Christ  Jesus  our 
Lord,  through  whom  '•♦  glory,  honour,  and  power 
be  to  Thee  for  ever.     Amen. 


•°  One  V.  MS.  gives  a  more  orthodo.v  form  to  this  prayer:  "  O 
Lord,  only  begotten  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  Lord  God,  the  Lamb  of 
God,  tile  Son  of  the  Father,  who  takesl  away  the  sins  of  the  world, 
receive  our  prayer.  Thou  who  sittest  at  the  right  hand  nf  the  Father, 
have  mercy  upon  us,  for  Thou  only  art  holy;  Thou  only  art  Christ, 
Jesus  Christ,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father.     Amen." 

'■  Ps.  cxiii.  I. 

'-  One  v.  MS.  omits  "  the  God  and;  "  then  reads,  "  to  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost." 

13  Luke  ii.  29,  etc. 

'*  One  V.  MS.  reads,  "  with  whom." 


GENERAL  NOTE. 


Comparing  the  Teaching  with  chapters  xxv.  and  xxvi.  of  these  Constitutions,  it  seems  to 
me  that  the  nature  of  the  eucharistic  (thanksgiving)  prayers  becomes  apparent.  They  pre- 
suppose the  formulas  to  be  found  in  the  eighth  book  of  the  Constitutions,^  and  are  such  instruc- 
tions as  were  imparted  only  to  catechumens ;  the  part  peculiar  to  presbyters  being  withheld,  of 
course,  as  esoteric  mysteries,  until  further  knowledge  was  canonically  appropriate.  See  Elucida- 
tion IV.  vol.  vi.  p.  236  ;  and  in  this  volume.  Elucidation  I.  p.  382.  The  Bryennios  ms.  is  cleared 
from  nearly  all  difficulties  by  Dr.  Riddle's  lucid  notes,  when  compared  with  corresponding  pas- 
sages in  the  Constitutions,  or  illustrated  by  such  as  are  supplementary. 

*  Beginning  p.  479,  infra. 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 

BOOK    VIII. 


CONCERNING  GIFTS,  AND  ORDINATIONS,  AND  THE  ECCLESIASTICAL  CANONS. 


SEC.    I. ON   THE    DIVERSITV    OF    SPIRITUAL    GIFTS. 

ON    WHOSE     ACCOUNT     THE     POWERS     OF     MIRACLES 
ARE    PERFORMED. 

I.  Jesus  Christ,  our  God  and  Saviour,  deliv- 
ered to  us  the  great  mystery  of  godliness,  and 
called  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  to  the  acknowl- 
edgment of  the  one  and  only '  true  God  His 
Father,^  as  Himself  somewhere  says,  when  He 
was  giving  thanks  for  the  salvation  of  those  that 
had  believed,  "  I  have  manifested  Thy  name  to 
men,  I  have  finished  the  work  Thou  gavest 
me ; "  ^  and  said  concerning  us  to  His  Father, 
"  Holy  Father,  although  the  world  has  not  known 
Thee,  yet  have  I  known  Thee ;  and  these  have 
known  Thee."-*  With  good  reason  did  He  say 
to  all  of  us  together,  when  we  were  perfected 
concerning  those  gifts  which  were  given  from 
Him  by  the  Spirit :  "  Now  these  signs  shall  fol- 
low them  that  have  believed  in  my  name  :  they 
shall  cast  out  devils  ;  they  shall  speak  with  new 
tongues ;  they  shall  take  up  serpents ;  and  if 
they  drink  any  deatlly  thing,  it  shall  by  no  means 
hurt  them  :  they  shall  lay  their  hands  on  the 
sick,  and  they  shall  recover."  5  These  gifts  were 
first  bestowed  on  us  the  apostles  when  we  were 
about  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature, 
and  afterwards  were  of  necessity  afforded  to 
those  who  had  by  our  means  believed  ;  not  for 
the  advantage  of  those  who  perform  them,  but 
for  the  conviction  of  the  unbeliev'ers,  that  those 
whom  the  word  did  not  persuade,  the  power  of 
signs  might  put  to  shame  :  for  signs  are  not  for 
us  who  believe,  but  for  the  unbelievers,  both  for 
the  Jews  and  Gentiles.  For  neither  is  it  any 
profit  to  us  to  cast  out  demons,  but  to  those  who 
are  so  cleansed  by  the  power  of  the  Lord ;  as 


*  The  words  "  one  and  only  "  are  omitted  in  the  Syriac  and  Cop- 
tic. 

2  One  v.  MS.  omits  "  His  Father."    The  Syriac  and  Coptic  have 
"  the  only  Father." 
■5  John  wii.  6,  4. 

*  John  xvii.  1 1,  21;. 
5  Mark  xvi.  17,  18. 


the  Lord  ^  Himself  somewhere  instructs  us,  and 
shows,  saying :  "  Rejoice  ye,  not  because  the 
spirits  are  subject  unto  you  ;  but  rejoice,  because 
your  names  are  written  in  heaven."  7  Since  the 
former  is  done  by  His  power,  but  this  by  our 
good  disposition  and  diligence,  yet  (it  is  mani- 
fest) by  His  assistance.  It  is  not  therefore  ne- 
cessary that  every  one  of  the  faithful  should  cast 
out  demons,  or  raise  the  dead,  or  speak  with 
tongues  ;  but  such  a  one  only  who  is  vouch- 
safed this  gift,  for  some  cause  which  may  be 
advantage  to  the  salvation  of  the  unbelievers, 
who  are  often  put  to  shame,  not  with  the  demon- 
stration of  the  world,  but  by  the  power  of  the 
signs  ;  that  is,  such  as  are  worthy  of  salvation  : 
for  all  the  ungodly  are  not  affected  by  wonders ; 
and  hereof  God  Himself  is  a  witness,  as  when 
He  says  in  the  law  :  "  With  other  tongues  will 
I  speak  to  this  people,  and  with  other  lips,  and 
yet  will  they  by  no  means  believe."  ^  For  neither 
did  the  Egyptians  believe  in  God,  when  Moses 
had  done  so  many  signs  and  wonders ;  ^  nor  did 
the  multitude  of  the  Jews  believe  in  Christ,  as 
they  believed  Moses,  who  yet  had  healed  every 
sickness  and  every  disease  among  them.'°  Nor 
were  the  former  shamed  by  the  rod  which  was 
turned  into  a  living  serpent,  nor  by  the  hand 
which  was  made  white  with  leprosy,  nor  by  the 
river  Nile  turned  into  blood  ;  nor  the  latter  by 
the  blind  who  recovered  their  sight,  nor  by  the 
lame  who  walked,  nor  by  the  dead  who  were 
raised."  The  one  was  resisted  by  Jannes  and 
Jambres,  the  other  by  Annas  and  Caiaphas.'^ 
Thus  signs  do  not  shame  all  into  belief,  but  only 
those  of  a  good  disposition  ;  for  whose  sake  also 
it  is  that  God  is  pleased,  as  a  wise  steward  of  a 
family,  to  appoint  miracles  to  be  wrought,  not 


*  The  Coptic  reads  "  our  God." 
'  Luke  X.  20. 

8  Isa.  xxviii.  ii;  i  Cor.  xiv.  2x. 

9  Ex.  vii.  and  iv. 

'°  Dcut.  xviii.  15,  etc. 
"  Matt.  xi.  5. 
««  2  Tim.  iii.  8. 

479 


48o 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  VIII. 


by  the  power  of  men,  but  by  His  own  will.  Now 
we  say  these  things,  that  those  who  have  received 
such  gifts  may  not  exalt  themselves  against  those 
who  have  not  received  them ;  such  gifts,  we 
mean,  as  are  for  the  working  of  miracles.  For 
otherwise  there  is  no  man  who  has  believed  in 
God  through  Christ,'  that  has  not  received  some 
spiritual  gift :  for  this  very  thing,  having  been 
delivered  from  the  impiety  of  polytheism,  and 
having  believed  in  God  the  Father  through 
Christ,^  this  is  a  gift  of  God.  And  the  having 
cast  off  the  veil  of  Judaism,  and  having  believed 
that,  by  the  good  pleasure  of  God,  His  only 
begotten  Son,  who  was  before  all  ages,^  was  in 
the  last  time  born  of  a  virgin,-*  without  the  com- 
pany of  a  man,  and  that  He  lived  as  a  man,  yet 
without  sin,  and  fulfilled  all  that  righteousness 
which  is  of  the  law  ;  and  that,  by  the  permission 
of  God,  He  who  was  God  the  Word  endured 
the  cross,  and  despised  the  shame ;  and  that 
He  died,  and  was  buried,  and  rose  within  three 
days ;  and  that  after  His  resurrection,  having 
continued  forty  days  with  His  apostles,  and  com- 
pleted His  whole  constitutions,  He  was  taken 
up  in  their  sight  to  His  God  and  Father,  who 
sent  Him  :  he  who  has  believed  these  things, 
not  at  random  and  irrationally,  but  with  judg- 
ment and  full  assurance,  has  received  the  gift 
of  God.  So  also  has  He  who  is  delivered  from 
every  heresy.  Let  not,  therefore,  any  one  that 
works  signs  and  wonders  judge  any  one  of  the 
faithful  who  is  not  vouchsafed  the  same  :  for  the 
gifts  of  God  which  are  bestowed  by  Him  through 
Christ  are  various  ;  and  one  man  receives  one 
gift,  and  another  another.  For  perhaps  one  has 
the  word  of  wisdom,  and  another  the  word  of 
knowledge  ;  5  another,  discerning  of  spirits  ;  an- 
other, foreknowledge  of  things  to  come  ;  another, 
the  word  of  teaching ;  another,  long-suffering ; 
another,  continence  according  to  the  law  :  for 
even  Moses,  the  man  of  God,  when  he  wrought 
signs  in  Egypt,  did  not  exalt  himself  against  his 
equals  :  and  when  he  was  called  a  god,  he  did 
not  arrogantly  despise  his  own  prophet  Aaron.^ 
Nor  did  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun,  who  was  the 
leader  of  the  people  after  him,  though  in  the 
war  with  the  Jebusites  he  had  made  the  sun 
stand  still  over  against  Gibeon,  and  the  moon 
over  against  the  valley  of  Ajalon,^  because  the 
day  was  not  long  enough  for  their  victory,  insult 
over  Phineas  or  Caleb.  Nor  did  Samuel,  who 
had  done  so  many  surprising  things,  disregard 
David  the  beloved  of  God  :  yet  they  were  both 
prophets,  and  the  one  was  high  priest,  and  the 


'  Instead  of  "  Christ,"  the  Coptic  reads,  "  through  His  Holy  Son." 
^  The  Coptic  reads,  "  and  in  Christ  and  the  Holy  Spirit." 
3  The  Coptic  reads,  "and  His  only  begotten  Son,  who  was  with 
the  Father  and  the  life-giving  Holy  Spirit  before  all  the  ages." 
*  The  Coptic  reads,  "  spotless  virgin." 
S  I  Cor.  xii.  8. 
^  Ex.  vii.  I. 
7  Josh.  X. 


Other  was  king.  And  when  there  were  only 
seven  thousand  holy  men  in  Israel  who  had  not 
bowed  the  knee  to  Baal,^  Elijah  alone  among 
them,  and  his  disciple  Elisha,  were  workers  of 
miracles.  Yet  neither  did  Elijah  despise  Oba- 
diah  the  steward,  who  feared  God,  but  wrought 
no  signs  ;  nor  did  Elisha  despise  his  own  disciple 
when  he  trembled  at  the  enemies.''  Moreover, 
neither  did  the  wise  Daniel  who  was  twice  de- 
livered from  the  mouths  of  the  lions,  nor  the 
three  children  who  were  delivered  from  the  fur- 
nace of  fire,'°  despise  the  rest  of  their  fellow- 
Israelites  :  for  they  knew  that  they  had  not 
escaped  these  terrible  miseries  by  their  own 
might ;  but  by  the  power  of  God  did  they  both 
work  miracles,  and  were  delivered  from  miseries. 
Wherefore  let  none  of  you  exalt  himself  against 
his  brother,  though  he  be  a  prophet,  or  though 
he  be  a  worker  of  miracles  :  for  if  it  happens 
that  there  be  no  longer  an  unbeliever,  all  the 
power  of  signs  will  thenceforwards  be  superfluous. 
For  to  be  pious  is  from  any  one's  good  disposi- 
tion ;  but  to  work  wonders  is  from  the  power  of 
Him  that  works  them  by  us  :  the  first  of  which 
respects  ourselves  ;  but  the  second  respects  God 
that  works  them,  for  the  reasons  which  we  have 
already  mentioned.  Wherefore  neither  let  a  king 
despise  his  officers  that  are  under  him,  nor  the 
rulers  those  who  are  subject.  For  where  there 
are  none  to  be  ruled  over,  rulers  are  superfluous  ; 
and  where  there  are  no  ofificers,  the  kingdom 
will  not  stand.  Moreover,  let  not  a  bishop  be 
exalted  against  his  deacons  and  presbyters,  nor 
the  presbyters  against  the  people  :  for  the  sub- 
sistence of  the  congregation  depends  on  each 
other.  For  the  bishops  and  the  presbyters  are 
the  priests  with  relation  to  the  people  ;  and  the 
laity  are  the  laity  with  relation  to  the  clergy. 
And  to  be  a  Christian  is  in  our  own  power ;  but 
to  be  an  apostle,  or  a  bishop,  or  in  any  other 
such  office,  is  not  in  our  own  power,  but  at  the 
disposal  of  God,  who  bestows  the  gifts.  And 
thus  much  concerning  those  who  are  vouchsafed 
gifts  and  dignities. 

CONCERNING   UNWORTHY  BISHOPS  AND   PRESBYTERS. 

II.  We  add,  in  the  next  place,  that  neither  is 
every  one  that  prophesies  holy,  nor  every  one 
that  casts  out  devils  religious  :  for  even  Balaam 
the  son  of  Beor  the  prophet  did  prophesy," 
though  he  was  himself  ungodly ;  as  also  did 
Caiaphas,  the  falsely-named  high  priest.'^  Nay, 
the  devil  foretells  many  things,  and  the  demons, 
about  Him  ;  and  yet  for  all  that,  there  is  not  a 
spark  of  piety  in  them  :  for  they  are  oppressed 


8  I  Kings  xix.  i8;  Rom.  xi.  4. 

9  2  Kings  vi. 

"^  Dan.  vi.  16,  iii. 

"  Num.  xxiii.  and  xxiv. 

'2  John  xi.  51.     [See  on  the  Sibyliina,  /assi'm.} 


Sec.  II.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


481 


with  ignorance,  by  reason  of  their  voluntary 
wickedness.  It  is  manifest,  therefore,  that  the 
ungodly,  although  they  prophesy,  do  not  by  their 
prophesying  cover  their  own  impiety ;  nor  will 
those  who  cast  out  demons  be  sanctified  by  the 
demons  being  made  subject  to  them  :  for  they 
only  mock  one  another,  as  they  do  who  play 
childish  tricks  for  mirth,  and  destroy  those  who 
give  heed  to  them.  For  neither  is  a  wicked  king 
any  longer  a  king,  but  a  tyrant ;  nor  is  a  bishop 
oppressed  with  ignorance  or  an  evil  disposition 
a  bishop,  but  falsely  so  called,  being  not  one 
sent  out  by  God,  but  by  men,  as  Ananiah  and 
Samoeah  in  Jerusalem,  and  Zedekiah  and  Achiah 
the  false  prophets  in  Babylon.'  And  indeed 
Balaam  the  prophet,  when  he  had  corrupted 
Israel  by  Baal-peor,  suffered  punishment ;  ^  and 
Caiaphas  at  last  was  his  own  murderer  ;  and  the 
sons  of  Sceva,  endeavouring  to  cast  out  demons, 
were  wounded  by  them,  and  fled  away  in  an  un- 
seemly manner ;  ^  and  the  kings  of  Israel  and 
of  Judah,  when  they  became  impious,  suffered 
all  sorts  of  punishments.  It  is  therefore  evident 
how  bishops  and  presbyters,  also  falsely  so  called, 
will  not  escape  the  judgment  of  God.  For  it 
will  be  said  to  them  even  now :  "  O  ye  priests 
that  despise  my  name,-*  I  will  deliver  you  up  to 
the  slaughter,  as  I  did  Zedekiah  and  Achiah, 
whom  the  king  of  Babylon  fried  in  a  frying-pan," 
as  says  Jeremiah  the  prophet.s  We  say  these 
things,  not  in  contempt  of  true  prophecies,  for 
we  know  that  they  are  wrought  in  holy  men  by 
the  inspiration  of  God,  but  to  put  a  stop  to  the 
boldness  of  vainglorious  men ;  and  add  this 
withal,  that  from  such  as  these  God  takes  away 
His  grace  :  for  "  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but 
giveth  grace  to  the  humble."  ^  Now  Silas  and 
Agabus  prophesied  in  our  times  ;  ^  yet  did  they 
not  equal  themselves  to  the  apostles,  nor  did 
they  exceed  their  own  measures  though  they 
were  beloved  of  God.  Now  women  prophesied 
also.  Of  old,  Miriam  the  sister  of  Moses  and 
Aaron,'^  and  after  her  Deborah,'^  and  after  these 
Huldah  '°and  Judith  "  —  the  former  under  Josiah, 
the  latter  under  Darius.  The  mother  of  the 
Lord  did  also  prophesy,  and  her  kinswoman 
Elisabeth,  and  Anna ;  '^  and  in  our  time  the 
daughters  of  Philip  :  '^  yet  were  not  these  elated 
against  their  husbands,  but  pre*^erved  their  own 
measures. '"*     Wherefore  if  among  you  also  there 


'  Jer.  xxviii.  and  xxix. 

*  Num.  XXV.  and  xxxi. 
3  Acts  xlx.  14. 

*  Mai.  i.  6. 

5  Jer.  xxix.  22. 

6  I  Pet.  V.  5. 

'  Acts  [xi.  2S]  XV.  32,  xxl.  10. 

*  Ex.  XV.  20. 
9  Jud.^.  iv.  4. 

'°  2  Kings  xxii.  14. 
"  Judith  viii. 
'-  Luke  i.  and  ii. 
'^  Acts  xxi.  9. 

'■*  [The  compiler  has  forgotten  that  few  of  these  had  husbands,  at 
least  at  the  time  when  they  are  reported  to  have  prophesied.  —  R.] 


be  a  man  or  a  woman,  and  such  a  one  obtains 
any  gift,  let  him  be  humble,  that  God  may  be 
pleased  with  him.  For  says  He  :  "  Upon  whom 
will  I  look,  but  upon  him  that  is  humble  and 
quiet,  and  trembles  at  my  words?  "  '5 

SEC.  II. ELECTION    AND    ORDINATION  OF  BISHOPS  : 

FORM    OF   SERVICE    ON    SUNDAYS. 

THAT  TO  MAKE  CONSTITUl'IONS  ABOUT  THE  OFFICES 
TO  BE  PERFORMED  IN  THE  CHURCHES  IS  OF 
GRE.\T    CONSEQUENCE. 

III.  We  have  now  finished  the  first  part  of  this 
discourse  concerning  gifts,  whatever  they  be, 
which  God  has  bestowed  upon  men  according 
to  His  own  will ;  and  how  He  rebuked  the  ways 
of  those  who  either  attempted  to  speak  lies,  or 
were  moved  by  the  spirit  of  the  adversary ;  and 
that  God  often  employed  the  wicked  '^  for  proph- 
ecy and  the  performance  of  wonders.  But  now 
our  discourse  hastens  as  to  the  principal  part, 
that  is,  the  constitution  of  ecclesiastical  affairs, 
that  so,  when  ye  have  learned  this  constitution 
from  us,  ye  who  are  ordained  bishops  by  us  at 
the  command  of  Christ,  may  perform  all  things 
according  to  the  commands  delivered  you,  know- 
ing that  he  that  heareth  us  heareth  Christ,  and 
he  that  heareth  Christ  heareth  His  God  and 
Father, '7  to  wliom  be  glory  for  ever.     Amen. 

CONCERNING    ORDIN.ATIONS. 

IV.  Wherefore  we.  the  twelve  apostles  of  the 
Lord,  who  are  now  together,  give  you  in  charge 
those  divine  constitutions  concerning  every 
ecclesiastical  form,  there  being  present  with  us 
Paul  the  chosen  vessel,  our  fellow-apostle,  and 
James  the  bishop,  and  the  rest  of  the  presbyters, 
and  the  seven  deacons.'^  In  the  first  place,  there- 
fore, I  Peter  say,'^  that  a  bishop  to  be  ordained  is 
to  be,  as  we  have  already,  all  of  us,  appointed, 
unblameable  in  all  things,  a  select  person,^°  chosen 
by  the  whole  people,  who,  zuhen  he  is  named  atid 
approved,  let  the  people  assemble,  with  the  presby- 
tery and  bishops  that  are  present,  on  the  Lord's 
day,  and  let  them  give  their  consent.  Aiid  let 
the  principal  of  the  bishops  ask  the  presbytery  and 


'5  Isa.  Ixvi.  2. 

■t'  We  have  adopted  the  reading  of  one  V.  MS.,  a.-n^xP'h'^^'"'-  I' 
means  more  than  is  in  the  text  —  that  God  used  the  wicked  in  a  w.^y 
in  which  they  would  not  be  naturally  used;  lit.,  "  abused,"  or  "  mis- 
used." The  other  MSS.  and  the  Coptic  road  aTrexop'faTO,  "  gave  His 
gifts  to  the  wicked  for  prophecy."  Whiston  has  tried  to  make  sense 
by  giving  a  new  meaning  to  aTrtxapioaTO,  "  taking  away  His  grace 
from  the  wicked." 

'^  Luke  X.  i6. 

"  The  Coptic  and  one  V.  MS.  omit  from  the  commencement  of 
the  chapter  to  "  deacons."  The  V.  MS.  has:  "  Peter,  the  chief  of  the 
apostles,  proclaimed  the  Gospel  to  Pontus,  Galatia,  Cappadocia,  A.sia, 
Bithynia,  and  finally  in  Rome,  where  he  was  crucified  by  the  prefect 
in  the  reign  of  Nero,  and  where  also  he  is  buried." 

'9  From  this  to  the  end  of  ch.  xxvi.,  only  small  portions  of  what  is 
now  in  the  received  text  occur  in  the  Coptic  version.  The  Oxford 
MS.  is  also  deficient.  It  has  only  a  portion  of  the  fifth,  nothing  of  ch. 
vi.  to  xvi.,  and  only  a  single  sentence  in  ch.  xxii.  The  portions  in 
Coptic  are  printed  in  italics. 

'"  Omitted  in  one  V.  MS. 


482 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  VIII. 


people  whether  this  be  the  person  whom  they  de- 
sire for  their  ruler.  And  if  they  give  their  con- 
sent, let  him  ask  further  whether  he  has  a  good 
testifnonyfro?n  all  men  as  to  his  worthiness  for 
so  great  and  glorious  an  authority  ;  whether  all 
things  relating  to  his  piety  tozoards  God  he  right; 
whether  justice  towards  tnen  has  been  obseroed 
by  him  ;  whether  the  affairs  of  his  fatnily  have 
been  well  ordered  by  him  ;  whether  he  has  been 
unblameable  in  the  course  of  his  life.  And  if  all 
the  assembly  together  do  according  to  truth,  and 
not  according  to  prejudice,  witness  that  he  is  such 
a  one,  let  them  the  third  time,  as  before  God  the 
Judge,  and  Christ,  the  Holy  Ghost  being  also 
present,  as  well  as  all  the  holy  and  ministering 
spirits,  ask  again  whether  he  be  truly  tvorthy  of 
this  ministry,  that  so  "  in  the  mouth  of  tiuo  or 
three  witnesses  every  word  may  be  established.^^ ' 
And  if  they  agree  the  third  time  that  he  is  worthy, 
let  them  all  be  demajided  their  vote ;  and  when 
they  all  give  it  willingly,  let  them  be  heard.  And 
silence  being  made,  let  one  of  the  principal  bish- 
ops, together  with  two  others,  stand  7iear  to  the 
altar,  the  rest  of  the  bishops  and  presbyters  pray- 
ing silently,  and  the  deacons  holding  the  divine 
Gospels  open  upon  the  head  of  him  that  is  to  be 
ordained,  and  say  to  God  thus  :  ^  — 

THE  FORM   OF   PR.\YER    FOR   THE   ORDINATION   OF  A 
BISHOP. 


V.  O  Thou  the  great 
Being,  O  Lord  God  Al- 
mighty, who  alone  art  un- 
begotten,  and  ruled  over 
by  none  ;  who  always  art, 
and  wast  before  the  world  ; 
who  standest  in  need  of 
nothing,  and  art  above  all 
cause  and  beginning ;  who 
only  art  true,  who  only  art 
wise ;  who  alone  art  the 
most  high ;  who  art  by 
nature  invisible ;  whose 
knowledge  is  without  begin- 
ning; who  only' art  good, 
and  beyond  compare  ;  who 
knowest  all  things  before 
they  are  ;  who  art  acquaint- 
ed with  the  most  secret 
things ;  who  art  inaccessi- 
ble, and  without  a  superior  ; 
the  God  and  Father  of  Thy 
only  begotten  Son,  of  our 
God  and  Saviour  ;  the  Cre- 
ator of  the  whole  world  by 
Him ;     whose    providence 


OXFORD   MS.' 

V.  God  and  Fa- 
ther of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Fa- 
ther of  mercies  and 
the  God  of  all  con- 
solation, who  know- 
est all  things  before 
they  take  place ; 
Thou  who  didst  ap- 
point the  rules  of 
the  Church  through 
the  word  of  Thy 
grace ;  who  didst 
appoint  beforehand 
the  race  righteous 
from  the  beginning 
that  came  from 
Abraham  to  be  rul- 
ers, and  didst  con- 
stitute them  priests, 
not  leaving  Thy 
sanctuary  without 
ministers ;  who  from 
the  foundation  of 
the  world  didst  de- 


'  Matt,  xviii.  16. 

^  T;ie  Coptic  has,  "  let  the  bishop  pny  for  him." 
3  The  Oxford  MS.  has  this  chapter  in  an  abbreviated  form  as  in 
the  parallel  columns. 


provides  for  and  takes  the 
care  of  all ;  the  Father  of 
mercies,  and  God  of  all 
consolation  ;  "*  who  dwellest 
in  the  highest  heavens, 5  and 
yet  lookest  down  on  things 
below :  Thou  who  didst 
appoint  the  rules  of  the 
Church,  by  the  coming  oT 
Thy  Christ  in  the  flesh  ;  of 
which  the  Holy  Ghost  is 
the  witness,  by  Thy  apos- 
tles, and  by  us  the  bishops, 
who  by  Thy  grace  are  here 
present ;  who  hast  fore-or- 
dained priests  from  the  be- 
ginning for  the  government 
of  Thy  people  —  Abel  in 
the  first  place,  Seth  and 
Enos,  and  Enoch  and  Noah, 
and  Melchisedec  and  Job  ; 
who  didst  appoint  Abraham, 
and  the  rest  of  the  patri- 
archs, with  Thy  faithful 
servants  Moses  and  Aaron, 
and  Eleazar  and  Phineas  ; 
who  didst  choose  from 
among  them  rulers  and 
priests  in  the  tabernacle  of 
Thy  testimony ;  who  didst 
choose  Samuel  for  a  priest 
and  a  prophet ;  who  didst 
not  leave  Thy  sanctuary 
without  ministers ;  who 
didst  delight  in  those  whom 
Thou  chosest  to  be  glorified 
in.  Do  Thou,  by  us,  pour 
down  the  influence  of  Thy 
free  Spirit,  through  the  me- 
diation of  Thy  Christ,  which 
is  committed  to  Thy  beloved 
Son  Jesus  Christ ;  which 
He  bestowed  according  to 
Thy  will  on  the  holy  apos- 
tles of  Thee  the  eternal 
God.  Grant  by  Thy  name, 
O  God,  who  searchest  the 
hearts,  that  this  Thy  ser- 
vant, whom  Thou'hast  chos- 
en to  be  a  bishop,  may  feed 
Thy  holy  flock,  and  dis- 
charge the  office  of  an  high 
priest  to  Thee,  and  minister 
to  Thee,  unblameably  night 
and  day ;  that  he  may  ap- 
pease Thee,  and  gather  to- 
gether the  number  of  those 
that  shall  be  saved,  and  may 


light  in  those  whom 
Thou  chosest  to  be 
glorified  in ;  and 
now  pour  down  the 
influence  of  Thy 
free  Spirit,  which 
through  Thy  be- 
loved Son  Jesus 
Christ  Thou  hast 
bestowed  on  Thy 
holy  apostles,  who 
set  up  the  Church 
in  the  place  of  the 
sanctuary,  to  unend- 
ing glory  and  praise 
of  Thy  name :  O 
Thou,  who  knowest 
the  hearts  of  all, 
grant  that  this  Thy 
servant  whom  Thou 
hast  chosen  to  the 
holy  office  of  Thy 
bishop,  may  dis- 
charge the  duty  of 
a  high  priest  to 
Thee,  and  minister 
to  Thee  unblame- 
ably night  and  day ; 
that  he  may  appease 
Thee  unceasingly, 
and  present  to  Thee 
the  gifts  of  Thy  holy 
Church,  and  in  the 
spirit  of  the  high- 
priesthood  have 
power  to  remit  sins 
according  to  Thy 
commandment,  to 
give  lots  according 
to  Thy  injunction, 
to  loose  every  bond 
according  to  the 
power  which  Thou 
hast  given  to  the 
apostles,  and  be 
well-pleasing  to 
Thee,  in  meekness 
and  a  pure  heart 
offering  a  smell 
of  sweet  savour 
through  Thy  Son 
Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord,  with  whom 
to  Thee  be  glory, 
power,  and  honour, 
along  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  now  and  for 
ever.     Amen. 


^  2  Cor.  i.  3. 
5  Ps.  cxiii.  5. 


Sec.  II.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


48: 


offer  to  Thee  the  gifts  of  Thy  holy  Church. 
Crant  to  him,  O  Lord  Ahiiighty,  through  Thy 
Christ,  the  fellowship  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that 
so  he  may  have  power  to  remit  sins  according 
to  Thy  command  ;  to  give  forth  lots  according  to 
Thy  command  ;  to  loose  every  bond,  according 
to  the  power  which  Thou  gavest  the  apostles  ; 
that  he  may  please  Thee  in  meekness  and  a  pure 
heart,  with  a  stedfast,  unblameable,  and  unre- 
provable  mind ;  to  offer  to  Thee  a  pure  and  un- 
bloody sacrifice,  which  by  Thy  Christ  Thou  hast 
appointed  as  the  mystery  of  the  new  covenant, 
for  a  sweet  savour,  through  Thy  holy  child  Jesus 
Christ,  our  God  and  Saviour,  through  whom  ' 
glory,  honour,  and  worship  be  to  Thee  in  the 
Holy  Spirit,  now  and  always,  and  for  all  ages. 
And  when  he  has  prayed  for  these  things,  let  the 
rest  of  the  priests  add.  Amen  ;  and  together  with 
them  all  the  people.  And  after  the  prayer  let 
Ofie  of  the  bishops  elevate  the  sacrifice  tipon  the 
hattds  of  him  that  is  ordained,  and  early  in  the 
morning  let  him  he  placed  in  his  throne,  in  a 
place  set  apart  for  him  among  the  rest  of  the 
bishops,  they  all  giving  him  the  kiss  in  the  Lord.^ 
And  after  the  reading  of  the  Law  3  and  the 
Prophets,  and  our  Epistles,  and  Acts,  and  the 
Gospels,  let  him  that  is  ordained  salute  the 
Church,  saying,  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  the  love  of  God  and  the  Father,  atul  the 
fellowship  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  7vith  you  all ; 
and  let  them  all  answer,  And  7vith  Thy  Spirit. 
And  after  these  words  let  him  speak  to  the  people 
the  words  of  exhortation ;  and  when  he  has 
ended  his  word  of  doctrine  (I  Andrew  ">  the 
brother  of  Peter  speak),  all  standing  up,  let  the 
deacon  ascend  upon  some  high  seat,  and  proclaim. 
Let  none  of  the  hearers,  let  none  of  the  unbe- 
lievers stay;  and  silence  being  made,  let  him 
say  :  — 

THE     DIVINE     LITURGY,    WHEREIN     IS    THE     BIDDING 
PRAYER    FOR   THE    CATECHUMENS. 

VI.  Ye  catechumens,  pray,  and  let  all  the  faith- 
ful pray  for  them  in  their  mind,  saying :  I>ord, 
have  mercy  upon  them.  And  let  the  deacon 
bid  prayers  for  them,  saying :  Let  us  all  pray 
unto  God  for  the  catechumens,  that  He  that  is 
good.  He  that  is  the  lover  of  mankind,  will  mer- 
cifully hear  their  prayers  and  their  supplications, 
and  so  accept  their  petitions  as  to  assist  them 
and  give  them  those  desires  of  their  hearts  which 
are  for  their  advantage,  and  reveal  to  them  the 
Gospel  of  His  Christ ;  give  them  illumination  and 

'  One  V.  MS.  reads,  "  with  whom." 

*  The  Coptic  inserts,  "  let  the  holy  Gospels  be  read." 
3  Tlie  Coptic  reads  "  Gospel  "  instead  of  "  Law." 

*  One  V.  MS  has  the  following  note:  "  Andrew  the  brother  of 
Peter  preaches  the  Gospel  to  the  Scythians,  Sogdiani,  and  Thraci.nns, 
who  on  account  of  preaching  Clirist  is  crowned  with  the  martyrdom 
of  the  cross  by  v'EgEea  the  proconsul,  and  was  buried  in  Patra;.  After- 
wards he  was  removed  to  Constantinople  by  the  Emperor  Constan- 
tine." 


understanding,  instruct  them  in  the  knowledge 
of  God,  teach  them  His  commands  and  His  or- 
dinances, implant  in  them  His  pure  and  saving 
fear,  open  the  ears  of  their  hearts,  that  they  may 
exercise  themselves  in  His  law  day  and  night ; 
strengthen  them  in  piety,  unite  them  to  and 
number  them  with  His  holy  flock ;  vouchsafe 
them  the  laver  of  regeneration,  and  the  garment 
of  incorruption,  which  is  the  true  life  ;  and  de- 
liver them  from  all  ungodliness,  and  give  no 
place  to  the  adversary  against  them ;  "  and 
cleanse  them  from  all  filthiness  of  flesh  and 
spirit,  and  dwell  in  them,  and  walk  in  them,  by 
His  Christ ;  bless  their  goings  out  and  their 
comings  in,  and  order  their  affairs  for  their 
good."  5  Let  us  still  earnestly  put  up  our  sup- 
plications for  them,  that  they  may  obtain  the 
forgiveness  of  their  transgressions  by  their  ad- 
mission, and  so  may  be  thought  worthy  of  the 
holy  mysteries,  and  of  constant  communion  with 
the  saints.  Rise  up,  ye  catechumens,  beg  for 
yourselves  the  peace  of  God  through  His  Christ, 
a  peaceable  day,  and  free  from  sin,  and  the  like 
for  the  whole  time  of  your  life,  and  your  Chris- 
tian ends  of  it ;  a  compassionate  and  merciful 
Cjod  ;  and  the  forgiveness  of  your  transgressions. 
Dedicate  yourselves  to  the  only  unbegotten  God, 
through  His  Christ.  Bow  down  your  heads,  and 
receive  the  blessing.  But  at  the  naming  of  every 
one  by  the  deacon,  as  we  said  before,  let  the 
people  say,  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  him  ;  and 
let  the  children  say  it  first.  And  as  they  have 
bowed  down  their  heads,  let  the  bishop  who  is 
newly  ordained  bless  them  with  this  blessing : 
O  God  Almighty,  unbegotten  and  inaccessible, 
who  only  art  the  true  God,  the  God  and  Father 
of  Thy  Christ,  Thy  only  begotten  Son  ;  the  God*' 
of  the  Comforter,  and  Lord  of  the  whole  world  ; 
who  by  Christ  didst  appoint  Thy  disciples  to  be 
teachers  for  the  teaching  of  piety  ;  do  'fhou  now 
also  look  down  upon  Thy  servants,  who  are  re- 
ceiving instruction  in  the  Gospel  of  Thy  Christ, 
and  "  give  them  a  new  heart,  and  renew  a  right 
spirit  in  their  inward  parts,"  7  that  they  may  both 
know  and  do  Thy  will  with  full  purpose  of  heart, 
and  with  a  willing  soul.  Vouchsafe  them  an  holy 
admission,  and  unite  them  to  Thy  holy  Church, 
and  make  them  partakers  of  Thy  di\-ine  mys- 
teries, through  Christ,  who  is  our  hope,  and  who 
tlied  for  them ;  by  whom  glory  and  worship  be 
given  to  Thee  in  the  Holy  Spirit  for  ever.  Amen. 
And  after  this,  let  the  deacon  say :  (jO  out,  ye 
catechumens,  in  peace.  And  after  they  are  gone 
out,  let  him  say  :  Ye  energumens,  afflicted  with 
unclean  spirits,  pray,  and  let  us  all  earnestly  pray 
for  them,  that  God,  the  lover  of  mankind,  will 


5  2  Cor.  vii.  I,  vi.  i6;  Ps.  cxxi.  8. 

*  One  V.  MS.  has  TrpojSoAeus,  "  the  sender  forth,"  or  "  producer," 
instea<l  of"  God." 
'   Ps.  li.  JO. 


484 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES.         [Book  viii. 


by  Christ  rebuke  the  unclean  and  wicked  spirits, 
and  deliver  His  supplicants  from  the  dominion 
of  the  adversary.  May  He  that  rebuked  the 
legion  of  demons,  and  the  devil,  the  prince  of 
wickedness,'  even  now  rebuke  these  apostates 
from  piety,  and  deliver  His  own  workmanship 
from  his  power,  and  cleanse  those  creatures 
which  He  has  made  with  great  wisdom.  Let  us 
still  pray  earnestly  for  them.  Save  them,  O  God, 
and  raise  them  up  by  Thy  power.  Bow  down 
your  heads,  ye  energumens,  and  receive  the 
blessings.  x\nd  let  the  bishop  add  this  prayer, 
and  say :  — 

FOR    THE    ENERGUMENS. 

Ml.  Thou,  who  hast  bound  the  strong  man, 
and  spoiled  all  that  was  in  his  house,  who  hast 
given  us  power  over  serpents  and  scorpions  to 
tread  upon  them,  and  upon  all  the  power  of  the 
enemy;  2  who  hast  delivered  the  serpent,  that 
murderer  of  men,  bound  to  us,  as  a  sparrow  to 
children,  whom  all  things  dread,  and  tremble 
before  the  face  of  Thy  power ;  ^  who  hast  cast 
him  down  as  lightning  from  heaven  to  earth, + 
not  with  a  fall  from  a  place,  but  from  honour  to 
dishonour,  on  account  of  his  voluntary  evil  dis- 
position ;  whose  look  dries  the  abysses,  and 
threatening  melts  the  mountains,  and  whose  truth 
remains  for  ever ;  whom  the  infants  praise,  and 
sucking  babes  bless ;  whom  angels  sing  hymns 
to,  and  adore ;  who  lookest  upon  the  earth,  and 
makest  it  tremble  ;  who  touchest  the  mountains, 
and  they  smoke ;  who  threatenest  the  sea,  and 
driest  it  up,  and  makest  all  its  rivers  as  desert, 
and  the  clouds  are  the  dust  of  His  feet ;  who 
walkest  upon  the  sea  as  upon  the  firm  ground  ;  5 
Thou  only  begotten  God,-'  the  Son  of  the  great 
Father,  rebuke  these  wicked  spirits,  and  deliver 
the  works  of  Thy  hands  from  the  power  of  the 
adverse  spirit.  For  to  Thee  is  due  glory,  honour, 
and  worship,  and  by  Thee  to  Thy  Father,  in  the 
Holy  Spirit,  for  ever.  Amen.  And  let  the  dea- 
con say :  Go  out,  ye  energumens.  And  after 
them,  let  him  cry  aloud  :  Ye  that  are  to  be  illu- 
minated, pray.  Let  all  us,  the  faithful,  earnestly 
pray  for  them,  that  the  Lord  will  vouchsafe  that, 
being  initiated  into  the  death  of  Christ,  they  may 
rise  with  Him,  and  become  partakers  of  His 
kingdom,  and  may  be  admitted  to  the  commun- 
ion of  His  mysteries ;  unite  them  to,  number 
them  among,  those  that  are  saved  in  His  holy 
Church.  Save  them,  and  raise  them  up  by  Thy 
grace.  And  being  sealed  to  God  through  His 
Christ,  let  them  bow  down  their  heads,  and  re- 
ceive this  blessing  from  the  bishop  :  — 

'  Mark  v.  9;  Zech.  iii.  2. 

*  Matt.  xii.  29;   Luke  x.  19. 
3  Job  xl.  24,  LXX. 

*  Luke  X.  18. 
5  Ps.  cvi.  9,  Isa.  li.  10;  Ps.  xcvii.  5;  Isa.  )xiv.  i;  Ps.  cxvii.  2, 

vni.  2,  xcvii.  4,  civ.  32;  Nah.  i.  4,  3;  Job  ix.  8,  LXX. 
^  [Comp.  note  i,  p.  477,  book  vii.  chap,  xliii.  —  R.] 


FOR   THE    B.\PTIZED. 

viiL  Thou  who  hast  formerly  said  by  Thy  holy 
prophets  to  those  that  be  initiated,  "  Wash  ye, 
become  clean,"?  and  hast  appointed   spiritual 
regeneration  by  Christ,  do  Thou  now  also  look 
down  upon  these  that  are  baptized,  and  bless 
them,  and  sanctify  them,  and  prepare  them  that 
they  may  become  worthy  of  Thy  spiritual  gift, 
and  of  the  true  adoption  of  Thy  spiritual  mys- 
teries, of  being  gathered  together  with  those  that 
are  saved  through  Christ  our  Saviour ;  by  whom 
glory,  honour,  and  worship  be  to  Thee,  in  the 
Holy  Ghost,    for   ever.      Amen.     And   let   the 
deacon  say :  Go  out,  ye  that  are  preparing  for 
illumination.     And  after  that  let  him  proclaim  : 
Ye  penitents,  pray ;  let  us  all  earnestly  pray  for 
our  brethren  in  the  state  of  penitence,  that  God, 
the  lover  of  compassion,  will  show  them  the  way 
of  repentance,  and  accept  their  return  and  their 
confession,  and   bruise    Satan   under  their  feet 
suddenly,*^  and  redeem  them  from  the  snare  of 
the  devil,  and  the  ill-usage  of  the  demons,  and 
free  them  from  every  unlawful  word,  and  every 
absurd    practice    and    wicked    thought ;    forgive 
them  all  their  offences,  both  voluntary  and  in- 
voluntary, and  blot  out  that  handwriting  which 
is  against  them,9  and  write  them  in  the  book  of 
life ; '°  cleanse  them  from  all  filthiness  of  ileah 
and  spirit,"  and  restore  and  unite  them  to  His 
holy  flock.     For  He  knoweth  our  frame.     For 
who  can  glory  that  he  has  a  clean  heart  ?     And 
who  can  boldly  say,  that  he  is  pure  from  sin?'^ 
For  we  are  all  among  the  blameworthy.     Let  us 
still  pray  for  them  more  earnestly,  for  there  is 
joy  in  heaven  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth,'^ 
that,  being  converted  from  every  evil  work,  they 
may  be  joined  to  all  good  practice  ;  that  God, 
the  lover  of  mankind,  will  suddenly  accept  their 
petitions,  will  restore  '*  to  them  the  joy  of  His 
salvation,  and    strengthen   them  with   His  free 
Spirit ;  's  that  they  may  not  be  any  more  shaken,'^ 
but  be  admitted  to  the  communion  of  His  most 
holy  things,  and  become  partakers  of  His  divine 
mysteries,  that  appearing  worthy  of  His  adop- 
tion, they  may  obtain  eternal  life.     Let  us  all 
still  earnestly  say  on  their  account :   Lord,  have 
mercy  upon   them.      Save   them,   O  God,  and 
raise  them  up  by  Thy  mercy.     Rise  up,  and  bow 
your  heads  to  God  through  His  Christ,  and  re- 
ceive the  blessings.     Let  the  bishop   then  add 
this  prayer :  — 


7  Isa.  i.  16. 

"  Rom.  xvi.  20. 

9  Col.  ii.  13,  14. 
>°  Phil.  iv.  3. 
"  2  Cor.  vii.  I. 
'-  Prov.  XX.  9. 
'3  Luke  XV.  7. 

'■>  The  V.  Mss.  read,  "restore  them  to  their  former  position,  and 
give  them  the  joy,"  etc. 
'5   Ps.  ],.  12. 

">  The  v.  M.ss.  add,  "  in  their  footsteps,  but  may  be  deemed  worthy 
to  be  admitted,"  etc. 


Sec.  II.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


485 


IMPOSITION    OF    hands;    PR.4YER    FOR    PENITENTS. 

IX.  Almighty,  eternal  God,  Lord  of  the  whole 
world,  the  Creator  and  Governor  of  all  things, 
who  hast  exhibited  man  as  the  ornament  of  the 
world  through  Christ,  and  didst  give  him  a  law 
both  naturally  implanted  and  written,  that  he 
might  live  according  to  law,  as  a  rational  crea- 
ture ;  and  when  he  had  sinned.  Thou  gavest  him 
Thy  goodness  as  a  pledge  in  order  to  his  repent- 
ance :  Look  down  upon  these  persons  who  have 
bended  the  neck  of  their  soul  and  body  to  Thee  ; 
for  Thou  desirest  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but 
his  repentance,  that  he  turn  from  his  wicked 
way,  and  live.'  Thou  who  didst  accept  the 
repentance  of  the  Ninevites,  who  wiliest  that  all 
men  be  saved,  and  come  to  the  acknowledg- 
ment of  the  truth ;  ^  who  didst  accept  of  that 
son  who  had  consumed  his  substance  in  riotous 
living,^  with  the  bowels  of  a  father,  on  account 
of  his  repentance  ;  do  Thou  now  accept  of  the 
repentance  of  Thy  supplicants  :  for  there  is  no 
man  that  will  not  sin ;  for  "  if  Thou,  O  Lord, 
rnarkest  iniquities,  O  Lord,  who  shall  stand? 
For  with  Thee  there  is  propitiation."  ■♦  And  do 
Thou  restore  them  to  Thy  holy  Church,  into 
their  former  dignity  and  honour,  through  Christ 
our  God  and  Saviour,  by  whom  glory  and  adora- 
tion be  to  Thee,  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  ever. 
Amen.  Then  let  the  deacon  say.  Depart,  ye 
penitents  ;  and  let  him  add,  Let  none  of  those 
who  ought  not  to  come  draw  near.  All  we  of 
the  faithful,  let  us  bend  our  knee  :  let  us  all 
entreat  God  through  His  Christ ;  let  us  earnestly 
beseech  God  through  His  Christ. 

THE    BIDDING    PRAYER    FOR   THE    FAITHFUL. 

X.  Let  us  pray  for  the  peace  and  happy  settle- 
ment of  the  world,  and  of  the  holy  churches  ; 
that  the  God  of  the  whole  world  may  afford  ns 
His  everlasting  peace,  and  such  as  may  not  be 
taken  away  from  us  ;  that  He  may  preserve  us  in 
a  full  prosecution  of  such  virtue  as  is  according 
to  godliness.  Let  us  pray  for  the  Holy  Catholic 
and  Apostolic  Church  which  is  spread  from  one 
end  of  the  earth  to  the  other ;  that  God  would 
preserve  and  keep  it  unshaken,  and  free  from  the 
waves  of  this  life,  until  the  end  of  the  world,  as 
founded  upon  a  rock  ;  and  for  the  holy  parish  in 
this  j)lace,  that  the  Lord  of  the  whole  world  may 
vouchsafe  us  without  failure  to  follow  after  His 
heavenly  hope,  and  without  ceasing  to  pay  Him 
the  debt  of  our  prayer.  Let  us  pray  for  every 
episcopacy  which  is  under  the  whole  heaven,  of 
those  that  rightly  divide  the  word  of  Thy  truth. 
And  let  us  pray  for  our  bishop  James,*  and  his 


'  Ezek.  xviii.  and  xxxiii. 
-  Jonah  iii. ;  i  Tim.  ii.  4. 
3  I.nkexv. 

■•  [Ps.cxxx.  3,  4.  — R.l 

5   [This  is  "James,  tlic  Lord's  brother;  "Cal.  I.  ig.    An  incidental 
proof  of  the  Kaslern  and  Aate-Niceiie  origin  of  book  viii,  also.  —  R.] 


parishes  ;  let  us  pray  for  our  bishop  Clement,  and 
his  parishes  ;  let  us  pray  for  our  bishop  Euodius, 
and  his  parishes ;  let  us  pray  for  our  bishop 
Annianus,  and  his  parishes  :  that  the  compas- 
sionate God  may  grant  them  to  continue  in  His 
holy  churches  in  health,  honour,  and  long  life, 
and  afford  them  an  honourable  old  age  in  godli- 
ness and  righteousness.  And  let  us  pray  for  our 
presbyters,  that  the  Lord  may  deliver  them  from 
every  unreasonable  and  wicked  action,  and  afford 
them  a  presbyterate  in  health  and  honour.  Let 
us  pray  for  all  the  deacons  and  ministers  in  Christ, 
that  the  Lord  may  grant  them  an  unblameable 
ministration.  Let  us  pray  for  the  readers,  singers, 
virgins,  widows,  and  orphans.  Let  us  pray  for 
those  that  are  in  marriage  and  in  child-bearing, 
that  the  Lord  may  have  mercy  upon  them  all. 
Let  us  pray  for  the  eunuchs  who  walk  holily. 
Let  us  pray  for  those  in  a  state  of  continence 
and  piety.  Let  us  pray  for  those  that  bear  fruit 
in  the  holy  Church,  and  give  alms  to  the  needy. 
And  let  us  pray  for  those  who  offer  sacrifices  and 
oblations  to  the  Lord  our  God,  that  God,  the 
fountain  of  all  goodness,  may  recompense  them 
with  His  heavenly  gifts,  and  "  give  them  in  this 
world  an  hundredfold,  and  in  the  world  to  come 
life  everlasting ;  "  ^  and  bestow  upon  them  for 
their  temporal  things,  those  that  are  eternal ;  for 
earthly  things,  those  that  are  heavenly.  Let  us 
pray  for  our  brethren  newly  enlightened,  that  the 
Lord  may  strengthen  and  confirm  them.  Let  us 
pray  for  our  brethren  exercised  with  sickness, 
that  the  Lord  may  deliver  them  from  every  sick- 
ness and  every  disease,  and  restore  them  sound 
into  His  holy  Church.  Let  us  pray  for  those  that 
travel  by  water  or  by  land.  Let  us  pray  for  those 
that  are  in  the  mines,  in  banishments,  in  prisons, 
and  in  bonds,  for  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Let  us 
pray  for  those  that  are  afflicted  with  bitter  servi- 
tude. Let  us  pray  for  our  enemies,  and  those 
that  hate  us.  Let  us  pray  for  those  that  perse- 
cute us  for  the  name  of  the  Lord,  that  the  Lord 
may  pacify  their  anger,  and  scatter  their  wrath 
against  us.  Let  us  pray  for  those  that  are  with- 
out, and  are  wandered  out  of  the  way,  that  the 
Lord  may  convert  them.  Let  us  be  mindful  of 
the  infants  of  the  Church,  that  the  Lord  may 
perfect  them  in  His  fear,  and  bring  them  to  a 
complete  age.  Let  us  pray  one  for  another,  that 
the  Lord  may  keep  us  and  preserve  us  by  flis 
grace  to  the  end,  and  deliver  us  from  the  evil 
one,  and  from  all  the  scandals  of  those  that  work 
iniquity,  and  preserve  us  unto  His  heavenly  king- 
dom. Let  us  pray  for  every  Christian  soul. 
Save  us,  and  raise  us  up,  O  God,  by  Thy  mercy. 
Let  us  rise  up,  and  let  us  pray  earnestly,  and 
dedicate  ourselves  and  one  another  to  the  living 
God,  through  His  Christ.  And  let  the  high  priest 
atld  this  prayer,  and  say  :  — 

^  Matt.  xix.  29. 


486 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


[Book  VIII. 


THE    FORM    OF    PRAYER    FOR   THE    FAITHFUL. 

XI.  O  Lord  Almighty,  the  Most  High,  who 
dwellest  on  high,  the  Holy  One,  that  restest 
among  the  saints,  without  beginning,  the  Only 
Potentate,  who  hast  given  to  us  by  Christ  the 
preaching  of  knowledge,  to  the  acknowledgment 
of  Thy  glory  and  of  Thy  name,  which  He  has 
made  known  to  us,  for  our  comprehension,  do 
Thou  now  also  look  down  through  Him  upon 
this  Thy  flock,  and  deliver  it  from  all  ignorance 
and  wicked  practice,  and  grant  that  we  may  fear 
Thee  in  earnest,  and  love  Thee  with  affection, 
and  have  a  due  reverence  of  Thy  glory.  Be 
gracious  and  merciful  to  them,  and  hearken  to 
them  when  they  pray  unto  Thee ;  and  keep 
them,  that  they  may  be  unmoveable,  unblame- 
able,  and  unreprovable,  that  they  may  be  holy 
in  body  and  spirit,  not  having  spot  or  wrinkle, 
or  any  such  thing ;  but  that  they  may  be  com- 
plete, and  none  of  them  may  be  defective  or 
imperfect.  O  our  support,  our  powerful  God, 
who  dost  not  accept  persons,  be  Thou  the  as- 
sister  of  this  Thy  people,'  which  Thou  hast  re- 
deemed with  the  precious  blood  of  Thy  Christ ; 
be  Thou  their  protector,  aider,  provider,  and 
guardian,  their  strong  wall  of  defence,  their  bul- 
wark and  security.  For  "  none  can  snatch  out 
of  Thy  hand  :  "  ^  for  there  is  no  other  God  like 
Thee ;  for  on  Thee  is  our  reliance.  "  Sanctify 
them  by  Thy  truth  :  for  Thy  word  is  truth."  ^ 
Thou  who  dost  nothing  for  favour,  Thou  whom 
none  can  deceive,  deliver  them  from  every  sick- 
ness, and  every  disease,  and  every  offence,  every 
injury  and  deceit,  "  from  fear  of  the  enemy, 
from  the  dart  that  flieth  in  the  day,  from  the 
mischief  that  walketh  about  in  darkness ;  "  * 
and  vouchsafe  them  that  everlasting  life  which  is 
in  Christ  Thy  only  begotten  Son,  our  God  and 
Saviour,  through  whom  glory  and  worship  be  to 
Thee,  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  now  and  always,  and 
for  ever  and  ever.  Amen.  And  after  this  let 
the  deacon  say.  Let  us  attend.  And  let  the 
bishop  salute  the  church,  and  say.  The  peace  of 
God  be  with  you  all.  And  let  the  people  an- 
swer. And  with  thy  spirit ;  and  let  the  deacon  say 
to  all.  Salute  ye  one  another  with  the  holy  kiss. 
And  let  the  clergy  salute  the  bishop,  the  men  of 
the  laity  salute  the  men,  the  women  the  women. 
And  let  the  children  stand  at  the  reading-desk  ; 
and  let  another  deacon  stand  by  them,  that  they 
may  not  be  disorderly. 5  And  let  other  deacons 
walk  about  and  watch  the  men  and  women,  that 
no  tumult  may  be  made,  and  that  no  one  nod,  or 
whisper,  or  slumber  ;  and  let  the  deacons  ^  stand 
at  the  doors  of  the  men,  and  the  swh-deacons  at 


'  The  V.  Mss.  insert,  "  whom  Thou  hast  selected  out  of  myriads." 
^  John  X.  29. 
^  John  xvii.  17. 

*  Ps.  Ixiv.  I,  xci.  5,  6. 

5  The  meaning  in  Coptic  seems  to  be  uncertain. 

*  The  Coptic  reads,  "  sub-deacons." 


those  of  the  women,  that  no  one  go  out,  nor  a 
door  be  opened,  although  it  be  for  one  of  the 
faitJiful,  at  the  time  of  the  oblation.  But  let 
one  of  the  sub-deacons  bring  water  to  wash  the 
hands  of  the  priests,  which  is  a  symbol  of  the 
purity  of  those  souls  that  are  devoted  to  God. 

THE    CONSTITUTION    OF    JAMES    THE     BROTHER     OF 
JOHN,    THE    SON    OF    ZEBEDEE. 

XII.  And  I  James,7  the  brother  of  John,  the 
son  of  Zebedee,  say,  that  the  deacon  shall  im- 
mediately say.  Let  none  of  the  catechumens,  let 
none  of  the  hearers,  let  none  of  the  unbelievers, 
let  none  of  the  heterodox,  stay  here.  You  who 
have  prayed  the  foregoing  prayer,  depart.^  Let 
the  mothers  receive  their  children ;  let  no  one 
have  anything  against  any  one  ;  let  no  one  come 
in  hypocrisy ;  let  us  stand  upright  befo?-e  the 
Lord  with  fear  and  trembling,  to  offer.  When 
this  is  done,  let  the  deacons  bring  the  gifts  to  the 
bishop  at  the  altar  ;  and  let  the  presbyters  stand  on 
his  right  hand,  and  on  his  left,  as  disciples  stand 
before  their  Master.  But  let  two  of  the  deacons, 
on  each  side  of  the  altar,  hold  a  fan,  made  up 
of  thin  7tiembranes,  or  of  the  feathers  of  the 
peacock,  or  of  fine  cloth,  and  let  them  silently 
drive  away  the  small  animals  that  fly  about,  that 
they  tnay  not  come  near  to  the  cups.  Let  the 
high  priest,  therefore,  together  with  the  priests, 
p?-ay'^  by  himself;  and  let  him  put  on  his  shin- 
ing garment,  and  stand  at  the  altar,  and  make 
the  sign  of  the  cross  upon  his  forehead  with  his 
hand,"''  and  say  :  The  grace  of  Almighty  God, 
and  the  love  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the 
fellowship  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  be  with  you  all. 
And  let  all  with  one  voice  say  :  And  with  thy 
spirit.  The  high  priest :  Lift  up  your  mind.  All 
the  people  :  We  lift  it  up  unto  the  Lord.  The 
high  priest :  Let  us  give  thanks  to  the  Lord.  All 
the  people  :  It  is  meet  and  right  so  to  do.  Then 
let  the  high  priest  say  :  It  is  very  meet  and  right 
before  all  things  to  sing  an  hymn  to  Thee,  who 
art  the  true  God,  who  art  before  all  beings,  "  from 
whom  the  whole  family  in  heaven  and  earth  is 
named ;  "  "  who  only  art  unbegotten,  and  with- 
out beginning,  and  without  a  ruler,  and  without 
a  master ;  who  standest  in  need  of  nothing ; 
who  art  the  bestower  of  everything  that  is  good  ; 
who  art  beyond  all  cause  and  generation ;  who 
art  alway  and  immutably  the  same  ;  from  whom 
all  things  came  into  being,  as  from  their  proper 
original.     For  Thou  art  eternal  knowledge,  ever- 

7  One  V.  MS.  gives  the  following  note:  "James  the  son  of  Zebe- 
dee, brother  of  John,  preached  the  Gospel  in  Judea,  was  slain  with 
the  sword  by  Herod  the  tetrarch,  and  lies  in  Caesarea. 

8  [N.B.  —  No  non-communicating  attendance  permitted.] 

9  The  Coptic  adds,  "  over  the  oblation,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may 
descend  upon  it,  making  the  bread  the  body  of  Christ,  and  the  cup 
the  blood  of  Christ;  and  prayers  being  ended."  It  then  goes  on  with 
the  words  in  italics  in  ch.  xiii. 

'°  The  common  text  has,  "  before  all  the  people,"  omitted  by  one 

V.  MS. 

"  Eph.  lii.  15. 


Sec.  II.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


487 


lasting  sight,  unbegotten  hearing,  untaught  wis- 
dom, the  first  by  nature,  and  the  measure  of 
being,  and  beyond  all  number ;  who  didst  bring 
all  things  out  of  nothing  into  being  by  Thy  only 
begotten  Son,  but  didst  beget  Him  before  all 
ages  by  Thy  will.  Thy  power,  and  Thy  goodness, 
without  any  instrument,  the  only  begotten  Son, 
God  the  Word,  the  living  Wisdom,  "  the  First- 
born of  every  creature,  the  angel  of  Thy  Great 
Counsel,"  '  and  Thy  High  Priest,  but  the  King 
and  Lord  of  every  intellectual  and  sensible  na- 
ture, who  was  before  all  things,  by  whom  were 
all  things.  For  Thou,  O  eternal  God,  didst 
make  all  things  by  Him,  and  through  Him  it  is 
that  Thou  vouchsafest  Thy  suitable  providence 
over  the  whole  world ;  for  by  the  very  same 
that  Thou  bestowedst  being,  didst  Thou  also 
bestow  well-being  :  the  God  and  Father  of  Thy 
only  begotten  Son,  who  by  Him  didst  make 
before  all  things  the  cherubim  and  the  seraphim, 
the  seons  and  hosts,  the  powers  and  authorities, 
the  principalities  and  thrones,  the  archangels 
and  angels  ;  and  after  all  these,  didst  by  Him 
make  this  visible  world,  and  all  things  that  are 
therein.  For  Thou  art  He  who  didst  frame  the 
heaven  as  an  arch,,  and  "  stretch  it  out  like  the 
covering  of  a  tent,"  ^  and  didst  found  the  earth 
upon  nothing  by  Thy  mere  will ;  who  didst  fix 
the  firmament,  and  prepare  the  night  and  the 
day  ;  who  didst  bring  the  light  out  of  Thy  treas- 
ures, and  on  its  departure  didst  bring  on  dark- 
ness, for  the  rest  of  the  living  creatures  that 
move  up  and  down  in  the  world ;  who  didst 
appoint  the  sun  in  heaven  to  rule  over  the  day, 
and  the  moon  to  rule  over  the  night,  and  didst 
inscribe  in  heaven  the  choir  of  stars  to  praise 
Thy  glorious  majesty  ;  who  didst  make  the  water 
for  drink  and  for  cleansing,  the  air  in  which  we 
live  for  respiration  and  the  affording  of  sounds, 
by  the  means  of  the  tongue,  which  strikes  the 
air,  and  the  hearing,  which  co-operates  there- 
with, so  as  to  perceive  speech  when  it  is  re- 
ceived by  it,  and  falls  upon  it ;  who  madest  fire 
for  our  consolation  in  darkness,  for  the  supply 
of  our  want,  and  that  we  might  be  warmed  and 
enlightened  by  it ;  who  didst  separate  the  great 
sea  from  the  land,  and  didst  render  the  former 
navigable  and  the  latter  fit  for  walking,  and  didst 
replenish  the  former  with  small  and  great  living 
creatures,  and  filledst  the  latter  with  the  same, 
both  tame  and  wild  ;  didst  furnish  it  with  various 
plants,  and  crown  it  with  herbs,  and  beautify  it 
with  flowers,  and  enrich  it  with  seeds  ;  who  didst 
ordain  the  great  deep,  and  on  every  side  madest 
a  mighty  cavity  for  it,  which  contains  seas  of 
salt  waters  heaped  together,^  yet  didst  Thou 
every   way   bound    them    with    barriers    of    the 


1  Col.  i.  15;  Isa.  IX.  6,  LXX. 

2  Gen.  i. ;  4  Esd.  xvi.  60;  Ps.  civ.  2. 

3  Job  xxxviii. 


smallest  sand  ;  ■♦  who  sometimes  dost  raise  it  to 
the  height  of  mountains  by  the  winds,  and  some- 
times dost  smooth  it  into  a  plain  ;  sometimes 
dost  enrage  it  with  a  tempest,  and  sometimes 
dost  still  it  with  a  calm,  that  it  may  be  easy  to 
seafaring  men  in  their  voyages ;  who  didst  en- 
compass this  world,  which  was  made  by  Thee 
through  Christ,  with  rivers,  and  water  it  with 
currents,  and  moisten  it  with  springs  that  never 
fail,  and  didst  bind  it  round  with  mountains  for 
the  immoveable  and  secure  consistence  of  the 
earth  :  for  Thou  hast  replenished  Thy  world, 
and  adorned  it  with  sweet-smelling  and  with 
healing  herbs,  with  many  and  various  living 
creatures,  strong  and  weak,  for  food  and  for 
labour,  tame  and  wild  ;  with  the  noises  of  creep- 
ing things,  the  sounds  of  various  sorts  of  flying 
creatures ;  with  the  circuits  of  the  years,  the 
numbers  of  months  and  days,  the  order  of  the 
seasons,  the  courses  of  the  rainy  clouds,  for 
the  production  of  the  fruits  and  the  support  of 
living  creatures.  Thou  hast  also  appointed  the 
station  of  the  winds,  which  blow  when  com- 
manded by  Thee,  and  the  multitude  of  the 
plants  and  herbs.  And  Thou  hast  not  only  cre- 
ated the  world  itself,  but  hast  also  made  man 
for  a  citizen  of  the  world,  exhibiting  him  as  the 
ornament  of  the  world  ;  for  Thou  didst  say  to 
Thy  Wisdom :  "  Let  us  make  man  according 
to  our  image,  and  according  to  our  likeness ; 
and  let  them  have  dominion  over  the  fish  of 
the  sea,  and  over  the  fowls  of  the  heaven."  5 
Wherefore  also  Thou  hast  made  him  of  an  im- 
mortal soul,  and  of  a  body  liable  to  dissolution 
—  the  former  out  of  nothing,  the  latter  out  of  the 
four  elements  —  and  hast  given  him  as  to  his  soul 
rational  knowledge,  the  discerning  of  piety  and 
impiety,  and  the  observation  of  right  and  wrong  ; 
and  as  to  his  body.  Thou  hast  granted  him  five 
senses  and  progressive  motion  :  for  Thou,  O  God 
Almighty,  didst  by  Thy  Christ  i)lant  a  paradise  in 
Eden,''  in  the  east,  adorned  with  all  plants  fit  for 
food,  and  didst  introduce  him  into  it,  as  into 
a  rich  banquet.  And  when  Thou  madest  him, 
Thou  gavest  him  a  law  implanted  within  him,  that 
so  he  might  have  at  home  and  within  himself 
the  seeds  of  divine  knowledge  ;  and  when  Thou 
hadst  brought  him  into  the  paradise  of  pleasure, 
Thou  allowedst  him  the  privilege  of  enjoying  all 
things,  only  forbidding  the  tasting  of  one  tree, 
in  hopes  of  greater  blessings  ;  that  in  case  he 
would  keep  that  command,  he  might  receive  the 
reward  of  it,  which  was  immortality.  But  when 
he  neglected  that  command,  and  tasted  of  the 
forbidden  fruit,  by  the  seduction  of  the  serpent 
and  the  counsel  of  his  wife,  Thou  didst  justly 
cast  him  out  of  paradise.     Yet  of  Thy  goodness 


*  Jer.  V.  22. 
5  Gen.  i.  26. 
«>  Gen.  ii.  8. 


488 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES.         [Book  viii. 


Thou  didst  not  overlook  him,  nor  suffer  him  to 
perish  utterly,  for  he  was  Thy  creature  ;  but  Thou 
didst  subject  the  whole  creation  to  him,  and  didst 
grant  him  liberty  to  procure  himself  food  by  his 
own  sweat  and  labours,  whilst  Thou  didst  cause 
all  the  fruits  of  the  earth  to  spring  up,  to  grow, 
and  to  ripen.  But  when  Thou  hadst  laid  him 
asleep  for  a  while.  Thou  didst  with  an  oath  call 
him  to  a  restoration  again,  didst  loose  the  bond 
of  death,  and  promise  him  life  after  the  resur- 
rection. And  not  this  only ;  but  when  Thou 
hadst  increased  his  posterity  to  an  innumerable 
multitude,  those  that  continued  with  Thee  Thou 
didst  glorify,  and  those  who  did  apostatize  from 
Thee  Thou  didst  punish.  And  while  Thou  didst 
accept  of  the  sacrifice  of  Abel '  as  of  an  holy 
person,  Thou  didst  reject  the  gift  of  Cain,  the 
murderer  of  his  brother,  as  of  an  abhorred  wretch. 
And  besides  these.  Thou  didst  accept  of  Seth  and 
Enos,2  and  didst  translate  Enoch  :  ^  for  Thou  art 
the  Creator  of  men,  and  the  giver  of  life,  and  the 
supplier  of  want,  and  the  giver  of  laws,  and 
the  rewarder  of  those  that  observe  them,  and  the 
avenger  of  those  that  transgress  them  ;  who  didst 
bring  the  great  flood  upon  the  world  by  reason 
of  the  multitude  of  the  ungodly,-*  and  didst  de- 
liver righteous  Noah  from  that  flood  by  an  ark,5 
with  eight  souls,  the  end  of  the  foregoing  gener- 
ations, and  the  beginning  of  those  that  were  to 
come  ;  who  didst  kindle  a  fearful  fire  against  the 
five  cities  of  Sodom,  and  "  didst  turn  a  fruitful 
land  into  a  salt  lake  for  the  wickedness  of  them 
that  dwelt  therein,"  ^  but  didst  snatch  holy  Lot 
out  of  the  conflagration.  Thou  art  He  who  didst 
deliver  Abraham  from  the  impiety  of  his  fore- 
fathers, and  didst  appoint  him  to  be  the  heir  of 
the  world,  and  didst  discover  to  him  Thy  Christ ; 
who  didst  aforehand  ordain  Melchisedec  an  high 
priest  for  Thy  worship  ;  ^  who  didst  render  Thy 
patient  servant  Job  the  conqueror  of  that  serpent 
who  is  the  patron  of  wickedness ;  who  madest 
Isaac  the  son  of  the  promise,  and  Jacob  the 
father  of  twelve  sons,  and  didst  increase  his  pos- 
terity to  a  multitude,  and  bring  him  into  Egypt 
with  seventy-five  souls.**  Thou,  O  Lord,  didst 
not  overlook  Joseph,  but  grantedst  him,  as  a  re- 
ward of  his  chastity  for  Thy  sake,  the  govern- 
ment over  the  Egyptians.  Thou,  O  Lord,  didst 
not  overlook  the  Hebrews  when  they  were  afflicted 
by  the  Egyptians,  on  account  of  the  promises 
made  unto  their  fathers ;  but  Thou  didst  deliver 
them,  and  punish  the  Egyptians.''  And  when 
men  had  corrupted  the  law  of  nature,  and  had 


'  Gen   iv. 

2  Exclus.  xlix.  16. 

3  Gen.  iv.  and  v. 

*  Gen.  vi.  and  vii. 
5  I  Pet.  iii.  20. 

*  Gen.  xix.;   Wisd.  x.  6;  Ps.  cvii.  34. 
^  Gen.  xii.,  etc. 

8  Gen.  xlvi.  27,  LXX. 

9  Ex.  i ,  etc. 


sometimes  esteemed  the  creation  the  effect  of 
chance,  and  sometimes  honoured  it  more  than 
they  ought,  and  equalled  it  to  the  God  of  the 
universe,  Thou  didst  not,  however,  suffer  them 
to  go  astray,  but  didst  raise  up  Thy  holy  ser\'ant 
Moses,  and  by  him  didst  give  the  written  law 
for  the  assistance  of  the  law  of  nature,'"  and  didst 
show  that  the  creation  was  Thy  work,  and  didst 
banish  away  the  error  of  polytheism.  Thou 
didst  adorn  Aaron  and  his  posterity  with  the 
priesthood,  and  didst  punish  the  Hebrews  when 
they  sinned,  and  receive  them  again  when  they 
returned  to  Thee.  Thou  didst  punish  the  Egyp- 
tians with  a  judgment  of  ten  plagues,  and  didst 
divide  the  sea,  and  bring  the  Israelites  through 
it,  and  drown  and  destroy  the  Egyptians  who 
pursued  after  them.  Thou  didst  sweeten  the 
bitter  water  with  wood  ;  Thou  didst  bring  water 
out  of  the  rock  of  stone  ;  Thou  didst  rain  manna 
from  heaven,  and  quails,  as  meat  out  of  the  air ; 
Thou  didst  afford  them  a  pillar  of  fire  by  night 
to  give  them  light,  and  a  pillar  of  a  cloud  by  day 
to  overshadow  them  from  the  heat ;  Thou  didst 
declare  Joshua  to  be  the  general  of  the  army,  and 
didst  overthrow  the  seven  nations  of  Canaan  by 
him  ;  "  Thou  didst  divide  Jordan,  and  dry  up  the 
rivers  of  Etham  ;  '^  Thou  didst  overthrow  walls 
without  instruments  or  the  hand  of  man.'^  For 
all  these  things,  glory  be  to  Thee,  O  Lord  Al- 
mighty. Thee  do  the  innumerable  hosts  of  angels, 
archangels,  thrones,  dominions,  principalities, 
authorities,  and  powers.  Thine  everlasting  armies, 
adore.  The  cherubim  and  the  six-winged  sera- 
phim, with  twain  covering  their  feet,  with  twain 
their  heads,  and  with  twain  flying,"'*  say,  together 
with  thousand  thousands  of  archangels,  and  ten 
thousand  times  ten  thousand  of  angels, 's  inces- 
santly, and  with  constant  and  loud  voices,  and 
let  all  the  people  say  it  with  them  :  "  Holy,  holy, 
holy.  Lord  of  hosts,  heaven  and  earth  are  full  of 
His  glory  :  be  I'hou  blessed  for  ever.  Amen."  '^ 
And  afterwards  let  the  high  priest  say  :  For  Thou 
art  truly  holy,  and  most  holy,  the  highest  and 
most  highly  exalted  for  ever.  Holy  also  is  Thy 
only  begotten  Son  our  Lord  and  God,  Jesus 
Christ,  who  in  all  things  ministered  to  His  God 
and  Father,  both  in  Thy  various  creation  and 
Thy  suitable  providence,  and  has  not  overlooked 
lost  mankind.  But  after  the  law  of  nature,  after 
the  exhortations  in  the  positive  law,  after  the 
prophetical  reproofs  and  the  government  of  the 
angels,  when  men  had  perverted  both  the  posi- 
tive law  and  that  of  nature,  and  had  cast  out  of 
their  mind  the  memory  of  the  flood,  the  burn- 


"o  See  Isa.  viii.  20,  LXX. 

"  Josh.  iii.  10,  etc. 

'2  Ps.  Ixxiv.  15. 

■^  Josh.  vi. 

■*  Isa.  vi.  2. 

'5  Dan    vii.  10. 

'*  Isa.  vi.  3 ;   Rom.  i.  25. 


Sec.  II.] 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


489 


ing  of  Sodom,  the  plagues  of  the  Egyptians,  and 
the  slaughters  of  the  inhabitant^  of  Palestine, 
and  being  just  ready  to  perish  universally  after 
an  unparalleled  manner,  He  was  pleased  by  Thy 
good  will  to  become  man,  who  was  man's  Crea- 
tor ;  to  be  under  the  laws,  who  was  the  Legis- 
lator ;  to  be  a  sacrifice,  who  was  an  High  Priest ; 
to  be  a  sheep,  who  was  the  Shepherd.  And  He 
appeased  Thee,  His  God  and  Father,  and  recon- 
ciled Thee  to  the  world,  and  freed  all  men  from 
the  wrath  to  come,  and  was  made  of  a  virgin, 
and  was  in  flesh,  being  God  the  Word,  the  be- 
loved Son,  the  first-born  of  the  whole  creation, 
and  was,  according  to  the  prophecies  which  were 
foretold  concerning  Him  by  Himself,  of  the  seed 
of  David  and  x\braham,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah. 
And  He  was  made  in  the  womb  of  a  virgin,  who 
formed  all  mankind  that  are  born  into  the  world  ; 
He  took  flesh,  who  was  without  flesh  ;  He  who 
was  begotten  before  time,  was  born  in  time  ;  He 
lived  holily,  and  taught  according  to  the  law ; 
He  drove  away  every  sickness  and  every  disease 
from  men,  and  wrought  signs  and  wonders  among 
the  people  ;  and  He  was  partaker  of  meat,  and 
drink,  and  sleep,  who  nourishes  all  that  stand  in 
need  of  food,  and  "  fills  every  living  creature  with 
His  goodness  ;  "  '  "  He  manifested  His  name  to 
those  that  knew  it  not ;  "  2  He  drave  away  igno- 
rance ;  He  revived  piety,  and  fulfilled  Thy  will ; 
He  finished  the  work  which  Thou  gavest  Him  to 
do  ;  and  when  He  had  set  all  these  things  right. 
He  was  seized  by  the  hands  of  the  ungodly,  of 
the  high  priests  and  priests,  falsely  so  called,  and 
of  the  disobedient  people,  by  the  betraying  of 
him  who  was  possessed  of  wickedness  as  with  a 
confirmed  disease  ;  He  suffered  many  things  from 
them,  and  endured  all  sorts  of  ignominy  by  Thy 
permission  ;  He  was  delivered  to  Pilate  the  gov- 
ernor, and  He  that  was  the  Judge  was  judged, 
and  He  that  was  the  Saviour  was  condemned  ; 
He  that  was  impassible  was  nailed  to  the  cross, 
and  He  who  was  by  nature  immortal  died,  and 
He  that  is  the  giver  of  life  was  buried,  that  He 
might  loose  those  for  whose  sake  He  came  from 
suffering  and  death,  and  might  break  the  bonds 
of  the  devil,  and  deliver  mankind  from  his  deceit. 
He  arose  from  the  dead  the  third  day ;  and 
when  He  had  continued  with  His  disciples  forty 
days.  He  was  taken  up  into  the  heavens,  and  is 
sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  Thee,  who  art 
His  God  and  Father.  Being  mindful,  therefore, 
of  those  things  that  He  endured  for  our  sakes, 
we  give  Thee  thanks,  O  God  Almighty,  not  in 
such  a  manner  as  we  ought,  but  as  we  are  able, 
and  fulfil  His  constitution  :  "  For  in  the  same 
night  that  He  was  betrayed,  He  took  bread  "  ^ 
in  His  holy  and  undefiled  hands,  and,  looking 


»  Ps.  cv.  16. 

^  John  xvii.  6,  4. 

^  I  Cor.   xi.  23. 


up  to  Thee  His  God  and  Father,  "He  brake 
it,  and  gave  it  to  His  disciples,  saying,  This  is 
the  mystery  of  the  new  covenant :  take  of  it, 
and  eat.  This  is  my  body,  which  is  broken  for 
many,  for  the  remission  of  sins."  ■*  In  like  man- 
ner also  "  He  took  the  cup,"  and  mixed  it  of 
wine  and  water,  and  sanctified  it,  and  delivered 
it  to  them,  saying :  "  Drink  ye  all  of  this ;  for 
this  is  my  blood  which  is  shed  for  many,  for  the 
remission  of  sins  :  do  this  in  remembrance  of 
me.  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread  and 
drink  this  cup,  ye  do  show  forth  my  death  until 
I  come."  Being  mindful,  therefore,  of  His  pas- 
sion, and  death,  and  resurrection  from  the  dead, 
and  return  into  the  heavens,  and  His  future 
second  appearing,  wherein  He  is  to  come  with 
glory  and  power  to  judge  the  quick  and  the 
dead,  and  to  recompense  to  every  one  accord- 
ing to  his  works,  we  offer  to  Thee,  our  King  and 
our  God,  according  to  His  constitution,  this 
bread  and  this  cup,  giving  Thee  thanks,  through 
Him,  that  Thou  hast  thought  us  worthy  to  stand 
before  Thee,  and  to  sacrifice  to  Thee  ;  and  we 
beseech  Thee  that  Thou  wilt  mercifully  look 
down  upon  these  gifts  which  are  here  set  before 
Thee,  O  Thou  God,  who  standest  in  need  of  none 
of  our  offerings.  And  do  Thou  accept  them, 
to  the  honour  of  Thy  Christ,  and  send  down 
upon  this  sacrifice  Thine  Holy  S])irit,  the  Wit- 
ness of  the  Lord  Jesus'  sufferings,  that  He  may 
show  this  bread  to  be  the  body  of  Thy  Christ, 
and  the  cup  to  be  the  blood  of  Thy  Christ,  that 
those  who  are  partakers  thereof  may  be  strength- 
ened for  piety,  may  obtain  the  remission  of  their 
sins,  may  be  delivered  from  the  devil  and  his 
deceit,  may  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  may 
be  made  worthy  of  Thy  Christ,  and  may  obtain 
eternal  life  upon  Thy  reconciliation  to  them,  O 
Lord  Almighty.  We  fiirther  pray  unto  Thee,  O 
Lord,  for  thy  holy  Church  spread  from  one  end 
of  the  world  to  another,  wliich  Thou  hast  pur- 
chased with  the  precious  blood  of  Thy  C'hrist, 
that  Thou  wilt  preserve  it  unshaken  and  free 
from  disturbance  until  the  end  of  the  world  ; 
for  every  episcopate  who  rightly  divides  the 
word  of  truth,  ^^'e  further  pray  to  Thee  for 
me,  who  am  nothing,  who  offer  to  Thee,  for  the 
whole  presbytery,  for  the  deacons  and  all  the 
clergy,  that  Thou  wilt  make  them  wise,  and  re- 
plenish them  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  We  further 
pray  to  Thee,  O  Lord,  "  for  the  king  and  all  in 
authority,"  5  for  the  whole  army,  that  they  may 
be  peaceable  towards  us,  that  so,  leading  the 
whole  time  of  our  life  in  quietness  and  unanim- 
ity, we  may  glorify  Thee  through  Jesus  Christ, 
who  is  our  hope.  We  further  offer  to  Thee  also 
for  all  those  holy  persons  who  have  pleased 
Thee  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  —  patri- 


*  Matt,  xxvi.;  Markxiv.;   Luke  xxii. 
S  I  Tim.  ii.  2. 


490 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES.        [Book  viii. 


archs,  prophets,  righteous  men,  apostles,  mar- 
tyrs, confessors,  bishops,  presbyters,  deacons, 
sub-deacons,  readers,  singers,  virgins,  widows, 
and  lay  persons,  with  all  whose  names  Thou 
knowest.  We  further  offer  to  Thee  for  this 
people,  that  Thou  wilt  render  them,  to  the 
praise  of  Thy  Christ,  "  a  royal  priesthood  and 
an  holy  nation  ;  "  '  for  those  that  are  in  virgin- 
ity and  purity ;  for  the  widows  of  the  Church  ; 
for  those  in  honourable  marriage  and  child- 
bearing  ;  for  the  infants  of  Thy  people  ,  that 
Thou  wilt  not  permit  any  of  us  to  "  become 
castaways."  We  further  beseech  Thee  also  for 
this  city  and  its  inhabitants  ;  for  those  that  are 
sick  ;  for  those  in  bitter  servitude  ;  for  those  in 
banishiBents  ;  for  those  in  prison  ;  for  those  that 
travel  by  water  or  by  land ;  that  Thou,  the 
helper  and  assister  of  all  men,  wilt  be  their  sup- 
porter. We  further  also  beseech  Thee  for  those 
that  hate  us  and  persecute  us  for  Thy  name's 
sake  ;  for  those  that  are  without,  and  wander  out 
of  the  way ;  that  Thou  wilt  convert  them  to 
goodness,  and  pacify  their  anger.  We  further 
also  beseech  Thee  for  the  catechumens  of  the 
Church,  and  for  those  that  are  vexed  by  the  ad- 
versary, and  for  our  brethren  tlie  penitents,  that 
Thou  wilt  perfect  the  first  in  the  faith,  that  Thou 
wilt  deliver  the  second  from  the  energy  of  the 
evil  one,  and  that  Thou  wilt  accept  the  repent- 
ance of  the  last,  and  forgive  both  them  and  us 
our  offences.  We  further  offer  to  Thee  also  for 
the  good  temi^erature  of  the  air,  and  the  fer- 
tihty  of  the  fruits,  that  so,  partaking  perpetually 
of  the  good  things  derived  from  Thee,  we  may 
praise  Thee  without  ceasing,  "  who  gavest  food 
to  all  flesh."  ^  We  further  beseech  Thee  also 
for  those  who  are  absent  on  a  just  cause,  that 
Thou  wilt  keep  us  all  in  piety,  and  gather  us  to- 
gether in  the  kingdom  of  Thy  Christ,  the  God 
of  all  sensible  and  intelligent  nature,  our  King  ; 
that  Thou  wouldst  keep  us  immoveable,  un- 
blameable,  and  unreprovable  :  for  to  Thee  be- 
longs all  glory,  and  worship,  and  thanksgiving, 
honour  and  adoration,  the  P'ather,  with  the  Son, 
and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  both  now  and  always, 
and  for  everlasting,  and  endless  ages  for  ever. 
And  let  all  the  people  say,  Amen.  And  let  the 
bishop  say,  "  The  peace  of  God  be  with  you 
all."  And  let  all  the  people  say,  "And  with  thy 
spirit."     And  let  the  deacon  proclaim  again  :  — 

THE    BIDDING     PI^WER     FOR    THE     FAITHFUL   AFTER 
THE    DIVINE   OBLATION. 

xiii.  Let  US  Still  further  beseech  God  through 
His  Christ,  and  let  us  beseech  Him  on  account 
of  the  gift  which  is  offered  to  the  Lord  (xod, 
that  the  good  God  will  accept  it,  through  the 


'  I  Pet.  ii.  9. 
*  Ps.  cxxxvi.  25, 


mediation  of  His  Christ,  upon  His  heavenly  al- 
tar, for  a  sweet-smelling  savour.  Let  us  pray 
for  this  church  and  people.  Let  us  pray  for 
every  episcopate,  every  presbytery,  all  the  dea- 
cons and  ministers  in  Christ,  for  the  whole  con- 
gregation, that  the  Lord  will  keep  and  preserve 
them  all.  Let  us  pray  "  for  kings  and  those  in 
authority,"  that  they  may  be  peaceable  toward 
us,  "  that  so  we  may  have  and  lead  a  quiet  and 
peaceable  life  in  all  godliness  and  honesty."  ^ 
Let  us  be  mindful  of  the  holy  martyrs,  that  we 
may  be  thought  worthy  to  be  partakers  of  their 
trial.  Let  us  pray  for  those  that  are  departed  in 
the  faith.  Let  us  pray  for  the  good  temperature 
of  the  air,  and  the  perfect  maturity  of  the  fruits. 
Let  us  pray  for  those  that  are  newly  enlightened, 
that  they  may  be  strengthened  in  the  faith,  and 
all  may  be  mutually  comforted  by  one  another.'* 
Raise  us  up,  O  God,  by  Thy  grace.  Let  us 
stand  up,  and  dedicate  ourselves  to  God,  through 
His  Christ.  And  let  the  bishop  say :  O  God, 
who  art  great,  and  whose  name  is  great,  who  art 
great  in  counsel  and  mighty  in  works,  the  God 
and  Father  of  Thy  holy  child  Jesus,  our  Saviour ; 
look  down  upon  us,  and  upon  this  Thy  flock, 
which  Thou  hast  chosen  by  Him  to  the  glory  of 
Tliy  name ;  and  sanctify  our  body  and  soul,  and 
grant  us  the  favour  to  be  "  made  pure  from  all 
filthiness  of  flesh  and  spirit,"  5  and  may  obtain 
the  good  things  laid  up  for  us,  and  do  not  ac- 
count any  of  us  unworthy ;  but  be  Thou  our 
comforter,  helper,  and  protector,  through  Thy 
Christ,  with  whom  glory,  honour,  praise,  doxol- 
ogy,  and  thanksgiving  be  to  Thee  and  to  the 
Holy  Ghost  for  ever.  Amen.  And  after  that 
all  have  said  Amen,  let  the  deacon  say  :  Let  us 
attend.  And  let  the  bishop  speak  thus  to  the 
people  :  Holy  things  for  holy  persons.  And  let 
the  people  answer :  There  is  One  that  is  holy ; 
there  is  one  Lord,  one  Jesus  Christ,  blessed  for 
ever,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father.  Amen. 
"  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth 
peace,  good-will  among  men.  Hosanna  to  the 
son  of  David  !  Blessed  be  He  that  cometh  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord,"  being  the  Lord  God 
who  appeared  to  us,  "  Hosanna  in  the  highest."  ^ 
And  after  that,  let  the  bishop  partake,  tlicn  the 
presbyters,  and  deacons,  and^  sub-deacons,  and 
the  readers,  and  the  singers,  and  the  ascetics ; 
and  then  of  the  women,  the  deaconesses,  and 
the  virgins,  and  the  widows ;  then  the  children  ; 
and  then  all  the  people  in  order,  with  reverence 
and  godly  fear,  without  tumult.  And  let  the 
bishop  give  the  oblation,  saying.  The  body  of 
Christ ;  and  let  him  that  receive th  say.  Amen. 


3  I  Tim   ii.  2. 

'■  This  is  not  a  fair  translation  of  the  Greek,  which,  as  the  text 
stands,  does  not  make  sense.  One  V.  MS.  reads,  "  Let  us  beseech  m 
behalf  of  one  another." 

5  2  Cor.  VII.  I. 

•>  Luke  it.  14;   Matt   xxi   9. 

'  The  Coptic  adds,  "  the  rest  of  the  clergy  iu  llieir  order." 


Sec.  III.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


491 


And  let  the  deacon  take  tlie  cup  ;  and  luhcii  he 
gives  it,  say,  The  blood  of  Christ,  the  cup  of  life  ; 
and  let  him  that  drinketh  say.  Amen."-  And  let 
the  thirty-third  psalm  be  said,  while  the  rest  are 
partaking  ;  and  w/ien  all,-  both  men  and  women, 
have  pai'taken,  let  the  deacons  carry  what  remains 
into  the  vestry.  And  when  the  singer  has  done, 
let  the  deacon  say  :  — 

THE    BIDDING    PR.^VER   AFTER   THE    PARTICIPATION. 

XIV.  Now  we  have  received  the  precious  body 
and  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  let  us  give 
thanks  to  Him  who  has  thought  us  worthy  to 
partake  of  these  His  holy  ^  mysteries  ;  and  let  us 
beseech  Him  that  it  may  not  be  to  us  for  con- 
demnation, but  for  salvation,  to  the  advantage 
of  soul  and  body,  to  the  preservation  of  piety, 
to  the  remission  of  sins,  and  to  the  life  of  the 
world  to  come.  Let  us  arise,  and  by  the  grace 
of  Christ  let  us  dedicate  ourselves  to  God,  to  the 
only  unbegotten  God,  and  to  His  Christ.  And 
let  the  bishop  give  thanks  :  — 

THE  for:m  of  prayer  after  the  participation. 

XV.  O  Lord  God  Almighty,  the  Father  of  Thy 
Christ,  Thy  blessed  Son,  who  hearest  those  who 
call  upon  'rhee  with  uprightness,  who  also  know- 
est  the  supplications  of  those  who  are  silent ;  we 
thank  Thee  that  Thou  hast  thought  us  worthy  to 
partake  of  Thy  holy  mysteries,  which  Thou  hast 
bestowed  upon  us,  for  the  entire  confirmation 
of  those  things  we  have  rightly  known,  for  the 
preservation  of  piety,  for  the  remission  of  our 
offences";  for  the  name  of  thy  Christ  is  called 
upon  us,  and  we  are  joined  To  Thee.  O  Thou 
that  hast  separated  us  from  the  communion  of 
the  ungodly,  unite  us  with  those  that  are  conse- 
crated to  Thee  in  holiness ;  confirm  us  in  the 
truth,  by  the  assistance  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit ;  re- 
veal to  us  what  things  we  are  ignorant  of,  supply 
what  things  we  are  defective  in,  confirm  us  in 
what  things  we  already  know,  preserve  the  priests 
blameless  in  Thy  worship  ;  keep  the  kings  in 
peace,  and  the  rulers  in  righteousness,  the  air 
in  a  good  temperature,  the  fruits  in  fertility,  the 
world  in  an  all-powerfiil  providence  ;  pacify  the 
warring  nations,  convert  those  that  are  gone 
astray,  sanctify  Thy  people,  keep  those  that  are 
in  virginity,  preserve  those  in  the  faith  that  are  in 
marriage,  strengthen  those  that  are  in  purity, 
bring  the  infants  to  complete  age,  confirm  the 
newly  admitted  ;  instruct  the  catechumens,  and 
render  them  worthy  of  admission  ;  and  gather 
us  all  together  into  Thy  kingdom  of  heaven,  by 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  with  whom  glory,  honour, 


'  The  Coptic  has,  "  and  let  them  sing  psalms  during  the  distribu- 
tion, until  the  whole  congregation  has  received  it." 

2  The  Coptic  has,  "  let  all  the  women  receive  it  also." 

3  The  Coptic,  "  these  His  holy  and  immortal  mysteries,  which 
are  numbered  in  heaven." 


and  worship  be  to  Thee,  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  for 
ever.  Amen.  And  let  the  deacon  ■  say :  Bow 
down  to  4  God  through  His  Christ,  and  receive 
the  blessing.  And  let  the  bishop  add  this  prayer, 
and  say  :  O  God  Almighty,  the  true  Ciod,  to 
whom  nothing  can  be  compared,  who  art  every- 
where, and  present  in  all  things,  and  art  in  noth- 
ing as  one  of  the  things  themselves  ;  who  art 
not  bounded  by  place,  nor  grown  old  by  time  ; 
who  art  not  terminated  by  ages,  nor  deceived 
by  words ;  who  art  not  subject  to  generation, 
and  wantest  no  guardian ;  who  art  above  all 
corruption,  free  from  all  change,  and  invariable 
by  nature  ;  "who  inhabitest  light  inaccessible  ;  "  5 
who  art  by  nature  invisible,  and  yet  art  known 
to  all  reasonable  natures  who  seek  Thee  with  a 
good  mind,  and  art  compreliended  by  those  that 
seek  after  Thee  with  a  good  mind  ;  the  (iod  of 
Israel,  Thy  people  which  truly  see,  and  which 
have  believed  in  Christ :  Be  gracious  to  me, 
and  hear  me,  for  Thy  name's  sake,  and  bless 
those  that  bow  down  their  necks  unto  Thee, 
and  grant  them  the  petitions  of  their  hearts,  which 
are  for  their  good,  and  do  not  reject  any  one  of 
them  from  Thy  kingdom  ;  but  sanctify,  guard, 
cover,  and  assist  them ;  deliver  them  from  the 
adversary  and  every  enemy  ;  keep  their  houses, 
and  guard  "  their  comings  in  and  their  goings 
out."  ^  For  to  Thee  belongs  the  glory,  praise, 
majesty,  worship,  and  adoration,  and  to  I'hy  Son 
Jesus,  Thy  Christ,  our  Lord  and  God  and  King, 
and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  now  and  always,  for  ever 
and  ever.  Amen.  And^  the  deacon  shall  say, 
Depart  in  peace?  These  constitutions  concern- 
ing this  mystical  worship,  we,  the  apostles,  do 
ordain  for  you,  the  bishops,  presbyters,  and 
deacons. 

SEC.   III.  —  ordination   and    duties    of    the 

CLERGY. 

CONCERNING   THE    ORDINATION    OF     PRESBYTERS 

THE  CONSTITUTION  OF   JOHN,  WHO  WAS    BELOVED 
BY    THE    LORD. 

XVI.  Concerning  the  ordination  of  presbyters, 
1 9  who  am  loved  by  the  Lord  make  this  consti- 
tution for  you  the  bishops  :  IViien  thou  ordaincst 
a  presbyter,  O  bishop,  lay  thy  hand  upon  his  head, 


*  The  Coptft  has,  "  the  Lord." 

5  I  Tim.  vi.  16. 

6  Ps.  cxxi.  8. 

7  The  Coptic  adds:  "  And  let  the  presbyters  and  deacons  watch 
the  few  fragments  that  are  left,  that  they  may  perceive  that  there  is 
nothing  superfluous;  lest  they  fall  into  the  great  judgment,  like  the 
sons  of  Aaron  and  F-li,  whom  the  Holy  Spirit  destroyed,  because  they 
did  not  refrain  from  despising  the  sacrifice  of  the  Lord:  how  much 
more  those  who  despise  the  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord,  thmking  that 
to  be  merely  material  food  which  they  receive,  and  not  spiritual!  " 

8  The  Coptic  inserts,  "  when  they  have  been  blessed." 

9  One  v.  MS.  has  this  note:  "John  the  evangelist,  the  brother  of 
James,  was  banished  by  Domitian  to  the  island  of  Patmos,  and  there 
composed  the  Gospel  according  to  him.  He  died  a  natural  death,  in 
the  third  year  of  Trajan's  reign,  in  Ephesus.  His  remains  were 
sought,  but  have  not  been  found." 


492 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  VIII. 


in  the  presence  of  the  presbyters  and  deacons,''  and 
pray,  saying :  6  Lord  Almighty,  our  Cxod,  who 
hast  created  all  things  by  Christ,  and  dost  in  like 
manner  take  care  of  the  whole  world  by  Him ; 
for  He  who  had  power  to  make  different  crea- 
tures, has  also  power  to  take  care  of  them,  ac- 
cording to  their  different  natures ;  on  which 
account,  O  God,  Thou  takest  care  of  immortal 
beings  by  bare  preservation,  but  of  those  that 
are  mortal  by  succession  —  of  the  soul  by  the 
provision  of  laws,  of  the  body  by  the  supply  of 
its  wants.  Do  Thou  therefore  now  also  look 
down  upon  Thy  holy  Church,  and  increase  the 
same,  and  multiply  those  that  preside  in  it,  and 
grant  them  power,  that  they  may  labour  both  in 
word  and  work  for  the  edification  of  Thy  people. 
Do  Thou  now  also  look  down  upon  this  Thy 
servant,  who  is  put  into  the  presbytery  by  the 
vote  and  determination  of  the  whole  clergy  ;  and 
do  Thou  replenish  him  with  the  Spirit  of  grace 
and  counsel,  to  assist  and  govern  Thy  people 
with  a  pure  heart,  in  the  same  manner  as  Thou 
didst  look  down  upon  Thy  chosen  people,  and 
didst  command  Moses  to  choose  elders,  whom 
Thou  didst  fill  with  Thy  Spirit.^  Do  Thou  also 
now,  O  Lord,  grant  this,  and  preserve  in  us  the 
Spirit  of  Thy  grace,  that  this  person,  being  filled 
with  the  gifts  of  healing  and  the  word  of  teach- 
ing, may  in  meekness  instruct  Thy  people,  and 
sincerely  serve  Thee  with  a  pure  mind  and  a 
willing  soul,  and  may  fully  discharge  the  holy 
ministrations  for  Thy  people,  through  Thy  Christ, 
with  whom  glory,  honour,  and  worship  be  to 
Thee,  and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  ever.     Amen. 

CONCERNING  THE   ORDINATION   OF   DEACONS  —  THE 
CONSTITUTION   OF   PHILIP. 

XVII.  Concerning  the  ordination  of  deacons,  I 
Philip  3  make  this  constitution  :  Thou  shalt  or- 
dain a  deacon,  O  bishop,  by  laying  thy  hands 
upon  him  in  the  presence  of  the  whole  presby- 
tery, and  of  the  deacons,  and  shalt  pray,  and 
say  :  -^ 

THE  FORM   OF   PR.^YER    FOR   THE  ORDINATION   OF  A 
DEACON. 

XVIII.  O  God  Almighty,  the  true  and  faithful 
God,  who  art  rich  unto  all  that  call  upon  Thee 
in  truth,  who  art  fearful  in  counsels,  and  wise  in 
understanding,  who  art  powerful  and»  great,  hear 
our  prayer,  O  Lord,  and  let  Thine  ears  receive 
our  supplication,  and  "  cause  the  light  of  Thy 
countenance  to  shine  upon  this  Thy  servant," 


'  The  Coptic  adds:  "While  you  pray,  he  is  ordained;  and  thou 
shalt  ordain  the  deacon  also  according  to  this  constitution  alone." 

*  Ex.  xviii.,  xxiv.,  xxviii. 

3  One  v.  MS.  has  the  following  note:  "Philip  having  proclaimed 
the  life-giving  word  to  the  Asiatic  diocese,  has  been  buried  in  Hierap- 
olis  of  Phrygia  along  with  his  daughters,  having  been  crowned  with 
martyrdom  m  the  reign  of  the  Emperor  Domitian.  Philip,  who  has 
the  daughters,  is  one  of  the  seven ;  it  was  he  also  who  baptized  the 
eunuch." 


who  is  to  be  ordained  for  Thee  to  the  ofifice  of 
a  deacon  ;  and  replenish  him  with  Thy  Holy 
Spirit,  and  with  power,  as  Thou  didst  replenish 
Stephen,  who  was  Thy  martyr,  and  follower  of 
the  sufferings  of  Thy  Christ.-*  Do  Thou  render 
him  worthy  to  discharge  acceptably  the  ministra- 
tion of  a  deacon,  steadily,  unblameably,  and  with- 
out reproof,  that  thereby  he  may  attain  an  higher 
degree,  through  the  mediation  of  Thy  only  be- 
gotten Son,  with  whom  glory,  honour,  and  wor- 
ship be  to  Thee  and  the  Holy  Spirit  for  ever. 
Amen. 

CONCERNING  THE  DEACONESS  —  THE   CONSTITUTION 
OF    BARTHOLOMEW, 

XIX.  Concerning  a  deaconess,  I  Bardiolomew  s 
make  this  constitution  :  O  bishop,  thou  shalt  lay 
thy  hands  upon  her  in  the  presence  of  the  pres- 
bytery, and  of  the  deacons  and  deaconesses,  and 
shalt  say :  — 

THE  FORM    OF   PRAYER   FOR   THE   ORDINATION   OF  A 
DEACONESS. 

XX.  O  Eternal  God,  the  Father  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Creator  of  man  and  of  woman, 
who  didst  replenish  with  the  Spirit  Miriam,  and 
Deborah,  and  Anna,  and  Huldah  ;  ^  who  didst 
not  disdain  that  Thy  only  begotten  Son  should 
be  born  of  a  woman  ;  who  also  in  the  tabernacle 
of  the  testimony,  and  in  the  temple,  didst  ordain 
women  to  be  keepers  of  Thy  holy  gates,  —  do 
Thou  now  also  look  down  upon  this  Thy  servant, 
who  is  to  be  ordained  to  the  office  of  a  deaconess, 
and  grant  her  Thy  Holy  Spirit,  and  "  cleanse  her 
from  all  filthiness  of  flesh  and  spirit,"'  that  she 
may  worthily  discharge  the  work  which  is  com- 
mitted to  her  to  Thy  glory,  and  the  praise  of 
Thy  Christ,  with  whom  glory  and  adoration  be 
to  Thee  and  the  Holy  Spirit  for  ever.     Amen. 

CONCERNING    THE     SUB-DEACONS THE     CONSTITU- 
TION  OF  THOMAS. 

XXI.  Concerning  the  sub-deacons,  I  Thomas  ^ 
make  this  constitution  for  you  the  bishops :  9 
When  thou  dost  ordain  a  sub-deacon, '°  O  bishop, 
thou  shalt  lay  thy  hands  upon  him,  and  say  :  O 
Lord  God,  the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  and 
of  all  things  that  are  therein  ;  who  also  in  the 
tabernacle  of  the  testimony  didst  appoint  over- 
seers and  keepers  of  Thy  holy  vessels  ; "  do  Thou 
now  look  down  upon  this  Thy  servant,  appointed 


'*  Acts  vi.  and  vii. 

5  One  v.  MS.  has  the  following  note:  "  Bartholomew  preached  the 
Gospel  according  to  Matthew  to  the  Indians,  who  also  has  been  buried 
in  India." 

6  Ex.  XV.  2o:  Judg.  iv.  4;  Luke  ii.  36;  2  Kings  xxii.  14. 

7  2  Cor.  vii.  I. 

8  One  v.  MS.  has  the  following  note:  "Thomas  preached  to  the 
Parthians,  Medes,  Persians,  Germans,  Hyrcanians,  Bactrians,  Bar- 
dians,  who  also,  having  been  a  martyr,  lies  in  Edessa  of  Osdroene." 

9  The  words  "  for  you  the  bishops"  are  omitted  in  the  Oxford  MS. 
•°  fSee  vol.  V.  Elucidation  XIV.  p.  417.] 

"  Num.  iii. ;  I  Chron.  vi. 


Sec.  III.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


493 


a  sub-deacon ;  and  grant  him  the  Holy  Spirit, 
that  he  may  worthily  handle  the  vessels  of  Thy 
ministry,  and  do  Thy  will  always,  through  Thy 
Christ,  with  whom  glory,  honour,  and  worship  be 
to  Thee  and  to  the  Holy  Spirit  for  ever.    Amen. 

CONCERNING    THE     READERS THE     CONSTITUTION 

OF   M.'^TTHEW. 

xxn.  Concerning  readers,'  I  Matthew,  also 
called  Levi,  who  was  once  a  tax-gatherer,  make 
a  constitution  :  Ordain  a  reader  by  laying  thy 
hands  upon  him,  and  pray  unto  God,  and  say : 
O  Eternal  God,  who  art  plenteous  in  mercy  and 
compassions,  who  hast  made  manifest  the  con- 
stitution of  the  world  by  Thy  operations  therein, 
and  keepest  the  number  of  Thine  elect,  do  Thou 
also  now  look  down  upon  Thy  servant,  who  is  to 
be  entrusted  to  read  Thy  Holy  Scriptures  to  Thy 
people,  and  give  him  Thy  Holy  Spirit,  the  pro- 
phetic Spirit.  Thou  who  didst  instruct  Esdras 
Thy  servant  to  read  Thy  laws  to  the  people,^  do 
Thou  now  also  at  our  prayers  instruct  Thy  ser- 
vant, and  grant  that  he  may  without  blame  per- 
fect the  work  committed  to  him,  and  thereby  be 
declared  worthy  of  an  higher  degree,  through 
Christ,  with  whom  glory  and  worship  be  to  Thee 
and  to  the  Holy  Ghost  for  ever.     Amen. 

CONCERNING    THE     CONFESSORS  —  THE     CONSTITU- 
TION   OF   JAMES   THE    SON    OF   ALPHEUS. 

XXIII.  And  I  James,  the  son  of  Alphaeus,  make 
a  constitution  in  regard  to  confessors  :  A  con- 
fessor is  not  ordained;  for  he  is  so  by  choice  and 
patience,  and  is  -worthy  of  great  honour,  as  hav- 
itig  confessed  the  fianie  of  God,  and  of  His  Christ, 
before  nations  and  kings.  But  if  there  he  occa- 
sion,ho.  is  to  be  ordained  3  either  a  bishop,  priest, 
or  deacon.  But  if  any  one  of  the  confessors  toho 
is  not  ordained  snatches  to  himself  any  such  dig- 
nity  upon  account  of  his  confession,  let  the  same 
person  be  deprived  and  rejected ;  for  he  is  not  in 
such  an  office,  since  he  has  denied  the  constitution 
of  Christ,  and  is  "  worse  than  an  infidel.''  ^ 

THE    SAME    apostle's    CONSTITUTION     CONCERNING 
VIRGINS. 

XXIV.  I,  the  same,  make  a  constitution  in  re- 
gard to  virgins  :  A  virgin  is  not  ordained,  for 
we  have  no  such  command  from  the  Lord  ;^  for 
this  is  a  state  of  voluntary  trial,  7iot  for  the  re- 
proach of  marriage,  but  on  account  of  leisure  for 
piety. 


THE    CONSTITUTION     OF     LEBB^US,    WHO    WAS    SUR- 
NAMED   THADD.^US,    CONCERNING    WIDOWS. 

XXV.  And  I  Lebbseus,^  surnamed  Thaddseus, 
make  this  constitution  in  regard  to  widows  :  A 
widow  is  not  ordained ;  yet  if  she  has  lost  her 
husband  a  great  while,  and  has  lived  soberly  and 
u?iblanieably,  and  has  taken  extraordinary  care 
of  her  family,  as  Judith  ^  and  Anna  '^  —  those 
women  of  great  reputation  —  let  her  be  chosen 
into  the  order  of  widoius.  But  if  she  has  lately 
lost  her  yokefellow,  let  her  not  be  believed,  but  let 
her  youth  be  judged  of  by  the  time  ;  for  the  affec- 
tions do  sometimes  grow  aged  with  men,  if  they 
be  710 1  restrained  by  a  better  bridle. 

THE   SAME   APOSTLE   CONCERNING   THE    EXORCIST. 

XXVI.  I  the  same  make  a  constitution  in  re- 
gard to  an  exorcist.  An  exorcist  is  not  ordained. 
For  it  is  a  trial  of  voluntatj  goodness,  and  of 
the  grace  of  God  through  Christ  by  the  inspira- 
tion of  the  Holy  Spirit.  For  he  who  has  received 
the  gift  of  healing  is  declared  by  revelation  from 
God,  the  grace  which  is  in  him  being  manifest  to 
all.  But  if  there  be  occasion  for  him,  he  must 
be  ordained  9  a  bishop,  or  a  presbyter,  or  a 
deacon. 

SIMON   THE    CANAANITE    CONCERNING   THE     NTJMBER 
NECESSARY    FOR   THE   ORDINATION    OF    A    BISHOP. 

XXVII. '°  And  I  Simon  the  Canaanite"  make  a 
constitution  to  determine  by  how  many  a  bishop 
ought  to  be  elected.  Let  a  bishop  be  ordained 
by  three  or  two  bishops ;  but  if  any  one  be  or- 
dained by  one  bishop,  let  him  be  deprived,  both 
himself  and  he  that  ordained  him.  But  if  there 
be  a  necessity  that  he  have  only  one  to  ordain 
him,  because  more  bishops  cannot  come  together, 
as  in  time  of  persecution,  or  for  such  like  causes, 
let  him  bring  the  suffrage  of  permission  from 
more  bishops. 

THE  SAME  apostle's  CANONS  CONCERNING  BISHOPS, 
PRESBYTERS,  DEACONS,  AND  THE  REST  OF  THE 
CLERGY. 

XXVIII.  Concerning  '^  the  canons  I  the  same 
make  a  constitution.  A  bishop  blesses,  but  does 
not  receive  the  blessing.     He  lays  on  hands,  or- 


•  The  Oxford  MS.  has  no  part  of  this  chapter.  It  reads:  "A 
reader  is  appointed  when  the  bishop  gives  him  a  book;  for  there  is  no 
imposition  of  hands." 

-  Neh.  viii. 

3  The  Coptic  reads,  "  let  him  be  ordained." 

^  I  Tim.  V.  8. 

i  I  Cor.  vii.  25. 


<>  The  two  V.  Mss.  have  the  following  note:  "  Thaddajus,  also 
called  Lebba;ns,  and  who  was  surnamed  Judas  the  Zealot,  preached 
the  truth  to  the  Ede.ssenes  and  the  people  of  Mesopotamia  when 
Abgarus  ruled  over  Edessa,  and  has  been  buried  in  Berylus  of  Phoe- 
nicia." 

^  Judith  xvi.  21,  23. 

8  Luke  ii.  36,  etc. 

9  The  Coptic  has,  "  let  him  be  ordained." 

"o  Ch.  x.vvii.,  xxviii.,  xxx.-xxxiv.,  and  ch.  xlii.-xlvii.,  occur  in 
Syriac  and  Coptic,  as  well  as  in  the  Greek  mss. 

■'  One  V.  MS.  has  the  following  note:  "  Simon  the  Canaanite, 
preacher  of  the  truth,  is  crowned  with  martyrdom  in  Judea  in  the 
reign  of  Domitian." 

1-  1  he  words  from  "concerning"  to  "  constitution"  are  omitted  in 
the  Oxford  MS.,  in  Syriac,  and  Coptic. 


494 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    HOLY    APOSTLES. 


[Book  VIII, 


dains,  ofifers,  receives  the  blessing  from  bishops, 
but  by  no  means  from  presbyters.  A  bishop  de- 
prives any  clergyman  who  deserves  deprivation, 
excepting  a  bishop;  for  of  himself  he, has  not 
power  to  do  that.  A  presbyter  blesses,  but  does 
not  receive  the  blessing ;  yet  does  he  receive  the 
blessing  from  the  bishop  or  a  fellow-presbyter. 
In  like  manner  does  he  give  it  to  a  fellow-pres- 
byter. He  lays  on  hands,  but  does  not  ordain ; 
he  does  not  deprive,  yet  does  he  separate  those 
that  are  under  him,  if  they  be  liable  to  such  a 
punishment.  A  deacon  does  not  bless,  does  not 
give  the  blessing,  but  receives  it  from  the  bishop 
and  presbyter  :  he  does  not  baptize,  he  does  not 
offer  ;  but  when  a  bishop  or  presbyter  has  offered, 
he  distributes  to  the  people,  not  as  a  priest,  but 
as  one  that  ministers  to  the  priests.  But  it  is 
not  lawful  for  any  one  of  the  other  clergy  to  do 
the  work  of  a  deacon.  A  deaconess  does  not 
bless,  nor  perform  anything  belonging  to  the 
office  of  presbyters  or  deacons,  but  only  is  to 
keep  the  doors,  and  to  minister  to  the  presbyters 
in  the  baptizing  of  women,  on  account  of  de- 
cency. A  deacon  separates  a  sub-deacon,  a 
reader,  a  singer,  and  a  deaconess,  if  there  be  any 
occasion,  in  the  absence  of  a  presbyter.  It  is 
not  lawful  for  a  sub-deacon  to  separate  either 
one  of  the  clergy  or  laity ;  nor  for  a  reader,  nor 
for  a  singer,  nor  for  a  deaconess,  for  they  are  the 
ministers  to  the  deacons. 


SEC.  IV. CERTAIN    PRAYERS    AND    LAWS. 

CONCERNING   THE    BLESSING   OF  WATER   AND   OIL  — 
THE    CONSTITUTION    OF    MATTHIAS. 

XXIX.'  Concerning  the  water  and  the  oil,  I 
Matthias  make  a  constitution.  Let  the  bishop 
bless  the  water,  or  the  oil.  But  if  he  be  not 
there,  let  the  presbyter  bless  it,  the  deacon 
standing  by.  But  if  the  bishop  be  present,  let 
the  presbyter  and  deacon  stand  by,  and  let  him 
say  thus  :  O  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  powers, 
the  creator  of  the  waters,  and  the  supplier  of 
oil,  who  art  compassionate,  and  a  lover  of  man- 
kind, who  hast  given  water  for  drink  and  for 
cleansing,  and  oil  to  give  man  a  cheerful  and 
joyful  countenance  ;  ^  do  Thou  now  also  sanctify 
this  water  and  this  oil  through  Thy  Christ,  in 
the  name  of  him  or  her  that  has  offered  them, 
and  grant  them  a  power  to  restore  health,  to 
drive  away  diseases,  to  banish  demons,  and  to 
disperse  all  snares  through  Christ  our  hope,  with 
whom  glory,  honour,  and  worship  be  to  Thee, 
and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  ever.     Amen. 

'  This  chapter  is  not  found  in  the  Coptic  and  Syriac.  One  V. 
MS.  has  the  following  note:  "  Matthew  (probably  a  mistake  for  Mat- 
thias) taught  the  doctrines  of  Christ  in  Judea,  and  was  one  of  the 
seventy  disciples.  After  the  ascension  of  Christ  he  was  numbered 
with  the  twelve  apostles,  instead  of  Judas,  who  was  the  betrayer.  He 
lies  in  Jerusalem." 

2  Ps.  civ.  15. 


THE     SAME     apostle's     CONSTITUTION     CONCERNING 
FIRST-FRUITS   AND    TITHES. 

XXX.  1 3  the  same  make  a  constitution  in  re- 
gard to  first-fruits  and  tithes.  Let  all  first-fruits 
be  brought  to  the  bishop,  and  to  the  presbyters, 
and  to  the  deacons,-*  for  their  maintenance ;  but 
let  all  the  tithe  be  for  the  maintenance  of  the 
rest  of  the  clergy,  and  of  the  virgins  and  widows, 
and  of  those  under  the  trial  of  poverty.  For  the 
first-fruits  belong  to  the  priests,  and  to  those 
deacons  that  minister  to  them. 

THE   SAME   apostle's    CONSTITUTIONS    CONCERNING 
THE    REMAINING   OBLATIONS. 

XXXI.  I  the  same  make  a  constitution  in 
regard  to  remainders.  Those  eulogies  which  re- 
main at  the  mysteries,  let  the  deacons  distribute 
them  among  the  clergy,  according  to  the  mind 
of  the  bishop  or  the  presbyters  :  to  a  bishop,  four 
parts  ;  to  a  presbyter,  three  5  parts  ;  to  a  deacon, 
tvvo^  parts;  and  to  the  rest  of  the  sub-deacons, 
or  readers,  or  singers,  or  deaconesses,  one  part. 
For  this  is  good  and  acceptable  in  the  sight  of 
God,  that  every  one  be  honoured  according  to 
his  dignity ;  for  the  Church  is  the  school,  not 
of  confusion,  but  of  good  order. 

VARIOUS  CANONS   OF   PAUL  THE  APOSTLE   CONCERN- 
ING    THOSE     THAT     OFFER     THEMSELVES     TO     BE 

BAPTIZED WHOM     WE    ARE    TO     RECEIVE,    AND 

WHOM    TO    REJECT. 

xxxii.  /  also,  Paitl^  the  least  of  the  apostles, 
do  make  the  following  constitutions  for  yon,  the 
bishops,  and  presbyters,  and  deacons,  concerning 
canons.  Those  that  first  come  to  the  mystery 
of  godliness,  let  them  be  brought  to  the  bishop 
or  to  the  presbyters  by  the  deacons,  and  let 
them  be  examined  as  to  the  causes  wherefore 
they  come  to  the  word  of  the  Lord ;  and  let 
those  that  bring  them  exactly  inquire  about  their 
character,  and  give  them  their  testimony.  Let 
their  manners  and  their  life  be  inquired  into, 
and  whether  they  be  slaves  or  freemen.  And  if 
any  one  be  a  slave,  let  him  be  asked  who  is  his 
master.  If  he  be  slave  to  one  of  the  faithful, 
let  his  master  be  asked  if  he  can  give  him  a  good 
character.  If  he  cannot,  let  him  be  rejected, 
until  he  show  himself  to  be  worthy  to  his  master. 
But  if  he  does  give  him  a  good  character,  let 
him  be  admitted.     But  if  he  be  household  slave 


3  The  Oxford  MS.  reads:  "I  the  same,  Simon  the  Canaanite, 
make  a  constitution." 

*  "  Deacons"  omitted  in  Oxford  MS.  and  in  Coptic. 

S  "  Two,"  Oxford  MS. 

'>  "  One,"  Oxford  MS. 

'  One  V.  MS.  has  the  following  instead  of  the  title:  "  Paul,  the 
teacher  of  the  Gentiles,  having  prclaimed  the  Gospel  of  Christ  to  the 
GentilL-s  from  Jerusalem  even  to  Illyricum,  was  cut  off  in  Rome  while 
teaching  the  truth,  by  Nero  and  King  Agrippa,  being  beheaded,  and 
has  been  buried  in  Rome  itself." 


Sec.  IV.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


495 


to  an  heathen,  let  him  be  taught  to  please  his 
master,  that  the  word  be  not  blasphemed.  If, 
then,  he  have  a  wife,  or  a  woman  hath  an  hus- 
band, let  them  be  taught  to  be  content  with  each 
other ;  but  if  they  be  unmarried,  let  them  learn 
not  to  commit  fornication,  but  to  enter  into  law- 
ful marriage.  But  if  his  master  be  one  of  the 
faithful,  and  knows  that  he  is  guilty  of  fornica- 
tion, and  yet  does  not  give  him  a  wife,  or  to  the 
woman  an  husband,  let  him  be  separated ;  but 
if  any  one  hath  a  demon,  let  him  indeed  be 
taught  piety,  but  not  received  into  communion 
before  he  be  cleansed  ;  yet  if  death  be  near, 
let  him  be  received.  If  any  one  be  a  maintainer 
of  harlots,  let  him  either  leave  off  to  prostitute 
women,  or  else  let  him  be  rejected.  If  a  harlot 
come,  let  her  leave  off  whoredom,  or  else  let  her 
be  rejected.  If  a  maker  of  idols  come,  let  him 
either  leave  off  his  employment,  or  let  him  be 
rejected.  If  one  belonging  to  the  theatre '  come, 
whether  it  be  man  or  woman,  or  charioteer,  or 
dueller,  or  racer,  or  player  of  prizes,  or  Olympic 
gamester,  or  one  that  plays  on  the  pipe,  on  the 
lute,  or  on  the  harp  at  those  games,  or  a  dancing- 
master,  or  an  huckster,^  either  let  them  leave  off 
their  employments,  or  let  them  be  rejected.  If 
a  soldier  come,  let  him  be  taught  to  "do  no 
injustice,  to  accuse  no  man  falsely,  and  to  be 
content  with  his  allotted  wages  :  "  ^  if  he  submit 
to  those  rules,  let  him  be  received  ;  but  if  he 
refuse  them,  let  him  be  rejected.  He  that  is 
guilty  of  sins  not  to  be  named,  a  sodomite,  an 
effeminate  person,  a  magician,  an  enchanter,  an 
astrologer,  a  diviner,  an  user  of  magic  verses,  a 
juggler,  a  mountebank,  one  that  makes  amulets, 
a  charmer,  a  soothsayer,  a  fortune-teller,  an  ob- 
server of  palmistry  ;  he  that,  when  he  meets  you, 
observes  defects  in  the  eyes  or  feet  of  the  birds 
or  cats,  or  noises,  or  symbolical  sounds :  let 
these  be  proved  for  some  time,  for  this  sort  of 
wickedness  is  hard  to  be  washed  away ;  and  if 
they  leave  off  those  practices,  let  them  be  re- 
ceived ;  but  if  they  will  not  agree  to  that,  let 
them  be  rejected.  Let  a  concubine,  who  is  slave 
to  an  unbeliever,  and  confines  herself  to  her 
master  alone,  be  received  ;  +  but  if  she  be  incon- 
tinent with  others,  let  her  be  rejected.  If  one 
of  the  faithful  hath  a  concubine,  if  she  be  a 
bond-servant,  let  him  leave  off  that  way,  and 
marry  in  a  legal  manner  :  if  she  be  a  free  woman, 
let  him  marry  her  in  a  lawful  manner  ;  if  he  does 
not,  let  him  be  rejected.  Let  him  that  follows 
the  Gentile  customs,  or  Jewish  fables,  either 
reform,  or  let  him  be  rejected.  If  any  one  fol- 
lows the  sports  of  the  theatre,  their  huntings,  or 
horse-races,   or  combats,  either  let   him   leave 


'  [Note  this  uniform  testimony  of  antiquity  against  theatricals  in 
all  forms.  J 

-  I  Purveyors  to  the  play-house  ] 

^  JLuke  lii.  14. 

*  [Compare  vol.  v.  p.  130,  note  i.] 


them  off,  or  let  him  be  rejected.  Let  him  who 
is  to  be  a  catechumen  be  a  catechumen  for  three 
years ;  but  if  any  one  be  diligent,  and  has  a 
good-will  to  his  business,  let  him  be  admitted  : 
for  it  is  not  the  length  of  time,  but  the  course 
of  life,  that  is  judged.  Let  him  that  teaches, 
although  he  be  one  of  the  laity,  yet,  if  he  be 
skilful  in  the  word  and  grave  in  his  manners, 
teach  ;  for  "  they  shall  be  all  taught  of  God."  s 
Let  all  the  faithful,  whether  men  or  women, 
when  they  rise  from  sleep,  before  they  go  to 
work,  when  they  have  washed  themselves,  pray ; 
but  if  any  catechetic  instruction  be  held,  let  the 
faithful  person  prefer  the  word  of  piety  before 
his  work.  Let  the  faithful  person,  whether  man 
or  woman,  treat  servants  kindly,  as  we  have  or- 
dained in  the  foregoing  books,  and  have  taught 
in  our  epistles.^ 


UPON   WHICH   DAYS   SERVANTS   ARE   NOT    TO   WORK. 

xxxin.  I  Peter  and  Paul  do  make  the  follow- 
ing constitutions.  Let  the  slaves  work  five  days  ; 
but  on  the  Sabbath-day  and  the  Lord's  day  let 
them  have  leisure  to  go  to  church  for  instruction 
in  piety.  We  have  said  that  the  Sabbath  is  on 
account  of  the  creation,  and  the  Lord's  day  of 
the  resurrection.  Let  slaves  rest  from  their  work 
all  the  great  week,  and  that  which  follows  it  — 
for  the  one  in  memory  of  the  passion,  and  the 
other  of  the  resurrection  ;  and  there  is  need  they 
should  be  instructed  who  it  is  that  suffered  and 
rose  again,  and  who  it  is  permitted  Him  to  suffer, 
and  raised  Him  again.  Let  them  have  rest  from 
their  work  on  the  Ascension,  because  it  was  the 
conclusion  of  the  dispensation  by  Christ.  Let 
them  rest  at  Pentecost,  because  of  the  coming 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  was  given  to  those  that 
believed  in  Christ.  Let  them  rest  on  the  festival 
of  His  birth,  because  on  it  the  unexpected  fa- 
vour was  granted  to  men,  that  Jesus  Christ,  the 
Logos  of  God,  should  be  born  of  the  Virgin 
Mary,7  for  the  salvation  of  the  world. ^  Let  them 
rest  on  the  festival  of  Epiphany,  because  on  it 
a  manifestation  took  place  of  the  divinity  of 
Christ,  for  the  Father  bore  testimony  to  Him 
at  the  baptism  ;  and  the  Paraclete,  in  the  form 
of  a  dove,  pointed  out  to  the  bystanders  Him 
to  whom  testimony  was  borne.  Let  them  rest  on 
the  days  of  the  apostles  :  for  they  were  appointed 
your  teachers  /o  drhig  you  to  Christ,  and  made 
you  worthy  of  the  Spirit.  Let  them  rest  on  the 
day  of  the  first  ^  martyr  Stephen,  and  of  the  other 
holy  martyrs  who  preferred  Christ  to  their  own 
hfe. 


5  John  vi.  45. 

*  Knh.  vi.;  Col.  iv  ;  Philem. 

'  The  Coptic  adds,  "  the  holy  mother  of  God." 

'  [Compare  vol.  iii.  pp.  164,  352. 

9  One  V.  MS.,  Coptic,  and  Syriac  omit  "  first.' 


496 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF    THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


[Book  VIII. 


AT  WHAT   HOURS,   AND   WH\',   WE   ARE  TO   PRAY. 

XXXIV.  Offer  up  your  prayers  in  the  morning, 
at  the  third  hour,  the  sixth,  the  ninth,  the  even- 
ing, and  at  cock-crowing :  in  the  morning,  re- 
turning thanks  that  the  Lord  has  sent  you  hght, 

■  that  He  has  brought  you  past  the  night,  and 
brought  on  the  day ;  at  the  third  hour,  because 
at  that  hour  the  Lord  received  the  sentence  of 
condemnation  from  Pilate  ;  at  the  sixth,  because 
at  that  hour  He  was  crucified ;  ■  at  the  ninth, 
because  all  things  were  in  commotion  at  the 
crucifixion  of  the  Lord,  as  trembling  at  the  bold 
attempt  of  the  impious  Jews,  and  not  bearing 
the  injur}'  offered  to  their  Lord ;  in  the  evening, 
giving  thanks  that  He  has  given  you  the  night 
to  rest  from  the  daily  labours ;  at  cock-crowing, 
because  that  hour  brings  the  good  news  of  the 
coming  on  of  the  day  for  the  operations  proper 
for  the  light.  But  if  it  be  not  possible  to  go  to 
the  church  on  account  of  the  unbelievers,  thou, 
O  bishop,  shalt  assemble"  them  in  a  house,  that 
a  godly  man  may  not  enter  into  an  assembly  of 
the  ungodly.  For  it  is  not  the  place  that  sancti- 
fies the  man,  but  the  man  the  place.  And  if 
the  ungodly  possess  the  place,  do  thou  avoid  it, 
because  it  is  profaned  by  them.  For  as  holy 
priests  sanctify  a  place,  so  do  the  profane  ones 
defile  it.  If  it  be  not  possible  to  assemble 
either  in  the  church  or  in  a  house,  let  every  one 
by  himself  sing,  and  read,  and  pray,  or  two  or 
three  together.  For  "  where  two  or  three  are 
gathered  together  in  my  name,  there  am  I  in  the 
midst  of  them."  ^  Let  not  one  of  the  faithful 
pray  with  a  catechumen,  no,  not  in  the  house  : 
for  it  is  not  reasonable  that  he  who  is  admitted 
should  be  polluted  with  one  not  admitted.  Let 
not  one  of  the  godly  pray  with  an  heretic,  no, 
not  in  the  house.  For  "  what  fellowship  hath 
light  with  darkness  ?  "  3  Let  Christians,  whether 
men  or  women,  who  have  connections  with  slaves, 
either  leave  them  off,  or  let  them  be  rejected. 

THE     CONSTITUTION     OF    JAMES    THE     BROTHER     OF 
CHRIST   CONCERNING   EVENING   PRAYER. 

XXXV.  I  James,-*  the  brother  of  Christ  accord- 
ing to  the  flesh,  but  His  servant  as  the  only  be- 
begotten  God,  and  one  appointed  bishop  of 
Jerusalem  by  the  Lord  Himself,  and  the  Apos- 
tles, do  ordain  thus  :  When  it  is  evening,  thou, 
O  bishop,  shalt  assemble  the  church  ;  and  after 
the  repetition  of  the  psalm  at  the  lighting  up 


*  The  Syriac  and  Coptic  add:  "and  His  side  being  wounded, 
blood  and  water  came  forth." 

2  Matt,  xviii.  20.  [A  token  that  much  of  these  constitutions  is 
truly  primitive.] 

J  2  Cor.  vi.  14.     [Compare  p.  483,  suf>ra  :  Energumens  ?] 

<  The  words  from  "  !  James  "  to  ''  ordain  thus  "  are  omitted  in  the 
V.  MSS.,  and  the  following  words  are  given  instead  in  the  two  V.  ms.s.  : 
"  Tames,  the  brother  of  the  Lord,  has  been  killed  with  stones  (the 
Other  MS.  reads,  '  with  sticks  ')  by  the  Jews  in  Jerusalem  on  account 
of  the  doctrines  of  Chri-;t."  Ch.  xxxv.-xli.  are  omitted  in  the  Oxford 
MS.,  and  in  Syriac  and  Coptic. 


the  lights,  the  deacon  shall  bid  prayers  for  the 
catechumens,  the  energumens,  the  illuminated, 
and  the  penitents,  as  we  have  formerly  said.  But 
after  the  dismission  of  these,  the  deacon  shall 
say  :  So  many  as  are  of  the  faithful,  let  us  pray 
to  the  Lord.  And  after  the  bidding  prayer, 
which  is  formerly  set  down,  he  shall  say  :  — 

THE    BIDDING   PRAYER    FOR   THE    EVENING. 

xxxvi.  Save  us,  O  God,  and  raise  us  up  by 
Thy  Christ.  Let  us  stand  up,  and  beg  for  the 
mercies  of  the  Lord,  and  His  compassions,  for 
the  angel  of  peace,  for  what  things  are  good  and 
profitable,  for  a  Christian  departure  out  of  this 
life,  an  evening  and  a  night  of  peace,  and  free 
from  sin  ;  and  let  us  beg  that  the  whole  course 
of  our  life  may  be  unblameable.  Let  us  dedi- 
cate ourselves  and  one  another  to  the  living 
God  through  His  Christ.  And  let  the  bishop 
add  this  prayer,  and  say  :  — 

THE   THANKSGIVING    FOR   THE    EVENING. 

xxxvii.  O  God,  who  art  without  beginning 
and  without  end,  the  Maker  of  the  whole  world 
by  Christ,  and  the  Provider  for  it,  but  before 
all  5  His  God  and  Father,  the  Lord  ^  of  the 
Spirit,  and  the  King  of  intelligible  and  sensible 
beings ;  who  hast  made  the  day  for  the  works 
of  light,  and  the  night  for  the  refreshment  of 
our  infirmity,  —  for  "  the  day  is  Thine,  the  night 
also  is  Thine  :  Thou  hast  prepared  the  light  and 
the  sun,"  7  —  do  Thou  now,  O  Lord,  Thou  lover 
of  mankind,  and  Fountain  of  all  good,  mercifully 
accept  of  this  our  evening  thanksgiving.  Thou 
who  hast  brought  us  through  the  length  of  the 
day,  and  hast  brought  us  to  the  beginnings  of 
the  night,  preserve  us  by  Thy  Christ,  afford  us 
a  peaceable  evening,  and  a  night  free  from  sin, 
and  vouchsafe  us  everlasting  life  by  Thy  Christ, 
through  whom  glory,  honour,  and  worship  be  to 
Thee  in  ^  the  Holy  Spirit  for  ever.  Amen.  And 
let  the  deacon  say  :  Bow  down  for  the  laying  on 
of  hands.  And  let  the  bishop  say :  O  God  of 
our  fathers,  and  Lord  of  mercy,  who  didst  form 
man  of  Thy  wisdom  a  rational  creature,  and  be- 
loved of  God  more  than  the  other  beings  upon 
this  earth,  and  didst  give  him  authority  to  rule 
over  the  creatures  upon  the  earth,  and  didst  or- 
dain by  Tliy  will  rulers  and  priests  —  the  former 
for  the  security  of  life,  the  latter  for  a  regular 
worship,  —  do  Thou  now  also  look  down,  O 
Lord  Almighty,  and  cause  Thy  face  to  shine 
upon  Thy  people,  who  bow  down  the  neck  of 
their  heart,  and  bless  them  by  Christ ;  through 
whom  Thou  hast  enlightened  us  with  the  light  of 


5  "  Before  all "  is  omitted  in  one  V.  MS. 

*  One  v.  MS.  reads  "  sender  forth  "  instead  of"  Lord." 

7  Ps.  Ixxiv.  16. 

8  One  v.  MS.  reads  "  with  "  instead  of"  in." 


Sec.  IV.] 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


497 


knowledge,  and  hast  revealed  Thyself  to  us ; 
with  whom  worthy  adoration  is  due  from  every 
rational  and  holy  nature  to  Thee,  and  to  the 
Spirit,  who  is  the  Comforter,  for  ever.  Amen. 
And  let  the  deacon  say  :  "  Depart  in  peace."  In 
like  manner,  in  the  morning,  after  the  repetition 
of  the  morning  psalm,  and  his  dismission  of  the 
catechumens,  the  energumens,  the  candidates 
for  baptism,  and  the  penitents,  and  after  the 
usual  bidding  of  prayers,  that  we  may  not  again 
repeat  the  same  things,  let  the  deacon  add  after 
the  words.  Save  us,  O  God,  and  raise  us  up  by 
Thy  grace  :  Let  us  beg  of  the  Lord  His  mercies 
and  His  compassions,  that  this  morning  and  this 
day  may  be  with  peace  and  without  sin,  as  also 
all  the  time  of  our  sojourning ;  that  He  will 
grant  us  His  angel  of  peace,  a  Christian  depart- 
ure out  of  this  life,  and  that  God  will  be  merci- 
ful and  gracious.  Let  us  dedicate  ourselves 
and  one  another  to  the  living  God  through  His 
Only-begotten.  And  let  the  bishop  add  this 
prayer,  and  say  :  — 

THE  THANKSGIVING   FOR  THE   MORNING. 

xxxvni.  O  God,  the  God  of  spirits  and  of  all 
flesh,  who  art  beyond  compare,  and  standest  in 
need  of  nothing,  who  hast  given  the  sun  to  have 
rule  over  the  day,  and  the  moon  and  the  stars  to 
have  rule  over  the  night,  do  Thou  now  also  look 
down  upon  us  with  gracious  eyes,  and  receive 
our  morning  thanksgivings,  and  have  mercy  upon 
us ;  for  we  have  not  "  spread  out  our  hands 
unto  a  strange  God  ;  "  '  for  there  is  not  among 
us  any  new  God,  but  Thou,  the  eternal  God, 
who  art  without  end,  who  hast  given  us  our 
being  through  Christ,  and  given  us  our  well- 
being  through  Him.  Do  Thou  vouchsafe  us 
also,  through  Him,  eternal  life ;  with  whom 
glory,  and  honour,  and  worship  be  to  Thee  and 
to  the  Holy  Spirit  for  ever.  Amen,  And  let 
the  deacon  say  :  Bow  down  for  the  laying  on  of 
hands.  And  let  the  bishop  add  this  prayer, 
saying :  — 

THE   IMPOSITION   OF   HANDS   FOR  THE   MORNING. 

XXXIX.  O  God,  who  art  faithful  and  true,  who 
"  hast  mercy  on  thousands  and  ten  thousands  of 
them  that  love  Thee,"  ^  the  lover  of  the  humble, 
and  the  protector  of  the  needy,  of  whom  all 
things  stand  in  need,  for  all  things  are  subject 
to  Thee ;  look  down  upon  this  Thy  people, 
who  bow  down  their  heads  to  Thee,  and  bless 
them  with  spiritual  blessing.  "  Keep  them  as 
the  apple  of  an  eye,"  ^  preserve  them  in  piety 
and  righteousness,  and  vouchsafe  them  eternal 
life  in  Christ  Jesus  Thy  beloved  Son^with  whom 
glory,  honour,  and  worship  be  to  Thee  and  to 


the  Holy  Spirit,  now  and  always,  and  for  ever 
and  ever.  x\men.  And  let  the  deacon  say : 
"  Depart  in  peace."  And  when  the  first-fruits 
are  offered,  the  bishop  gives  thanks  in  this  man- 
ner :  — 

THE    FORM    OF   PRAYER    FOR   THE    FIRST-FRUITS. 

XL.  We  give  thanks  to  Thee,  O  Lord  Al- 
mighty, the  Creator  of  the  whole  world,  and  its 
Preserver,  through  Thy  only  begotten  Son  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord,  for  the  first-fruits  which  are 
offered  to  Thee,  not  in  such  a  manner  as  we 
ought,  but  as  we  are  able.  For  what  man  is 
there  that  can  worthily  give  Thee  thanks  for 
those  things  Thou  hast  given  them  to  partake 
of?  The  God  of  Abraham,  and  of  Isaac,  and 
of  Jacob,  and  of  all  the  saints,  who  madest  all 
things  fruitful  by  Thy  word,  and  didst  command 
the  earth  to  bring  forth  various  fruits  for  our  re- 
joicing and  our  food ;  who  hast  given  to  the 
duller  and  more  sheepish  sort  of  creatures  juices 
—  herbs  to  them  that  feed  on  herbs,  and  to 
some  flesh,  to  others  seeds,  but  to  us  corn,  as 
advantageous  and  proper  food,  and  many  other 
things  —  some  for  our  necessities,  some  for  our 
health,  and  some  for  our  pleasure.  On  all  these 
accounts,  therefore,  art  Thou  worthy  of  exalted 
hymns  of  praise  for  Thy  beneficence  by  Christ, 
through  whom  •*  glory,  honour,  and  worship  be 
to  Thee,  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  ever.  Amen. 
Concerning  those  that  are  at  rest  in  Christ : 
After  the  bidding  prayer,  that  we  may  not  repeat 
it  again,  the  deacon  shall  add  as  follows  :  — 

THE    BIDDING    PR.\YER    FOR    THOSE    DEPARTED. 

XLi.  Let  US  pray  for  our  brethren  that  are  at 
rest  5  in  Christ,  that  God,  the  lover  of  mankind, 
who  has  received  his  soul,  may  forgive  him  every 
sin,  voluntary  and  involuntary,  and  may  be  mer- 
ciful and  gracious  to  him,  and  give  him  his  lot 
in  the  land  of  the  pious  that  are  sent  into  the 
bosom  of  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  with 
all  those  that  have  pleased  Him  and  done  His 
will  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  whence  all 
sorrow,  grief,  and  lamentation  are  banished.  Let 
us  arise,  let  us  dedicate  ourselves  and  one  an- 
other to  the  eternal  God,  through  that  Word 
which  was  in  the  beginning.  And  let  the  bishop 
say :  O  Thou  who  art  by  nature  immortal,  and 
hast  no  end  of  Thy  being,  from  whom  every 
creature,  whether  immortal  or  mortal,  is  derived  ; 
who  didst  make  man  a  rational  creature,  the 
citizen  of  this  world,  in  his  constitution  mortal, 
and  didst  add  the  promise  of  a  resurrection  ; 
who  didst  not  suffer  I'^noch  and  Elijah  to  taste  of 
death  ;  "  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac, 
and  the  God  of  Jacob,  who  art  the  God  of  them. 


'  Ps.  xliv.  20. 

^  Ex.  xxxiv.  and  xx. 

3  Ps.  xvii.  8. 


*  One  V.  MS.  reads,  "  with  whom,"  and  "  witli  the  Holy  Spirit." 
5  [They  are  "  at  rest."     Vet  this  prayer,  and  wherefore  ?     See  St. 
Augustine,  Con/essiotis  (ed.  Migne),  p.  765,  Nebridius.J 


498 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES.        [Book  viii. 


not  as  of  dead,  but  as  of  living  persons :  for 
the  souls  of  all  men  live  with  Thee,  and  the 
spirits  of  the  righteous  are  in  Thy  hand,  which 
no  torment  can  touch  ;  "  '  for  they  are  all  sanc- 
tified under  Thy  hand  :  do  Thou  now  also  look 
upon  this  Thy  servant,  whom  Thou  hast  selected 
and  received  into  another  state,  and  forgive  him 
if  voluntarily  or  involuntarily  he  has  sinned,  and 
afford  him  merciful  angels,  and  place  him  in  the 
bosom  of  the  patriarchs,  and  prophets,  and  apos- 
tles, and  of  all  those  that  have  pleased  Thee  from 
the  beginning  of  the  world,  where  there  is  no 
grief,  sorrow,  nor  lamentation  ;  but  the  peace- 
able region  of  the  godly,  and  the  undisturbed 
land  of  the  upright,  and  of  those  that  therein  see 
the  glory  of  Thy  Christ ;  by  whom  ^  glory,  hon- 
our, and  worship,  thanksgiving,  and  adoration  be 
to  Thee,  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  ever.  Amen. 
And  let  the  deacon  say  :  Bow  down,  and  receive 
the  blessing.  And  let  the  bishop  give  thanks  for 
them,  saying  as  follows  :  "  O  Lord,  save  Thy 
people,  and  bless  Thine  inheritance,"  ^  which 
Thou  hast  purchased  with  the  precious  blood  of 
Thy  Christ.  Feed  them  under  Thy  right  hand, 
and  cover  them  under  Thy  wings,  and  grant  that 
they  may  •'  fight  the  good  fight,  and  finish  their 
course,  and  keep  the  faith "  ■♦  immutably,  un- 
blameably,  and  unreprovably,  through  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  Thy  beloved  Son,  with  whom  glory, 
honour,  and  worship  be  to  Thee  and  to  the  Holy 
Spirit  for  ever.     Amen. 

HOW  AND  WHEN  WE  OUGHT  TO  CELEBRATE  THE 
MEMORIALS  OF  THE  FArfHFUL  DEPARTED,  AND 
THAT  WE  OUGHT  THEN  TO  GIVE  SOMEWHAT  OUT 
OF   THEIR   GOODS   TO   THE   POOR. 

XLii.  Let  the  third  day  of  the  departed  be 
celebrated  with  psalms,  and  lessons,  and  prayers, 
on  account  of  Him  who  arose  within  the  space 
of  three  days ;  and  let  the  ninth  day  be  cele- 
brated in  remembrance  of  the  living,  and  of  the 
departed  ;  and  the  fortieth  5  day  according  to  the 
ancient  pattern  :  for  so  did  the  people  lament 
Moses,  and  the  anniversary  day  in  memory  of 
him.^  And  let  alms  be  given  to  the  poor  out 
of  his  goods  for  a  memorial  of  him.^ 

THAT   MEMORIALS   OR    MANDATES    DO    NOT   AT  ALL 
PROFIT   THE   UNGODLY    WHO    ARE    DEAD. 

XLiii,  These  things  we  say  concerning  the 
pious ;  for  as  to  the  ungodly,  if  thou  givest  all 
the  world  to  the  poor,  thou  wilt  not  benefit  him 
at  all.     For  to  whom  the  Deity  was  an  enemy 


'  Matt.  xxii.  32;  Wisd.  iii.  i. 

'  "  With  whom,"  one  V.  MS. 

3  Ps.  xxviii.  9. 

*  2  Tim.  iv.  7. 

5  The  Syriac  and  a  Greek  marginal  reading  give  "  the  thirtieth." 

''  Deut.  xxxiv.  8.     [Comp.  Aug.,  Confess,  (ed.  Migne),  p.  778.] 

^  [The  "  month's  mind  "  wa.s  anciently  of  this  sort,  with  no  refer- 
ence to  purgatorial  penalties.  "  Credo  jam  feceris  quod  rogo."  — 
Aug.] 


while  he  was  alive,  it  is  certain  it  will  be  so  also 
when  he  is  departed ;  for  there  is  no  unright- 
eousness with  Him.  For  "  the  Lord  ^  is  right- 
eous, and  has  loved  righteousness."  9  And, 
"Behold  the  man  and  his  work." '° 

CONCERNING   DRUNKARDS. 

XLiv.  Now,  when  you  are  invited  to  their  me- 
morials, do  you  feast  with  good  order,  and  the 
fear  of  God,  as  disposed  to  intercede  for  those 
that  are  departed.  For  since  you  are  the  pres- 
byters and  deacons  of  Christ,  you  ought  always 
to  be  sober,  both  among  yourselves  and  among 
others,  that  so  you  may  be  able  to  warn  the 
unruly.  Now  the  Scripture  says,  "  The  men  in 
power  are  passionate.  But  let  them  not  drink 
wine,  lest  by  drinking  they  forget  wisdom,  and 
are  not  able  to  judge  aright." ' '  Wherefore  '^  both 
the  presbyters  and  the  deacons  are  those  of  au- 
thority in  the  Church  next  to  God  Almighty  and 
His  beloved  Son.'^  We  say  this,  not  they  are 
not  to  drink  at  all,  otherwise  it  would  be  to  the 
reproach  of  what  God  has  made  for  cheerfulness, 
but  that  they  be  not  disordered  with  wine.  For 
the  Scripture  does  not  say,  Do  not  drink  wine ; 
but  what  says  it?  "  Drink  not  wine  to  drunk- 
enness ;  "  and  again,  "  Thorns  spring  up  in  the 
hand  of  the  drunkard."  "*  Nor  do  we  say  this 
only  to  those  of  the  clergy,  but  also  to  every  lay 
Christian,  upon  whom  the  name  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  called.  For  to  them  also  it  is 
said,  "Who  hath  woe?  who  hath  sorrow?  who 
hath  uneasiness  ?  who  hath  babbling  ?  who  hath 
red  eyes  ?  who  hath  wounds  without  cause  ?  Do 
not  these  things  belong  to  those  that  tarry  long 
at  the  wine,  and  that  go  to  seek  where  drinking 
meetings  are?"  '5 

CONCERNING  THE   RECEIVING   SUCH  AS   ARE   PERSE- 
CUTED   FOR    CHRIST'S    SAKE. 

XLv.  Receive  ye  those  that  are  persecuted  '^  on 
account  of  the  faith,  and  who  fly  from  city  to 
city, '7  as  mindful  of  the  words  of  the  Lord.  For, 
knowing  that  though  "  the  spirit  be  willing,  the 
flesh  is  weak,"  '**  they  fly  away,  and  prefer  the 
spoiling  of  their  goods,  that  they  may  preserve 
the  name  of  Christ  in  themselves  without  deny- 
ing it.  Supply  them  therefore  with  what  they 
want,  and  thereby  fulfil  the  commandment  of 
the  Lord. 


*  The  Syriac  and  the  Oxford  MS.  read  "  God  "  instead  of  "  Lord." 
9  Ps.  xi.  7. 

'°  Isa.  Ixii.  II. 

"  Prov.  xxxi.  4,  LXX. 

I-  The  Syriac,  the  Coptic,  and  the  Oxford  MS.  add,  "  the  bishops." 
The  Coptic  omits  "  the  deacons." 

■3  The  Coptic  adds,  "  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Holy  Spirit." 

'*  Prov.  xxiii.;  Ecclus.  xxxi.  25-31;  Eph.  v.  18;  Prov.  xxvi.  9. 

'S  Prov.  xxiii.  29,  30. 

'6  [A  token  of  the  early  origin  of  what  is  genuine  in  these  inter- 
polated Constitutions.] 

'7  Matt.  x.  2j. 

'8  Matt.  XXVI.  41. 


Sec.  v.] 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


499 


SEC.    V. — ALL   THE   APOSTLES    URGE    THE    OBSERV- 
ANCE OF  THE  ORDER  OF  THE  CHURCH. 

THAT  EVERY  ONE  OUGHT  TO  REMAIN  IN  THAT 
RANK  WHEREIN  HE  IS  PLACED,  BUT  NOT  SNATCH 
SUCH  OFFICES  TO  HIMSELF  WHICH  ARE  NOT 
ENTRUSTED  TO   HIM. 

XLVi.  Now  this  we  all  in  common  do  charge 
you,  that  every  one  remain  in  that  rank  which  is 
appointed  him,  and  do  not  transgress  his  proper 
bounds  ;  for  they  are  not  ours,  but  God's.     For 
says  the  Lord  :  "  He  that  heareth  you,  heareth 
me ;  and  he  that  heareth  me,  lieareth  Him  that 
sent  me."     And,  "  He  that  despiseth  you,  de- 
spiseth  me  ;  and  he  that  despiseth  me,  despiseth 
Him  that  sent  me."  '     For  if  those  things  that 
are  without  life  do  observe  good  order,  as  the 
night,  the  day,  the  sun,  the  moon,  the  stars,  the 
elements,  the  seasons,  the   months,  the  weeks, 
the  days,  and  the  hours,  and  are  subservient  to 
the  uses  appointed  them,  according  to  that  which 
is  said,  "Thou  hast  set  them  a  bound  which  they 
shall  not  pass  ;  "==  and  again,  concerning  the  sea, 
"  I  have  set  bounds  thereto,  and  have  encom- 
passed it  with  bars  and  gates ;  and  I  said  to  it. 
Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  and  thou  shalt  go  no 
farther  ;"3  how  much  more  ought  ye  not  to  ven- 
ture to  remove  those  things  which  we,  according 
to  God's  will,  have  determined  for  you  !     But 
because  many  think  this  a  small   matter,  and 
venture  to  confound  the  orders,  and  to  remove 
the  ordination  which  belongs  to  them  severally, 
snatching   to   themselves   dignities  which  were 
never  given  them,  and  allowing  themselves  to 
bestow  that   authority  in   a   tyrannical   manner 
which  they  have  not   themselves,  and   thereby 
provoke  God  to  anger  (as  did  the  followers  of 
Corah  and  King  Uzziah,-*  who,  having  no  author- 
ity, usurped  the  high- priesthood  without  com- 
mission from  God ;  and  the  former  were  burnt 
with  fire,  and  the  latter  was  struck  with  a  leprosy 
in  his  forehead)  ;  and  provoke  Christ  Jesus  to 
anger,  who  has  made  this  constitution  ;  and  also 
grieve  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  make  void  His  testi- 
mony :    therefore,  foreknowing  the  danger  that 
hangs  over  those  who  do  such  things,  and  the 
neglect   about   the   sacrifices  and   eucharistical 
offices  which  will  arise  from  their  being  impiously 
offered  by  those  who  ought  not  to  offer  them  ; 
who  think  the   honour  of  the  high-i)riesthood, 
which  is  an  imitation  of  the  great  High  Priest 
Jesus  Christ  our  King,  to  be  a  matter  of  sport ; 
we  have  found  it  necessary  to  give  you  warning 
in  this  matter  also.    For  some  are  already  turned 
aside  after  their  own  vanity.     We  say  that  Moses 
the  servant  of  God  ("to  whom  God  spake  face 

'  Luke  X.  i6;  Matt.  x.  40;  John  xiiL  20. 

*  Ps.  civ.  9. 

3  Job  xxxviii.  10,  n. 

♦  Num.  xvi. ;  2  Chron.  xxvi. 


to  face,  as  if  a  man  spake  to  his  friend ;  "  s  to 
whom  He  said,  "  I  know  thee  above  all  men  ;  " 
to  whom  He  spake  directly,  and  not  by  obscure 
methods,  or  dreams,  or  angels,  or  riddles), — 
this  person,  when  he  made   constitutions   and 
divine  laws,  distinguished  what  things  were    to 
be  performed  by  the  high  priests,  what  by  the 
priests,  and  what  by  the   Levites ;    distributing 
to  every  one  his  proper  and  suitable  office  in  the 
divine  service.     And  those  things  which  are  al- 
lotted for  the  high  priests  to  do,  those  might  not 
be  meddled  with  by  the  priests  ;  and  what  things 
were  allotted  to  the  priests,  the  Levites  might 
not  meddle  with  ;  but  every  one  observed  those 
ministrations  which  were  written  down  and  ap- 
pointed for  them.     And  if  any  would  meddle 
beyond  the  tradition,  death  was  his  punishment. 
And  Saul's  example  does  show  this  most  plainly, 
who,  thinking  he  might   offer  sacrifice  without 
the  prophet  and  high  priest  Samuel,^  drew  upon 
himself  a  sin  and  a  curse  without  remedy.     Nor 
did  even  his  having  anointed  him  king  discour- 
age the  prophet.     But  God  showed  the  same  by 
a  more  visible  effect  in  the  case  of  Uzziah,7  when 
He  without  delay  exacted  the  punishment  due 
to  this  transgression,  and  he  that  madly  coveted 
after  the  high-priesthood  was  rejected  from  his 
kingdom  also.     As  to  those  things   that   have 
happened  amongst  us,  you  yourselves  are  not 
ignorant  of  them.     For  ye   know  undoubtedly 
that  those  that  are  by  us  name(5  bishops,  and 
presbyters,  and  deacons,  were  made  by  prayer, 
and  by  the  laying  on  of  hands ;  and  that  by  the 
difference  of  their  names  is  showed  the  difference 
of  their  employments.     For  not  every  one  that 
will  is  ordained,  as  the  case  was  in  that  spurious 
and  counterfeit  priesthood  of  the  calves  under 
Jeroboam  ;  ^  but  he  only  who  is  called  of  God. 
For  if  there  were  no  rule  or  distinction  of  orders, 
it  would  suffice  to  perform  all  the  offices  under 
one  name.     But  being  taught  by  the  Lord  the 
series  of  things,  we  distributed  the  functions  of 
the  high-priesthood  to  the  bishops,  those  of  the 
priesthood  to  the  presbyters,  and  the  ministra- 
tion under  them  both  to  the  deacons ;  that  the 
divine  worship  might  be   performed    in    purity. 
For  it  is  not  lawful  for  a  deacon  to  offer  the  sac- 
rifice, or  to  baptize,  or  to  give  either  the  greater 
or  the   lesser  blessing.      Nor  may  a  presbyter 
perform   ordination;    for  it  is  not  agreeable  to 
holiness  to  have  this  order  perverted.     For  "  God 
is  not  the  God  of  confiision/'^  that  the  subordi- 
nate persons  should  tyrannically  assume  to  them- 
selves the  functions  l)elonging  to  their  superiors, 
forming  a  new  scheme  of  laws  to  their  own  mis- 
chief, not  knowing  that  "  it  is  hard  for  them  to 


•7- 


5  Num.  xii   7,  8;   Ex.  xxxiii. 

^  1  Sam.  xiii. 

'  2  Chron.  xxvi. 

*  I  Kings  xiii   33. 

9  I  Cor.  xiv.  33.     [See  p.  500,  note  6,  I'n/ra.] 


500 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


kick  against  the  pricks  ;  "  '  for  such  as  these  do 
not  fight  against  us,  or  against  the  bishops,  but 
against  the  universal  Bishop  and  the  High  Priest 
of  the  Fatlie'r,  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.^  High 
priests,  priests,  and  Levites  were  ordained  by 
Moses/  the  most  beloved  of  God.  By  our 
Saviour  ■♦  were  we  apostles,  thirteen  in  number, 
ordained ;  and  by  the  apostles  I  James,  and  I 
Clement,  and  others  with  us,  were  ordained,  that 
we  may  not  make  the  catalogue  of  all  those 
bishops  over  again.  And  in  common,  presby- 
ters, and  deacons,  and  sub-deacons,  and  readers, 
were  ordained  by  all  of  us.  The  great  High 
Priest  therefore,  who  is  so  by  nature,  is  Christ  the 
only  begotten  ;  not  having  snatched  that  honour 
to  Himself,  but  having  been  appointed  such  by 
the  Father ;  who  being  made  man  for  our  sake, 
and  offering  the  spiritual  sacrifice  to  His  God 
and  Father,  before  His  suffering  gave  it  us  alone 
in  charge  to  do  this,  although  there  were  others 
with  us  who  had  believed  in  Him.  But  he  that 
believes  is  not  presently  appointed  a  priest,  or 
obtains  the  dignity  of  the  high-priesthood.  But 
after  His  ascension  we  offered,  according  to  His 
constitution,  the  pure  and  unbloody  sacrifice ; 
and  ordained  bishops,  and  presbyters,  and  dea- 
cons, seven  in  number :  one  of  which  was  Ste- 


'  Acts  ix.  5.     [See  Acts  xxvi.  14,  where  the  clause  is  genuine. 
In  ix.  5  it  is  a  later  interpolation  of  the  Vulgate  and  Erasmus.  —  R.] 

2  The  Coptic  adds,  "  the  Son  of  God,  and  true  God." 

3  Ex.  xxviii.  andjtxix. 

■♦  The  Coptic  ad^  "  God." 


phen,5  that  blessed  martyT,  who  was  not  inferior 
to  us  as  to  his  pious  disposition  of  mind  towards 
God  ;  who  showed  so  great  piety  towards  God, 
by  his  faith  and  love  towards  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  as  to  give  his  life  for  Him,  and  was  stoned 
to  death  by  the  Jews,  the  murderers  of  the  Lord. 
Yet  still  this  so  great  and  good  a  man,  who  was 
fervent  in  spirit,  who  saw  Christ  on  the  right 
hand  of  God,  and  the  gates  of  heaven  opened, 
does  nowhere  appear  to  have  exercised  functions 
which  did  not  appertain  to  his  office  of  a  deacon, 
nor  to  have  offered  the  sacrifices,  nor  to  have 
laid  hands  upon  any,  but  kept  his  order  of  a 
deacon  unto  the  end.  For  so  it  became  him, 
who  was  a  martyr  for  Christ,  to  preserve  good 
order.  But  if  some  do  blame  Philip  ^  our  dea- 
con, and  Ananias  ^  our  faithful  brother,  that  the 
one  did  baptize  the  eunuch,  and  the  other  me 
Paul,  these  men  do  not  understand  what  we  say. 
For  we  have  affirmed  only  that  no  one  snatches 
the  sacerdotal  dignity  to  himself,  but  either 
receives  it  from  God,  as  Melchisedec  and  Job, 
or  from  the  high  priest,  as  Aaron  from  Moses. 
Wherefore  Philip  and  Ananias  did  not  constitute 
themselves,  but  were  appointed  by  Christ,  the 
High  Priest  of  that  God  to  whom  no  being  is  to 
be  compared. 

5  Acts  vi.  and  vii. 

6  One  V.  MS.  has  the  following  note:  "  That  he  who  baptized  the 
Ethiopian  eunuch  was  not  the  Apostle  Philip,  but  one  of  those  who 
were  chosen  along  with  St.  Stephen  to  be  deacons,  and  who  also  had 
four  daughters,  as  says  Luke  intheActs."     [Seepp.  452,  492,  .f/z/ra.] 

7  Acts  viii.  and  ix. 


THE   ECCLESIASTICAL   CANONS    OF   THE   SAME   HOLY   APOSTLES.' 


XLVii.  I.  Let  a  bishop  be  ordained  by  two  or 
three  bishops. 

2.  A  presbyter  by  one  bishop,  as  also  a  dea- 
con, and  the  rest  of  the  clergy.^ 

3.  If  any  bishop  or  presbyter,  otherwise  than 
our  Lord  has  ordained  concerning  the  sacrifice, 
offer  other  things  at  the  altar  of  God,  as  honey, 
milk,  or  strong  beer  instead  of  wine,  any  neces- 
saries, or  birds,  or  animals,  or  pulse,  otherwise 
than  is  ordained,  let  him  be  deprived  ;  excepting 
grains  of  new  corn,  or  ears  of  wheat,  or  bunches 
of  grapes  in  their  season.^ 

4.  For  it  is  not  lawful  to  offer  anything  besides 
these  at  the  altar,  and  oil  for  the  holy  lamp,  and 
incense  in  the  time  of  the  divine  oblation. 


'  [The  brief  notes  on  these  canons  have  been  mainly  derived  from 
the  text  and  notes  appended  to  Hefele's  History  0/  Christian  Coiih- 
ciis,  vol.  i.  pp.  450-492,  Edinburgh  translation.  —  R.] 

^  [Comp.  Apostolic  Constitutions,  iii.  20,  viii.  4,  27,  on  these 
two  canons.  —  R.] 

3  [This  canon,  and  the  two  following  ones,  which  explain  it,  point 
to  some  early  heretical  customs.  I'he  Apostolic  Constitutions  fur- 
nish no  exact  parallel.  Canon  4  was  joined  with  3  in  the  Greek  text. 
Dionysius  divided  them:  hence  a  variation  in  number  exists  from  this 
point.  —  R.J 


5.  But  let  all  other  fruits  be  sent  to  the  house 
of  the  bishop,  as  first-fruits  to  him  and  to  the 
presbyters,  but  not  to  the  altar.  Now  it  is  plain 
that  the  bishop  and  presbyters  are  to  divide  them 
to  the  deacons  and  to  the  rest  of  the  clergy. 

6.  Let  not  a  bishop,  a  priest,  or  a  deacon^  cast 
off  his  own  wife  under  pretence  of  piety ;  but 
if  he  does  cast  her  off,  let  him  be  suspended. 
If  he  go  on  in  it,  let  him  be  deprived. 

7.  Let  not  a  bishop,  a  priest,  or  deacon  under- 
take the  cares  of  this  world ;  but  if  he  do,  let 
him  be  deprived. 5 

8.  If  any  bishop,  or  presbyter,  or  deacon  shall 
celebrate  the  holiday  of  the  passover  before 
the  vernal  equinox  with  the  Jews,  let  him  be 
deprived.^ 

9.  If  any  bishop,  or  presbyter,  or  deacon,  or 
any  one  of  the  catalogue  of  the  priesthood,  when 
the  oblation  is  over,  does  not  communicate,  let 


Dionysius  omits  ant  diaconus.  —  R  ] 

Comp.  Apostolic  Constitntians,  ii.  6.  —  R.] 

This  points  to  a  discussion  in  the  third  century.  —  R.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE   HOLY   APOSTLES. 


501 


him  give  his  reason ;  and  if  it  be  just,  let  him 
be  forgiven  ;  but  if  he  does  not  do  it,  let  him  be 
suspended,  as  becoming  the  cause  of  damage  to 
the  people,  and  occasioning  a  suspicion  against 
him  that  offered,  as  of  one  that  did  not  rightly 
offer.' 

10.  All  those  of  the  faithful  that  enter  into 
the  holy  church  of  God,  and  hear  the  sacred 
Scriptures,  but  do  not  stay  during  prayer  and 
the  holy  communion,  must  be  suspended,  as 
causing  disorder  in  the  church. 

11.  If  any  one,  even  in  the  house,  prays  with 
a  person  excommunicate,  let  him  also  be  sus- 
pended. 

12.  If  any  clergyman  prays  with  one  deprived 
as  with  a  clergyman,  let  himself  also  be  deprived. 

13.  If  any  clergyman  or  layman  who  is  sus- 
pended, or  ought  not  to  be  received, ^  goes  away, 
and  is  received  in  another  city  without  com- 
mendatory letters,  let  both  those  who  received 
him  and  he  that  was  received  be  suspended. 
But  if  he  be  already  suspended,  let  his  suspen- 
sion be  lengthened,  as  lying  to  and  deceiving 
the  Church  of  God. 

14.  A  bishop  ought  not  to  leave  his  own  parish 
and  leap  to  another,  although  the  multitude 
should  compel  him,  unless  there  be  some  good 
reason  forcing  him  to  do  this,  as  that  he  can 
contribute  much  greater  profit  to  the  people  of 
the  new  parish  by  the  word  of  piety ;  but  this  is 
not  to  be  settlei^l  by  himself,  but  by  the  judg- 
ment of  many  bishops,  and  very  great  supplica- 
tion. 

15.  If  any  presbyter  or  deacon,  or  any  one  of 
the  catalogue  of  the  clergy,  leaves  his  own  parish 
and  goes  to  another,  and,  entirely  removing  him- 
self, continues  in  that  other  parish  without  the 
consent  of  his  own  bishop,  him  we  command  no 
longer  to  go  on  in  his  ministry,  especially  in  case 
his  bishop  calls  upon  him  to  return,  and  he  does 
not  obey,  but  continues  in  his  disorder.  How- 
ever, let  him  communicate  there  as  a  layman. 

16.  But  if  the  bishop  with  whom  they  are  un- 
dervalues the  deprivation  decreed  against  them, 
and  receives  them  as  clergymen,  let  him  be  sus- 
pended as  a  teacher  of  disorder. 

17.  He  who  has  been  twice  married  after  his 
baptism,  or  has  had  a  concubine,  cannot  be  made 
a  bishop,  or  presbyter,  or  deacon,  or  indeed  any 
one  of  the  sacerdotal  catalogue.^ 

18.  He  who  has  taken  a  widow,  or  a  divorced 
woman,  or  an  harlot,  or  a  servant,  or  one  l)elong- 
ing  to  the  theatre,  cannot  be  either  a  bishop, 
priest,  or  deacon,  or  indeed  any  one  of  the  sacer- 
dotal catalogue. 


'  [Canons  9-16  agree  with  those  of  the  Council  of  Antioch,  a.d. 
341 ;  but  there  is  a  difference  of  opinion  on  the  question  of  priority. 

-R-l  .       .         .  

^  Diony.sius  Exiguus  translates  "  cotninunicans,"  m  which  case 
the  Greek  reading  must  be  SfxTd?,  or,  "  who  can  be  received." 

3  [Canons  17,  18,  20,  agree  with  Apostolic  Constitutions,  vi.  17, 
ii.  6.  — R.] 


19.  He  who  has  married  two  sisters,  or  his 
brother's  or  sister's  daughter,  cannot  be  a  cler- 
gyman. 

20.  Let  a  clergyman  who  becomes  a  surety  be 
deprived. 

21.  Let  an  eunuch,  if  he  be  such  by  the  injury 
of  men,  or  his  virilia  were  taken  away  in  the 
persecution,  or  he  was  born  such,  and  yet  is 
worthy  of  episcopacy,  be  made  a  bishop. 

22.  Let  not  him  who  has  disabled  himself  be 
made  a  clergyman ;  for  he  is  a  self-murderer, 
and  an  enemy  to  the  creation  of  God.'* 

23.  If  any  one  who  is  of  the  clergy  disables 
himself,  let  him  be  deprived,  for  he  is  a  mur- 
derer of  himself. 

24.  Let  a  layman  who  disables  himself  be 
separated  for  three  years,  for  he  lays  a  snare  for 
his  own  life. 5 

25.  Let  a  bishop,  or  presbyter,  or  deacon  who 
is  taken  in  fornication,  or  perjury,  or  stealing,  be 
deprived,  hut  not  suspended;  for  the  Scripture 
says  :  "  Thoi^  shalt  not  avenge  twice  for  the  same 
crime  by  affliction.^''  ^ 

26.  In  like  manner  also  as  to  the  rest  of  the 
clergy. 

27.  Of  those  who  come  into  the  clergj'  un- 
married, we  permit  only  the  readers  and  singers, 
if  they  have  a  mind,  to  marry  afterward. 7 

28.  We  command  that  a  bishop,  or  presbyter, 
or  deacon  who  strikes  the  faithful  that  offend,  or 
the  unbelievers  who  do  wickedly,  and  thinks  to 
terrify  them  by  such  means,  be  deprived,  for  our 
Lord  has  nowhere  taught  us  such  things.  On 
the  contrary,  "  when  Himself  was  stricken,  He 
did  not  strike  again  ;  when  He  was  reviled.  He 
reviled  not  again  ;  when  He  suffered.  He  threat- 
ened not."  '^ 

29.  If  any  bishop,  or  presbyter,  or  deacon 
who  is  deprived  justly  for  manifest  crimes,  does 
venture  to  meddle  with  that  ministration  which 
was  once  entrusted  to  him,  let  the  same  person 
be  entirely  cut  off  from  the  Church. 

30.  If  any  bishop  obtains  that  dignity  by 
money,  or  even  a  presbyter  or  deacon,  let  him 
and  the  person  that  ordained  him  be  deprived  ; 
and  let  him  be  entirely  cut  off  from  communion, 
as  Simon  Magus  was  by  mc  Peter.^ 

31.  If  any  bishop  makes  use  of  the  rulers  of 
this  world,  and  by  their  means  obtains  to  be  a 
bishop  of  a  church,  let  him  be  deprived  and  sus- 
pended, and  all  that  communicate  with  him. 


*  [After  Origen.    Comp.  Melito,  vol.  viii.,  this  series.] 

5  fCanons  21-24  agree  with  the  first  of  the  Nicene  Council 
(Hefele,  Christian  ConncUs,'\  pp.  375,  376).  Pome  hold  that  canon 
to  refer  to  these;  others  find  in  the  enlarged  application  of  Canon  24 
a  proof  of  the  later  date  of  this  collection.  —  R.J 

<>  Nah  i.  g.  [Canons  25,  26,  are  referred  to  by  Basil  the  Great 
{Aii  Amjihilochiiitn,  iii.).  In  the  Greek  collection  26  is  joined  with 
25.-R.f 

'  [Afiostolic  Constitutions,  vi.  17. —  R.l 

'  I  Pet.  ii.  23.  [This  canon  seems  of  late  origin,  probably  from 
Synod  of  Constantinople,  a.d.  394.  —  R.] 

9  I']  ho  closing  clause  points  to  a  comparatively  late  date,  as  do 
the  conleuts  ol  Caiiou  31.  —  R.j 


502 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


32.  If  any  presbyter  despises  his  own  bishop, 
and  assembles  separately,  and  fixes  another  altar, 
when  he  has  nothing  to  condemn  in  his  bishop 
either  as  to  piety  or  righteousness,  let  him  be 
deprived  as  an  ambitious  person ;  for  he  is  a 
tyrant,  and  the  rest  of  the  clergy,  whoever  join 
themselves  to  him.  And  let  the  laity  be  sus- 
pended. But  let  these  things  be  done  after  one, 
and  a  second,  or  even  a  third  admonition  from 
the  bishop.' 

^^.  If  any  presbyter  or  deacon  be  put  under 
suspension  by  his  bishop,  it  is  not  lawful  for 
any  other  to  receive  him,  but  for  him  only  who 
put  him  under  suspension,  unless  it  happens 
that  he  who  put  him  under  suspension  die. 

34.  Do  not  ye  receive  any  stranger,  whether 
bishop,  or  presbyter,  or  deacon,  without  com- 
mendatory letters  ;  and  when  such  are  offered, 
let  them  be  examined.  And  if  they  be  preach- 
ers of  piety,  let  them  be  received ;  but  if  not, 
supply  their  wants,  but  do  not  receive  them  to 
communion  :  for  many  things  are  done  by  sur- 
prise. 

35.  The  bishops  of  every  country  ought  to 
know  who  is  the  chief  among  them,  and  to  es- 
teem him  as  their  head,  and  not  to  do  any  great 
thing  without  his  consent ;  but  every  one  to 
manage  only  the  affairs  that  belong  to  his  own 
parish,  and  the  places  subject  to  it.  But  let 
him  not  do  anything  without  the  consent  of  all ; 
for  it  is  by  this  means  there  will  be  unanimity, 
and  God  will  be  glorified  by  Christ,  in  the  Holy 
Spirit. 

36.  A  bishop  must  not  venture  to  ordain  out 
of  his  own  bounds  for  cities  or  countries  that 
are  not  subject  to  him.  But  if  he  be  convicted 
of  having  clone  so  without  the  consent  of  such 
as  governed  those  cities  or  countries,  let  him  be 
deprived,  both  the  bishop  himself  and  those 
whom  he  has  ordained. 

37.  If  any  bishop  that  is  ordained  does  not 
undertake  his  office,  nor  take  care  of  the  people 
committed  to  him,  let  him  be  suspended  until 
he  do  undertake  it ;  and  in  the  like  manner  a 
presbyter  and  a  deacon.  But  if  he  goes,  and  is 
not  received,  not  because  of  the  want  of  his 
own  consent,  but  because  of  the  ill  temper  of 
the  people,  let  him  continue  bishop  ;  but  let  the 
clergy  of  that  city  be  suspendetl,  because  they 
have  not  taught  that  disobedient  people  better. 

38.  Let  a  synod  of  bishops  be  held  twice  in 
the  year,  and  let  them  ask  one  another  the  doc- 
trines of  piety ;  and  let  them  determine  the 
ecclesiastical  disputes  that  happen  —  once  in 
the  fourth  week  of  Pentecost,  and  again  on  the 
twelfth  of  the  month  Hyperberetxus. 


'  [Canons  32-41  also  agr^^e  with  those  of  Antioch;  see  note  on 
Canon  9.  Some  of  the  regulations  have,  however,  an  earlier  date: 
whether  they  existed  in  this  form  before  that  time,  is  open  to  dis- 
tussion.  —  R.] 


39.  Let  the  bishop  have  the  care  of  ecclesi- 
astical revenues,  and  administer  them  as  in  the 
presence  of  God.  But  it  is  not  lawful  for  him 
to  appropriate  any  part  of  them  to  himself,  or 
to  give  the  things  of  God  to  his  own  kindred. 
But  if  they  be  poor,  let  him  support  them  as 
poor;  but  let  him  not,  under  such  pretences, 
alienate  the  revenues  of  the  Church. 

40.  Let  not  the  presbyters  and  deacons  do 
anything  without  the  consent  of  the  bishop,  for 
it  is  he  who  is  entrusted  with  the  people  of  the 
Lord,  and  will  be  required  to  give  an  account 
of  their  souls.  Let  the  proper  goods  of  the 
bishop,  if  he  has  any,  and  those  belonging  to 
the  Lord,  be  openly  distinguished,  that  he  may 
have  power  when  he  dies  to  leave  his  own  goods 
as  he  pleases,  and  to  whom  he  pleases ;  that, 
under  pretence  of  the  ecclesiastical  revenues, 
the  bishop's  own  may  not  come  short,  who 
sometimes  has  a  wife  and  children,  or  kinsfolk, 
or  servants.  For  this  is  just  before  God  and 
men,  that  neither  the  Church  suffer  any  loss  by 
the  not  knowing  which  revenues  are  the  bishop's 
own,  nor  his  kindred,  under  pretence  of  the 
Church,  be  undone,  or  his  relations  fall  into  law- 
suits, and  so  his  death  be  liable  to  reproach.^ 

41.  We  command  that  the  bishop  have  power 
over  the  goods  of  the  Church  ;  for  if  he  be  en- 
trusted with  the  precious  souls  of  men,  much 
more  ought  he  to  give  directions  about  goods, 
that  they  all  be  distributed  to  those  in  want,  ac- 
cording to  his  authority,  by  the  presbyters  and 
deacons,  and  be  used  for  their  support  with  the 
fear  of  God,  and  with  all  reverence.  He  is 
also  to  partake  of  those  things  he  wants,  if  he 
does  want  them,  for  his  necessary  occasions,  and 
those  of  the  brethren  who  live  with  him,  that 
they  may  not  by  any  means  be  in  straits  :  for 
the  law  of  God  appointed  that  those  who  waited 
at  the  altar  should  be  maintained  by  the  altar ; 
since  not  so  much  as  a  soldier  does  at  any  time 
bear  arms  against  the  enemies  at  his  own  charges. 

42.  Let  a  bishop,  or  presbyter,  or  deacon  who 
indulges  himself  in  dice  or  drinking,  either  leave 
off  those  practices,  or  let  him  be  deprived.^ 

43.  If  a  sub-deacon,  a  reader,  or  a  singer  does 
the  hke,  either  let  him  leave  off,  or  let  him  be 
suspended  ;  and  so  for  one  of  the  laity. 

44.  Let  a  bishop,  or  presbyter,  or  deacon  who 
requires  usury  of  those  he  lends  to,  either  leave 
off  to  do  so,  or  let  him  be  deprived. 

45.  Let  a  bishop,  or  presbyter,  or  deacon  who 
only  prays  with  heretics,  be  suspended  ;  but  if 
he  also  permit  them  to  perform  any  part  of  the 
office  of  a  clergyman,  let  him  be  deprived.-* 


2  [This  canon  is  divided  by  most  editors  of  the  Greek  text;  form- 
ing, in  their  enumeration,  Canons  38  and  39.  —  R.] 

3  [Hefele  and  others  regard  Canons  4^744  as  among  the  most 
ancient  of  this  collection,  and  of  nnknown  origin.  —  R.l 

*  [The  substance  of  this  canon  is  very  ancient,  Hefele  thinks; 
but  Drey  derives  it  from  Canons  9,  33,  34,  of  the  Synod  of  Laodicea, 
about  A.D.  363.  —  R.] 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


503 


46.  We  command  that  a  bishop,  or  presbyter, 
or  deacon  who  receives  the  baptism,  or  the  sac- 
rifice of  heretics,  be  deprived  :  "  For  what  agree- 
ment is  there  between  Christ  and  Behal  ?  or  what 
part  hath  a  behever  with  an  infidel  ?  "  ' 

47.  If  a  bishop  or  presbyter  rebaptizes  him 
who  has  had  true  baptism,  or  does  not  baptize 
him  who  is  polluted  by  the  ungodly,  let  him  be 
deprived,  as  ridiculing  the  cross  and  the  death 
of  the  Lord,  and  not  distinguishing  between  real 
priests  and  counterfeit  ones. 

48.  If  a  layman  divorces  his  own  wife,  and 
takes  another,  or  one  divorced  by  another,  let 
him  be  suspended.^ 

49.  If  any  bishop  or  presbyter  does  not  bap- 
tize according  to  the  Lord's  constitution,  into 
the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  but 
into  three  beings  Avithout  beginning,  or  into 
three  Sons,  or  three  Comforters,  let  him  be 
deprived.^ 

50.  If  any  bishop  or  presbyter  does  not  per- 
form the  three  immersions  of  the  one  admission, 
but  one  immersion,  which  is  given  into  the  death 
of  Christ,  let  him  be  deprived  ;  for  the  Lord  did 
not  say,  "  Baptize  into  my  death,"  but,  "  Go  ye 
and  make  disciples  of  all  nations,  baptizing  them 
into  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son, 
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Do  ye,  therefore,  O 
bishops,  baptize  thrice  into  one  Father,  and  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost,  according  to  the  will  of  Christ, 
and  our  constitution  by  the  Spirit.* 

51.  If  any  bishop,  or  presbyter,  or  deacon, 
or  indeed  any  one  of  the  sacerdotal  catalogue, 
abstains  from  marriage,  flesh,  and  wine,  not  for 
his  own  exercise,  but  because  he  abominates 
these   things,  forgetting   that  "  all  things  were 


'  2  Cor.  vi.  5.  [Drey  regards  this  as  very  ancient;  but  Hefele 
derives  it  and  the  following  one  from  the  Apostolic  Constitiitiotts, 
vi.  15.  — R.] 

2  [Very  ancient,  of  unknown  origin;  repeated  in  canons  of  Elvira 
and  Aries.  —  R.] 

3  [From  Apostolic  Constitulions,  vi.  11,  26.  —  R.] 

••  [This  canon,  the  last  of  those  in  the  collection  of  Dionysius,  is 
regarded  as  among  the  most  recent.  Of  unknown  origin.  —  R.]  At 
the  end  of  this  canon,  in  the  collection  of  John  of  Antioch,  the  follow- 
ing words  are  added:  "  Let  him  that  is  baptized  be  taught  that  the 
Father  was  not  crucified,  nor  endured  to  be  born  of  man,  nor  indeed 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  became  man,  or  even  endured  suffering,  for  He 
was  not  made  flesh;  but  the  only  begotten  Son  ransomed  the  world 
from  the  wrath  which  lay  upon  it:  for  He  became  man  through  His 
love  of  man,  having  fashioned  a  body  for  Himself  from  a  virgin.  For 
Wisdom  built  a  house  for  herself  as  a  Creator;  but  He  willingly  en- 
dured the  cross,  and  rescued  the  world  from  the  wrath  that  lies  on  it, 
namely,  those  who  are  baptized  into  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  the 
Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  But  let  those  who  do  not  thus  baptize  be 
suspended,  as  benig  ignorant  of  the  mystery  of  piety."  The  same 
collection  gives  the  following  as  Canon  51:  "  He  who  says  that  the 
Father  suffered  is  more  impious  than  the  Jews,  nailing  along  with 
Christ  the  Father  also.  He  who  denies  that  the  only  begotten  Son 
was  made  flesh  for  us,  and  endured  the  cross,  fights  with  God,  and  is 
an  enemy  of  the  saints.  He  that  names  the  Holy  Spirit  Father  or 
Son,  is  ignorant  and  foolish;  for  the  Son  is  Creator  along  with  the 
Father,  and  has  the  same  tlirone,  and  is  Lawgiver  along  with  Hiin, 
and  Judge,  and  the  cause  of  the  resurrection;  and  the  Holy  Spirit  is 
the  same  in  substance:  for  the  Godhead  has  three  Persons,  the  same 
in  substance.  For  in  our  day  Simon  the  magician  gave  forth  his 
doctrines,  drawing  the  speechless,  delusive,  unstable,  and  wicked 
spirit  to  himself,  and  babbling  that  there  is  one  Gocl  with  tliree  names, 
and  sometimes  erasing  the  passion  and  birth  of  Christ.  Do  you,  then, 
most  beloved  ones,  baptize  into  one  Father,  and  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Spirit  as  third,  according  to  the  will  of  the  Lord,  and  our  constitution 
made  in  the  spirit." 


very  good,"  5  and  that  "  God  made  man  male 
and  female,"  ^  and  blasphemously  abuses  the 
creation,  either  let  him  reform,  or  let  him  be 
deprived,  and  be  cast  out  of  the  Church ;  and 
the  same  for  one  of  the  laity.^ 

52.  If  any  bishop  or  presbyter  does  not  re- 
ceive him  that  returns  from  his  sin,  but  rejects 
him,  let  him  be  deprived  ;  because  he  grieves 
Christ,  who  says,  "  'I'here  is  joy  in  heaven  over 
one  sinner  that  repenteth."  ^ 

53.  If  any  bishop,  or  presbyter,  or  deacon 
does  not  on  festival  days  partake  of  flesh  or 
wine,  let  him  be  deprived,  as  "  having  a  seared 
conscience,"  ^  and  becoming  a  cause  of  scandal 
to  many. 

54.  If  any  one  of  the  clergy  be  taken  eating 
in  a  tavern,  let  him  be  suspended,  excepting 
when  he  is  forced  to  bait  at  an  inn  upon  the 
road.'° 

55.  If  any  one  of  the  clergy  abuses  his  bishop 
unjustly,  let  him  be  deprived  ;  for  says  the  Scrip- 
ture, "  Thou  shalt  not  speak  evil  of  the  ruler  of 
thy  people."  " 

56.  If  any  one  of  the  clergy  abuses  a  presby- 
ter or  a  deacon,  let  him  be  separated. 

57.  If  any  one  of  the  clergy  mocks  at  a  lame, 
a  deaf,  or  a  blind  man,  or  at  one  maimed  in  his 
feet,  let  him  be  suspended ;  and  the  like  for  the 
laity. 

58.  Let  a  bishop  or  presbyter  who  takes  no 
care  of  the  clergy  or  people,  and  does  not  in- 
struct them  in  piety,  be  separated  ;  and  if  he 
continues  in  his  negligence,  let  him  be  deprived.'^ 

59.  If  any  bishop  or  presbyter,  when  any  one 
of  the  clergy  is  in  want,  does  not  sup{)ly  his 
necessity,  let  him  be  suspended  ;  and  if  he  con- 
tinues in  it,  let  him  be  deprived,  as  having  killed 
his  brother.'^ 

60.  If  any  one  publicly  reads  in  the  Church 
the  spurious  books  of  the  ungodly,  as  if  they 
were  holy,  to  the  destruction  of  the  people  and 
of  the  clergy,  let  him  be  deprived.'* 

61.  If  there  be  an  accusation  against  a  Chris- 
tian for  fornication,  or  adultery,  or  any  other 
forbidden  action,  and  he  be  convicted,  let  him 
not  be  promoted  into  the  clerg)'. 

62.  If  any  one  of  the  clergy  for  fear  of  men, 


5  Gen.  i.  31. 

*  Gen.  i.  26. 

'  [Canons  51-53  are  from  the  Apostolic  Constitutions  :  the  first 
from  vi.  8,  10,  26;  the  second  from  ii.  12,  13;  the  third  from  v.  20. 
-R.l 

*  Luke  XV.  7. 
9  I  Tim.  iv.  2. 

10  [Canons  54-57  are  of  unknown  origin;  the  first  is  deemed  .incient, 
while  the  conduct  forbidden  in  the  others  points  to  .a  more  recent  date. 
Drey  thinks  the  distinctions  of  the  clergy  also  point  to  a  later  date. 
-K.l 

"   Ex.  x.xii.  28. 

'2  [Canon  58  is  supposed  to  refer  to  the  ab.sence  of  bishops  at  the 
imperi.al  city,  which  prevailed  in  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century. — 

R.] 

"  (Canon  59  resembles  the  twenty-fifth  canon  of  Synod  of  AnU- 
och;  see  on  Canon  9.  —  R.l 

'*  [Of  doubtful  origin,  but  resembling  Apostolic  Constitutions, 
vi.  16,  though  probably  of  later  date.  —  R.] 


504 


CONSTITUTIONS    OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


as  of  a  Jew,  or  a  Gentile,  or  an  heretic,  shall 
deny  the  name  of  Christ,  let  him  be  suspended ; 
but  if  he  deny  the  name  of  a  clergyman,  let  him 
be  deprived  ;  but  when  he  repents,  let  him  be 
received  as  one  of  the  laity.' 

63.  If  any  bishop,  or  presbyter,  or  deacon,  or 
indeed  any  one  of  the  sacerdotal  catalogue,  eats 
flesh  with  the  blood  of  its  life,  or  that  which  is 
torn  by  beasts,  or  which  died  of  itself,  let  him 
be  deprived ;  for  this  the  law  itself  has  for- 
bidden.- But  if  he  be  one  of  the  laity,  let  him 
be  suspended. 3 

64.  If  any  one  of  the  clergy  be  found  to  fast 
on  the  Lord's  day,  or  on  the  Sabbath-day,  ex- 
cepting one  only,  let  him  be  deprived ;  but  if 
he  be  one  of  the  laity,  let  him  be  suspended. •♦ 

65.  If  any  one,  either  of  the  clergy  or  laity, 
enters  into  a  synagogue  of  the  Jews  or  heretics 
to  pray,  let  him  be  deprived  and  suspended.5 

66.  If  any  one  of  the  clergy  strikes  one  in  a 
quarrel,  and  kills  him  by  that  one  stroke,  let  him 
be  deprived,  on  account  of  his  rashness ;  but  if 
he  be  one  of  the  laity,  let  him  be  suspended.^ 

67.  If  any  one  has  offered  violence  to  a  virgin 
not  betrothed,  and  keeps  her,  let  him  be  sus- 
pended. But  it  is  not  lawful  for  him  to  take 
another  to  wife ;  but  he  must  retain  her  whom 
he  has  chosen,  although  she  be  poor.7 

68.  If  any  bishop,  or  presbyter,  or  deacon, 
receives  a  second  ordination  from  any  one,  let 
him  be  deprived,  and  the  person  who  ordained 
him,  unless  he  can  show  that  his  former  ordina- 
tion was  from  the  heretics  ;  for  those  that  are 
either  baptized  or  ordained  by  such  as  these,  can 
be  neither  Christians  nor  clergymen.^ 

69.  If  any  bishop,  or  presbyter,  or  deacon,  or 
reader,  or  singer,  does  not  fast  the  fast  of  forty 
days,  or  the  fourth  day  of  the  week,  and  the  day 
of  the  Preparation,  let  him  be  deprived,  except 
he  be  hindered  by  weakness  of  body.  But  if  he 
be  one  of  the  laity,  let  him  be  suspended.^ 

70.  If  any  bishop,  or  any  other  of  the  clergy, 
fasts  with  the  Jews,  or  keeps  the  festivals  with 
them,  or  accepts  of  the  presents  from  their  fes- 
tivals, as  unleavened  bread  or  some  such  thing, 
let  him  be  deprived  ;  but  if  he  be  one  of  the 
laity,  let  him  be  suspended. '° 

71.  If  any  Christian  carries  oil  into  an  heathen 


'  [Canons  61,  62,  are  of  unknown  origin.  —  R.] 

^  Gen.  ix.;   Lev.  xvii. 

3  [Canon  63  is  regarded  as  very  ancient.  —  R.] 

*  [Canon  64  is  numbered  as  56  in  Hefele's  edition,  being  preceded 
by  Canons  65  and  66  as  given  above.  It  is  from  Apostolic  Constitu- 
tions, V.  2o.  —  R.] 

5  [Canon  65  is  from  Apostolic  Constitutions,  ii.  61.  —  R.] 

'     Of  unknown  but  probably  late  origin.  —  R.] 

'  [Drey  makes  thi.s  one  of  the  most  recent  canons  of  the  collec- 
tion. —  R.J 

■»  [Of  unknown  origin,  probably  recent.  —  R.] 

9  [Drey  considers  Canon  69  to  be  very  ancient,  but  also  intimates 
that  it  and  Canon  70  were  taken  from  the  pseudo-Ignatian  Epistle  to 
the  Philippians;  see  the  same,  chap,  xiii.,  latter  half,  vol.  i.  p.  119,  of 
this  series   —  R.] 

'°  [With  Canons  70,  71,  compare  Synod  of  Elvira  (a. D.  305  or  306), 
Canons  49,  50,  in  Hefele,  vol.  i  pp.  158,  159.  Drey,  however,  derives 
them  from  Canons  37-39  of  Laodicea  (a.d.  363) .  —  R. j 


temple,  or  into  a  synagogue  of  the  Jews,  or  lights 
up  lamps  in  their  festivals,  let  him  be  suspended. 

72.  If  any  one,  either  of  the  clergy  or  laity, 
takes  away  from  the  holy  Church  an  honeycomb, 
or  oil,  let  him  be  suspended,  and  let  him  add 
the  fifth  part  to  that  which  he  took  away." 

73.  A  vessel  of  silver,  or  gold,  or  linen,  which 
is  sanctified,  let  no  one  appropriate  to  his  own 
use,  for  it  is  unjust ;  but  if  any  one  be  caught, 
le-t  him  be  punished  with  suspension.'^ 

74.  If  a  bishop  be  accused  of  any  crime  by 
credible  and  faithful  persons,  it  is  necessary  that 
he  be  cited  by  the  bishops  ;  and  if  he  comes 
and  makes  his  apology,  and  yet  is  convicted,  let 
his  punishment  be  determined.  But  if,  when 
he  is  cited,  he  does  not  obey,  let  him  be  cited  a 
second  time,  by  two  bishops  sent  to  him.  But 
if  even  then  he  despises  them,  and  will  not  come, 
let  the  synod  pass  what  sentence  they  please 
against  him,  that  he  may  not  appear  to  gain  ad- 
vantage by  avoiding  their  judgment. '^ 

75.  Do  not  ye  receive  an  heretic  in  a  testi- 
mony against  a  bishop  ;  nor  a  Christian  if  he  be 
single.  For  the  law  says,  "  In  the  mouth  of  two 
or  three  witnesses  every  word  shall  be  estab- 
lished." '4 

76.  A  bishop  must  not  gratify  his  brother,  or 
his  son,  or  any  other  kinsman,  with  the  episcopal 
dignity,  or  ordain  whom  he  pleases  ;  for  it  is  not 
just  to  make  heirs  to  episcopacy,  and  to  gratify 
human  affections  in  divine  matters.  For  we  must 
not  put  the  Church  of  God  under  the  laws  of 
inheritance ;  but  if  any  one  shall  do  so,  let  his 
ordination  be  invalid,  and  let  him  be  punished 
with  suspension. '5 

77.  If  any  one  be  maimed  in  an  eye,  or  lame 
of  his  leg,  but  is  worthy  of  the  episcopal  dignity, 
let  him  be  made  a  bishop  ;  for  it  is  not  a  blemish 
of  the  body  that  can  defile  him,  but  the  pollution 
of  the  soul.'^ 

78.  But  if  he  be  deaf  and  blind,  let  him  not 
be  made  a  bishop  ;  not  as  being  a  defiled  per- 
son, but  that  the  ecclesiastical  affairs  may  not  be 
hindered. 

79.  If  any  one  hath  a  demon,  let  him  not  be 
made  one  of  the  clergy.  Nay,  let  him  not  pray 
with  the  faithful ;  but  when  he  is  cleansed,  let 
him  be  received ;  and  if  he  be  worthy,  let  him 
be  ordained.''' 


"  Lev.  V.  16.  [It  is  argued  from  the  theft  forbidden  that  this 
canon  is  more  recent;  its  origin  is  unknown.  —  R.] 

■2  [The  wealth  here  implied  points  to  a  comparatively  late  origin; 
Hefele  assigns  it  to  the  second  half  of  the  third  century,  but  Drey 
gives  a  later  date.  —  R.l 

'3  [Hefele  thinks  both  this  and  the  following  canon  to  be  later  than 
the  Nicaean  Council.  Drey,  however,  derives  Canon  74  frorri  the  coun- 
cil at  Chalcedon  (a.d.  451),  a  view  opposed  by  both  Bickell  and 
Hefele.  — R.] 

■•*  Deut.  xix.  15.  [According  to  Drey  this  canon  is  from  the 
Council  of  Constantinople  (sixth  canon),  in  a.d.  381.—^  R.] 

'5  [Drey  derives  this  from  Canon  23,  Synod  of  Antioch,  a.d.  341. 
—  R.] 

'6  [Hefele:  "The  Canons  77-^79,  inclusive,  belong  to  the  first 
three  centuries  of  the  Church;  their  origin  is  unknown."  —  R] 

'7  (Comp.  Apostolic  Constitutions,  viii.  32,  p.  495,  from  which 
this  may  have  been  taken.  —  R.] 


CONSTITUTIONS   OF   THE    HOLY   APOSTLES. 


505 


80.  It  is  not  right  to  ordain  him  bishop  pres- 
ently who  is  just  come  in  from  the  Gentiles,  and 
baptized ;  or  from  a  wicked  mode  of  life  :  for 
it  is  unjust  that  he  who  has  not  yet  afforded  any 
trial  of  himself  should  be  a  teacher  of  others, 
unless  it  anywhere  happens  by  divine  grace.' 

81.  We  hav^e  said  that  a  bishop  ought  not  to 
let  himself  into  public  administrations,  but  to  at- 
tend on  all  opportunities  upon  the  necessary 
affairs  of  the  Church.^  Either  therefore  let  him 
agree  not  to  do  so,  or  let  him  be  deprived.  For 
"  no  one  can  serve  two  masters,"  ^  according  to 
the  Lord's  admonition.* 

82.  We  do  not  permit  servants  to  be  ordained 
into  the  clergy  without  their  masters'  consent ; 
for  this  would  grieve  those  that  owned  them. 
For  such  a  practice  would  occasion  the  subver- 
sion of  families.  But  if  at  any  time  a  servant 
appears  worthy  to  be  ordained  into  an  high 
office,  such  as  our  Onesimus  appeared  to  be,  and 
if  his  master  allows  of  it,  and  gives  him  his  free- 
dom, and  dismisses  him  from  his  house,  let  him 
be  ordained. 5 

83.  Let  a  bishop,  or  presbyter,  or  deacon,  who 
goes  to  the  army,  and  desires  to  retain  both  the 
Roman  government  and  the  sacerdotal  adminis- 
tration, be  deprived.  For  "  the  things  of  Csesar 
belong  to  Caesar,  and  the  things  of  God  to 
God."  6 

84.  Whosoever  shall  abuse  the  king^  or  the 
governor  unjustly,  let  him  suffer  punishment ;  and 
if  he  be  a  clergyman,  let  him  be  deprived ;  but  if 
he  be  a  layman,  let  him  be  suspended. 

85.  Let  the  following  books  be  esteemed  ven- 
erable and  holy  by  you,  both  of  the  clergy  and 


1  [Drey  regards  Canon  80  as  an  imitation  of  the  second  canon 
of  Nicsea,  which  is,  however,  much  fuller:  comp.  Hefele,  i.  p.  377. 
On  the  principle,  comp.  i  Tim.  iii.  6  and  similar  passages.  -■  R.] 

2  Can.  iv.  prills. 

3  Matt.  vi.  la,. 

<  [The  contents  of  this  canon  point  to  a  late  date.  Drey  regards 
It  as  an  abridgment  of  the  third  canon  of  Chalcedon  (a.d.  451).  —  R.j 

5  [Of  unknown  origin  and  date.  —  R.] 

6  Matt,  x.xii.  21.  [This  also  Drey  traces  to  the  Council  of  Chal- 
cedon, A.D.  451  (Canon  7) ;  but  Hefele  opposes  this  view  here,  as  in 
the  case  of  the  other  canons  (30,  67,  74,  81)  which  Drey  derives  from 
that  source.  —  R.] 

1  [Orrather,"  the  emperor"  (3a<TtAea  having  that  sense).  Hefele 
refers  this  to  tlie  time  of  the  Arian  struggle,  when  the  emperors  were 
involved  in  ecclesiastical  controversies.  —  R.J 


laity.  Of  the  Old  Covenant :  the  five  books  of 
Moses  —  Genesis,  Exodus,  Leviticus,  Numbers, 
and  Deuteronomy  ;  one  of  Joshua  the  son  of 
Nun,  one  of  the  Judges,  one  of  Ruth,  four  of 
the  Kings,  two  of  the  Chronicles,  two  of  Ezra, 
one  of  Esther,  one  of  Judith,  three  of  the  Macca- 
bees, one  of  Job,  one  hundred  and  fifty  psalms ; 
three  books  of  Solomon  —  Proverbs,  Ecclesiastes, 
and  the  Song  of  Songs  ;  sixteen  prophets.  And 
besides  these,  take  care  that  your  young  persons 
learn  the  Wisdom  of  the  very  learned  Sirach. 
But  our  sacred  books,  that  is,  those  of  the  New 
Covenant,  are  these  :  the  four  Gospels  of  Mat- 
thew, Mark,  Luke,  and  John  ;  the  fourteen  Epis- 
tles of  Paul ;  two  Epistles  of  Peter,  three  of 
John,  one  of  James,  one  of  Jude  ;  two  Epistles 
of  Clement ;  and  the  Constitutions  dedicated  to 
you  the  bishops  by  me  Clement,  in  eight  books ; 
which  it  is  not  fit  to  publish  before  all,  because 
of  the  mysteries  contained  in  them ;  and  the 
Acts  of  us  the  Apostles.^ 

Let  these  canonical  rules  be  established  by  us 
for  you,  O  ye  bishops  ;  and  if  you  continue  to 
observe  them,  ye  shall  be  saved,  and  shall  have 
peace;  but  if  you  be  disobedient,  you  shall  be 
punished,  and  have  everlasting  war  one  with  an- 
other, and  undergo  a  penalty  suitable  to  your 
disobedience. 

Now,  God  who  alone  is  unbegotten,  and  the 
Maker  of  the  whole  world,  unite  you  all  through 
His  peace,  in  the  Holy  Spirit ;  perfect  you  unto 
every  good  work,  immoveable,  unblameable,  and 
unreprovable  ;  and  vouchsafe  to  you  eternal  life 
with  us,  through  the  mediation  of  His  beloved 
Son  Jesus  Christ  our  God  and  Saviour ;  with 
whom  glory  be  to  Thee,  the  God  over  all,  and 
the  Father,  in  the  Holy  Spirit  the  Comforter, 
now  and  always,  and  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 

The  end  of  the  Constitutions  of  the  Holy 
Apostles  by  Clement,  which  are  the  Catholic 
doctrine. 


8  [Hefele:  "  This  is  probably  the  least  ancient  canon  in  the  whole 
collection."  With  this  opinion  there  is  general  concurrence,  since  the 
mention  of  the  Constitutinus  among  the  canonical  books  indicates 
the  hand  of  the  last  compiler  of  that  collection  of  writings.  Whoever 
he  was,  he  was  not  Clement  of  Rome.  —  R.J 


5o6  ELUCIDATIONS. 


ELUCIDATIONS. 
I. 

(The  Bidding  Prayer,  etc.,  p.  485.) 

THE   PAULINE   NORM.' 

1.  Supplications. 

2.  Prayers,  Psalms,  Hymns,  and  Spiritual  Songs. 

3.  Intercessions. 

4.  General  Thanksgiving.    The  Kiss  of  Peace. 

5.  Anaphora.^ 

The  Lord  Jesus  the  same  night  in  which  He  was  betrayed  took  bread : 
And  when  He  had  given  thanks,  He  brake  it, 
And  said,  Take,  eat :  this  is  my  Body,  which  is  broken  for  you  : 
This  do  in  remembrance  of  Me. 

After  the  same  manner  also  He  took  the  cup,  when  He  had  supped, 
Saying,  This  cup  is  the  New  Testament  in  my  Blood  : 
This  do  ye,  as  oft  as  ye  drink  it,  in  remembrance  of  Me. 

For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  Bread,  and  drink  this  Cup,  ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  till  He 
come. 

6.  Our  Father,  etc.^ 

7.  Communion. 

Let  us  note  also  that  the  Apostle  had  "delivered"  unto  the  Corinthians  (i  Cor.  xi.  23),  as 
doubtless  to  others  (vii.  17),  certain  institutions  which  he  ordained  in  all  the  churches,  and  for 
departing  from  which  he  censures  the  Corinthians  in  this  place  (ver.  17  compared  with  ver.  2) 
in  certain  particulars.  In  chap,  xiv.,  at  ver.  40,  he  refers  to  these  ordinances  as  a  ra^t?,  in  the 
performance  of  which  they  were  to  proceed  (/coo-|attos)  with  due  order,  becojningly ;  not  with  mere 
decency,  but  with  a  beautiful  decorum  of  service. 

Finally,  let  me  suggest  that  there  are  fragments  of  the  Apostle's  (7rapa8oo-et?)  instructions 
everywhere  scattered  through  his  Epistles,  such  as  the  minute  canon  ^  concerning  the  veiling  of 
women  in  acts  of  worship,  insisting  upon  it  with  a  length  of  argument  which  in  one  of  the 
Apostolic  Fathers  would  be  considered  childish.  He  also  insisted  that  his  ra^cs  is  from  the 
Lord. 

«  I  Tim.  ii.  1-3.  Compare  (n-oteto-ffot)  the  Greek  here  with  that  of  the  LXX.  in  Ex.  xxix.  36,  38,  39,  41;  also  Ex.  x.  25,  and  SO 
throughout  the  Old  Testament.     Note  also  Eph.  v.  19  and  Col.  iii.  16;  and  the  kiss,  i  Cor.  xvi.  20. 

2  I  Cor.  xi.  23.  To  me  there  is  great  significance  in  the  fact  that  the  Apostle  received  this  as  an  original  Gospel  from  the  Lord  Him- 
self. Truly  (2  Cor.  xi.  5)  he  was  not  "  a  whit  behind"  even  that  chief  Apostle  who  reclined  in  the  bosom  of  the  Great  High  Priest  and 
adorable  Lamb  of  God  as  He  instituted  the  feast. 

3  Matt,  vi  9.  For  this  we  have  the  important  testimony  of  Gregory  the  Great,  as  preserved  to  his  day:  that  the  Apostles  (SS.  Peter 
and  Paul  must  have  been  primarily  in  his  mind,  of  course)  delivered  no  other  "  custom  "  to  the  churches  (i.e.,  as  essential)  than  the  words 
of  Institution  and  the  Lord's  Prayer.     He  says:  — 

"  Orationem  Dominicam,  mox  post  precem,  dicimus,  quia  tnos  Apostolorum  erat,  ad  ipsam  solummodo  orationem  oblationis  hostiam 

consecrare."  —  Epist.  ad  Joann.  Episc.  Syrac,  lib.  ix.  Ep.  xii.,  Opp.,  torn.  iii.  p.  958,  ed.  Migne. 
Now,  for  the  sense  oi  post  precem  in  the  above,  we  have  Justin  Martyr  for  a  primitive  witness  of  Roman  usage.  He  speaks  of  the  words 
of  Institution  expressly  (vol.  i.  cap.  Ixvi.  p.  185)  as  "the  Prayer  of  the  Logos"  (St'  6ux>)S  Aoyov),  in  the  use  of  which  he  makes  the 
essential  act  of  the  Oblation  to  consist.  Liturgic  fulness  may  or  may  not  require  more,  but  the  essentials  are  thus  simple.  So  far, 
the  Roman  Missal  to  this  day  sustains  the  words  of  Gregory.  It  is  overlo.ided  with  ceremonial,  but  does  not  include  the  noble  features 
on  which  the  Greeks  lay  so  great  stress;  i.e.,  the  conjoint  Oblation  and  Invocation.     See  i  Pet.  ii.  5. 

♦  I  Cor.  xi.  5,  6.     Here  men  are  equally  enjoined  not  to  follow  the  Jewish  rite  of  covering  their  heads  in  prayer. 


ELUCIDATIONS.  507 


Fragments  of  the  primitive  hymns  are  also  scattered  through  the  Apostles'  writings,  as,  e.g.,  — 

"Eyeipat   6  KaOevSwv, 

Koi  a.vd<TTa  eK  tCiv  V(Kpwv, 

Kttt  e7ri(f>av(T€L  aoi   6   Xptcrros.' 

Of  such  passages  the  formula  (Sco  Xe'yet)  "  It  saith  "  seems  to  be  a  frequent  index. 

May  we  not  conclude  also  that  the  sublime  prayer  and  doxology  of  Eph.  iii.  14-21  is  a,  quota- 
tion from  the  Apostle's  own  eucharistic  ra^is  for  the  whole  state  of  Christ's  Church  militant  ? 

Might  not  the  same  be  more  constantly  used  in  our  days  as  an  intercession  for  the  whole 
flock  of  the  one  Shepherd? 

II- 

(Fulfil  His  constitution,  p.  489.) 

The  Pauline  Norm  being  borne  in  mind,  we  shall  best  comprehend  this  Clementine  liturgy,  as 
to  its  primitive  claims,  by  taking  the  testimony  of  Justin,  writing  in  Rome  to  the  Antonines 
A.D.  160.  Referring  to  the  Apology  in  our  first  volume,  we  observe  that  the  order  kept  up  in  his 
day  was  this  :  — 

1.  Prayers  for  all  estates  of  men. 

2.  The  kiss  of  peace. 

3.  Oblation  of  bread  and  wine. 

4.  Thanksgiving. 

5.  Words  of  institution. 

6.  The  prayer  ending  with  Amen. 

7.  Communion. 

Now,  a  century  later,  we  may  suppose  the  original  of  this  Clemetithie  to  have  taken  a  fuller 
shape  ;  of  which  still  later  this  Ck'tnentine  is  the  product.^ 

Bear  in  mind  that  the  early  Roman  use  was  (Greek)  borrowed  wholly  from  the  East ;  ^  and, 
comparing  the  testim.ony  of  Justin  with  the  Pauline  Norm,  may  we  not  suppose  that  this  norm 
in  Rome  was  augmented  by  the  Eastern  vses,  and  so  preserves  a  true  name  in  that  of  the  first 
Bishop  of  Rome,  who  accepted  it  from  Jerusalem  or  Antioch  ? 


III. 

(That  He  may  show  this  bread,  etc.,  p.  4S9.) 

From  a  recent  essay  by  Dr.  Williams,  the  erudite  bishop  of  Connecticut,  I  am  permitted  to 
cite,  as  follows  :  — 


Compare  the  original  texts  thus:  — 


CLEMENTINE.^ 


67r(jf  ano<pT]vy  rfiv  aprov  tovtov  auiua  rov  Kpiarov  oov  nal 
rd  noT7]f)iov  tovtov  aiixa  rov  Xpcaroii  auv  iva  o't  uirahiliov- 
r£f,  K.T.X. 


IREN/EUS.' 

OTTtjf  dno<pTivy  tjjv  Ovaiav  ravTijv,  ndl  rbv  upTov  auiia  rov 
XpioTov,  hat  TO  TtoTfipiov  Tb  alfio  Tov  XptdToi)  Iva  ol  /ucTaT^a- 


•  Eph.  V.  14. 

*  See  the  Greek  in  Hammond,  p.  3,  and  the  learned  Introdtiction,  p.  Ixx. 
3  Hammond,  Introduction,  p.  Ixix. 

<  See  transition,  p.  489.  supra. 

S  See  translation,  vol.  i.  (Fragment  xxxvii.)  p.  574,  this  series. 


5oS  ELUCIDATIONS. 


Bishop  Williams  then  proceeds  to  inquire  :  — 

"How  is  this  striking  agreement  to  be  explained?  Does  Irenaeus  quote  from  the  Clementine,  or  the 
Clementine  from  him?  Or  is  it  not  much  more  likely  that  they  are  independent  witnesses  to  primitive  uses, 
going  back  to  the  period  of  the  persecutions,  and  extending  '  far  beyond  the  limits  of  Syria  or  Palestine  '  ? " ' 

I  shall  recur  to  these  passages  in  the  elucidations  to  Early  Liturgies  {infra)  :  but  here  I  beg 
the  reader  to  consult  Pfaff,  to  whom  we  owe  the  discovery  of  the  fragment  cited  from  Irenaeus ; 
also  Grabe,  in  the  same  volume  of  Pfaff,  whom  I  have  already  introduced  to  the  reader.^ 


POSTSCRIPT. 

The  American  editor  had  been  promised  the  aid  of  his  beloved  friend  the  Rev.  Dr.  Hobart 
in  the  elucidation  of  the  liturgies ;  but  a  sudden  and  almost  fatal  prostration  of  his  health  has 
deprived  the  reader  of  the  admirable  comments  with  which  he  would  have  enriched  these  pages, 
had  Providence  permitted. 

'  For  purposes  of  comparison  on  many  points  connected  with  this  inquiry,  see  the  Fragment  of  an  Ancient  East-Syrian  Liturgy 
in  Hammond's  Appendix,  pubhshed  separately,  Oxford,  1879. 

2  Concerning  Pfaff,  see  p.  536,  infra,  and  vol.  i.  p.  574,  note  5,  this  series. 


AN  ANCIENT  HOMILY, 


COMMONLY  STYLED 


THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  CLEMENT. 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE 

TO   THE   HOMILY    KNOWN   AS 

THE  SECOND  EPISTLE  OF  CLEMENT. 


It  is  gratifying  that  our  series  is  marked  by  tokens  of  critical  progress,  and  not  less  cheering 
tokens  of  scientific  research.  The  clearing-up  of  much  that  has  perplexed  us  about  Hermas ; 
the  Bryennios  discovery ;  and,  not  least,  the  completion  of  this  fragment,  which  has  long  been 
a  scandal  to  patristic  inquiry,  —  are  surely  such  tokens.  They  enrich  the  reader  with  definite 
ideas  on  many  collateral  subjects.  May  they  not  stimulate  American  scholarship  and  American 
affluence  to  fresh  enterprises  of  the  same  character  for  the  advancement  of  learning,  and  the 
glory  of  the  world's  Redeemer  and  Illuminator  ? 

The  very  early  date  to  which  this  homily  is  now  assigned  makes  its  slightest  allusions  to  the 
New-Testament  canon  of  very  great  importance.  I  have  ventured  to  indicate  a  few  such,  even 
where  they  may  be  mere  allusions,  not  textual  quotations  :  as,  e.g.,  on  p.  517,  at  notes  20  and  22, 
sHght  indications  of  a  reference  to  the  Second  Epistle  of  St.  Peter  and  to  the  Apocalypse.' 

I  shall  have  occasion  to  refer  to  this  work  in  the  elucidation  of  the  Liturgies  which  are  to 
follow.  If  it  be,  as  Bishop  Lightfoot  supposes,  a  homily  of  the  second  century,  it  may  lend 
important  retrospective  aid  to  the  student  of  these  volumes  in  other  particulars ;  but,  having 
entrusted  this  interesting  relic  to  the  editorial  care  of  a  most  competent  scholar,  I  shall  not 
presume  to  anticipate  his  judgment  in  any  matter. 

'  If  this  reference  to  2  Pet.  iii.  9  be  probable,  it  is  one  of  the  earliest  testimonies  to  the  genuine  character  of  that  Epistle.  The  true 
Clement  has  two  references  to  the  same  (pp.  8  and  11,  vol.  i.,  this  series),  and  Justin  also  (vol.  i.  p.  240)  is  credited  with  a  similar  refer- 
ence to  2  Peter  and  the  .Apocalypse.    See  Lardner,  Credit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  123  et  seq. 

5" 


512  INTRODUCTORY    NOTICE. 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE  BY  PROFESSOR  M.  B.  RIDDLE,  D.D. 


SECTION   I.  — TEXT. 


In  this  volume,  pp.  372-376,  will  be  found  a  brief  account  of  the  Codex  discovered  by  Bryen- 
nios,  now  Metropolitan  of  Nicomedia.  It  remains  in  the  library  of  the  Jerusalem  Monastery  of 
the  Holy  Sepulchre  at  Constantinople,  While  the  publication  of  the  Greek  text  of  the  Teaching 
awakened  unusual  interest,  the  recovery  of  that  document  has  not  been  the  only  valuable  result 
of  this  important  discovery.  The  Codex,  as  was  speedily  known,  contains  the  only  complete 
copy  of  the  Greek  text  of  the  two  Epistles  of  Clement.  The  lacunce  previously  existing  in  the 
genuine  Epistle  were  not  extensive  ;  but,  as  now  appears,  the  Alexandrian  manuscript  contains 
only  three-fifths  of  the  second  Epistle.  The  entire  Greek  text  of  both  Epistles  was  given  to  the 
public  by  Bryennios  '  in  1875. 

This  at  once  led  to  a  revision  of  some  recent  editions,  notably  those  of  Hilgenfeld,^  and 
of  Gebhardt  and  Harnack.3  Many  monographs  soon  appeared.  But  the  discovery  of  a  new 
(Syriac)  source  for  the  text  in  1876,  while  not  affecting  the  general  problem,  gave  to  patristic 
scholars  more  abundant  critical  material.  Bishop  Lightfoot's  Appendix  t  contains  the  most  con- 
venient and  accessible  collation  of  this  material,  as  well  as  the  most  clear  statements  on  all  points 
affected  by  the  two  discoveries.  The  Syriac  manuscript,  containing  a  version  of  the  two  Epistles 
of  Clement,  was  purchased  by  the  Cambridge  University  Library  in  1876,  from  the  collection 
of  "the  late  Oriental  scholar  M.  Jules  Mohl  of  Paris"  (Lightfoot).  It  embraces  the  entire  New 
Testament,  except  the  Apocalypse,  in  the  Harkleian  recension  of  the  Philoxenian  (or  later) 
Syriac  version;  but  the  scribe  has  inserted  the  two  Epistles  of  Clement  (entire)  between  the 
Catholic  and  Pauline  Epistles.  The  value  of  the  manuscript  for  New-Testament  criticism  is 
great,  and  the  phenomena  it  presents  interesting,  as  bearing  on  the  discussion  of  the  New- 
Testament  canon ;  but  the  paucity  of  sources  for  the  text  of  the  Clementine  Epistles  gives 
special  importance  to  the  discovery  of  a  version  of  these  writings  so  soon  after  the  recovery  of 
the  entire  Greek  text.  A  discussion  of  the  textual  questions  is  forbidden  by  the  limits  of  this 
Introductory  Notice,  but  a  few  points  may  be  stated  :  — 

1.  A  comparison  of  the  three  authorities  (the  Alexandrian,  the  Constantinopolitan,  and  the 
Syriac) ,  in  the  parts  they  in  common  contain,  shows  that  the  first  is  most  trustworthy,  and  that 
the  Syriac  is  usually  more  correct  than  the  Constantinopolitan. 

2.  Hence,  in  the  recovered  portions,  the  authority  of  the  Syriac  is  very  valuable  in  correcting 
the  obvious  blunders  of  the  Greek  copy.  This  should  teach  caution  in  accepting  the  text  of  the 
Teaching,  where  the  same  Greek  manuscript  is  our  only  authority. 

3.  The  genuine  Epistle  of  Clement,  which  stands  next  in  age  to  the  canonical  books  of  the 
New  Testament,  now  stands  next  in  accuracy  of  text  also.  Doubt  in  regard  to  textual  questions 
decreases  as  the  critical  material  increases. 

1  The  full  title  of  his  edition,  in  English  form,  is  as  follows:  "  The  two  Epistles  of  our  holy  father  Clement  Bishop  of  Rome  to  the 
Corinthians;  from  a  manuscript  in  the  library  of  the  Most  Holy  Sepulchre  in  Fanar  of  Constantinople;  now  for  the  first  time  published 
complete,  with  prolegomena  and  notes,  by  Philotheos  Bryennios,  Metropolitan  of  Serrse.     Constantinople,  1875." 

2  Novum  Test,  extra  canonem  receptum  (2d  ed.,  Leipzig,  1876).  Pp.  xliv.-xlix.,  69-106,  contain  prolegomena,  text,  and  notes, 
2  Clement. 

3  Patrum  Apost.  Opera,  2d  ed.,  Leipzig,  1876. 

*  St.  Clement  0/  Rome.  An  Appendix  containing  the  newly  recovered  portions,  with  introductions,  notes,  and  translations.  Londoii, 
1877.    The  original  volume,  London,  1869. 


INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE.  513 


SECTION   2.  — PLACE   AND   DATE   OF  COMPOSITION;   AUTHOR. 

The  recovery  of  the  entire  text  of  the  Second  Epistle  settles  the  question  as  to  the  purpose 
of  the  work.  As  was  previously  surmised,  it  is  a  homily  (comp.  chaps,  xvii.,  xix.,  xx.)  ;  more- 
over, it  was  "  read  "  by  the  author  at  public  worship  after  the  Scripture  lesson  (see  chap,  xix) . 
But  as  to  place,  date,  and  author,  there  is  still  diversity  of  opinion.  The  three  questions  are 
closely  related.  The  view  of  Bishop  Lightfoot  seems,  on  the  whole,  most  tenable.  He  regards 
the  homily  as  of  Corinthian  origin,  dehvered,  in  all  probability,  between  a.d.  120  and  140,  but  the 
work  of  an  unknown  author,  who  seems  to  have  been  one  of  the  presbyters  of  the  church,  —  pos- 
sibly the  bishop.  The  allusions  to  the  athletic  games  are  in  favour  of  Corinth.  On  this  theory 
the  title  is  thus  accounted  for :  The  genuine  Epistle  of  Clement  was  addressed  to  the  Corin- 
thians, and  read  in  the  church  of  that  city  from  time  to  time.  This  homily  was  probably  read  in 
the  same  manner,  and  at  length  united  in  a  manuscript  copy  with  the  other.  Each  was  "  to  the 
Corinthians  :  "  hence  it  was  gradually  inferred  that  both  were  Epistles  of  Clement.  Of  this  suc- 
cession or  movement  Lightfoot  finds  some  indications  in  the  manuscript  authorities. 

The  internal  evidence  of  an  early  date  has  been  increased  by  the  discovery  of  the  concluding 
portion,  but  there  is  nothing  to  determine  the  exact  time  of  composition.  The  distinction  made 
in  chap.  xiv.  between  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  as  well  as  the  use  of  the  Gospel  of  the  Egyp- 
tians (at  the  close  of  chap,  xii.),  taken  in  connection  with  the  unmistakeable  citations  of  New- 
Testament  passages  as  of  Divine  authority,  point  to  the  first  half  of  the  second  century  as  the 
probable  period.  The  absence  of  all  direct  opposition  to  Gnosticism  points  to  an  origin  within 
the  same  limits.  All  these  considerations  make  against  the  view  of  Hilgenfeld,  who  attributes 
the  homily  to  Clement  of  Alexandria,  thus  assigning  it  to  the  latter  half  of  the  second  century. 

In  regard  to  the  author,  nothing  further  is  learned  from  the  newly  recovered  portion,  except 
the  fact  that  he  was  a  preacher.  Even  this  does  not  determine  his  ecclesiastical  position,  since 
at  that  early  date  much  freedom  of  utterance  was  permitted  in  Christian  assemblies.  It  is,  how- 
ever, very  probable  that  the  author  was  a  presbyter ;  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  he  was  the 
chief  presbyter,  or  local  bishop. 

The  homily  is  still  attributed  to  a  person  named  Clement,  but  there  are  three  theories  as  to 
what  Clement,  (i)  Bryennios  stands  almost  alone  in  claiming  that  the  document  is  the  work  of 
Clemens  Romanus.  The  internal  evidence  against  this  view  was  quite  sufficient  before  the  full 
text  of  the  two  Epistles  was  known ;  now  it  is  to  be  regarded  as  abundantly  conclusive.  Even 
the  English  version  of  the  two  writings  will  suggest  to  the  intelligent  reader  the  points  of  dif- 
ference. (2)  As  intimated  above,  Hilgenfeld  regards  Clement  of  Alexandria  as  the  author; 
but  this  places  the  homily  too  late.  Moreover,  the  writings  of  the  Alexandrian  Father  stand 
immensely  above  this  feeble,  commonplace,  and  chaotic  production.  Even  the  citation  from  the 
Gospel  of  the  Egyptians,  common  to  both,'  is  differently  used  by  the  two  authors ;  Clement  of 
Alexandria  opposing  the  interpretation  favoured  in  this  homily,  as  well  as  objecting  to  the  authority 
of  that  apocryphal  Gospel.  Hilgenfeld's  argument  from  the  word  ^ikoa-o^Civ,  in  chap,  xix., 
is  invalidated  by  the  improbability  of  that  reading;  see  note  in  loco.  (3)  The  most  plausible 
view,  as  Bishop  Lightfoot  admits,  is  that  of  Harnack.  He  assigns  the  homily  to  a  third  Clement, 
referred  to,  as  he  supposes,  in  the  Shepherd  of  Ilermas,-  and  living  somewhat  later  than  Clement 
of  Rome.  In  favour  of  this  may  be  urged  :  some  similarity  to  the  Shepherd  of  Hernias,  the 
probability  that  at  the  date  of  the  later  writing  Clement  of  Rome  was  not  living,  and  the  easy 
explanadon  it  affords  of  the  traditional  tide.  But,  while  a  third  Clement  may  have  lived  at  Rome, 
we  have  no  evidence  other  than  the  doubtful  hint  in  the  Shepherd.  The  allusion  in  that  work 
seems  far  more  appropriate  to  the  well-known  Clement  of  Rome.  The  argument  from  the  later 
date  of  the  Shepherd  proves  very  litde ;  not  only  is  the  date  uncertain,  but  the  visions  are  placed 

«  See  chap,  xii.,  and  Clem.  Alex.,  Stromata,  iii.  13,  vol.  ii.  p.  398.  "  See  Vision  II.  4,  vol.  ii.  p.  12. 


514  INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE. 

quite  early.  The  editor  of  this  series,  while  accepting  a.d.  i6o  as  the  probable  date  of  the  Shepherd, 
regards  it  as  a  compilation,  introducing  "  Hernias  and  Clement  to  identify  the  times  which  are 
idealized  in  his  allegory."  '     The  view  of  Bishop  Lightfoot,  therefore,  seems  to  be  the  safest. 

SECTION   3.— CHARACTER   AND   CONTENTS. 

The  style  of  the  homily  is  poor.  It  abounds  in  connectives,  which  link  unconnected  ideas ; 
its  thought  is  feeble,  its  theology  peculiar  though  not  false,  its  arrangement  confused.  While 
it  furnishes  some  historical  data  for  practical  theology,  it  is,  in  homiletical  method  and  matter, 
in  sharp  contrast  with  the  Apostolic  writings  and  with  the  homilies  of  Origen.  Though  refer- 
ring to  Scripture,  it  has  none  of  the  virtues  of  the  expository  discourse ;  though  hortatory  in 
tone,  it  has  little  of  the  unity  and  directness  of  better  sermons  of  that  class.  Its  chief  excellence 
is  its  brevity. 

It  is  difficult  to  make  an  analysis  of  the  contents.  The  theme  is  the  duty  of  fulfilling  the 
commands  of  Christ. 

(i)  This  obedience  is  the  true  confession  of  Christ,  answering  to  the  greatness  of  His  salva- 
tion ;  mainly  in  chaps,  i.-iv. 

( 2 )  Thus  the  Christian  shows  his  opposition  to  the  world ;  chaps,  v.-viii. 

(3)  This  obedience  will  be  rewarded  in  the  future  world  ;  chaps,  ix.-xvii. 

(4)  The  conclusion  :  the  preacher's  confession  (xviii.),  justification  of  his  exhortation  (xix.)  ; 
concluding  word  of  consolation,  with  doxology  (xx.).  But  the  treatment  is  not  strictly  logical, 
nor  are  the  parts  clearly  distinguished. 

The  theology  shows  no  traces  of  heresy,  nor  does  it  sharply  oppose  any  false  doctrinal  views. 
It  lacks  the  dogmatic  precision  of  a  later  age,  but  emphasizes  rigid  views  of  the  relation  of  the 
sexes.  "  Repentance  and  good  works  seem  to  be  the  main  articles  of  its  creed.  Of  regeneration 
there  seems  to  be  no  definite  idea  :  to  be  called  is  the  same  as  to  be  saved.  The  Church  is  pre- 
existent ;  the  kingdom  of  God  is  in  the  future ;  no  worth  is  left  to  this  world  or  to  the  life  in  it. 
The  principal  argument  urged  in  favour  of  standing  firm  in  faith  is  the  good  issue  of  it  in  the 
next  life"  (C.J.  H.  Ropes). 

The  hints  given  in  regard  to  public  worship  agree  with  the  famous  description  of  Justin 
Martyr,^  and  there  are  indications  that  the  early  freedom  of  exhortation  had  not  yet  disappeared. 
Bishop  Lightfoot  aptly  concludes  his  dissertation  with  these  words:  "The  homily  itself,  as  a 
literary  work,  is  almost  worthless.  As  the  earliest  example  of  its  kind,  however,  and  as  the 
product  of  an  important  age  of  which  we  possess  only  the  scantiest  remains,  it  has  the  highest 
value.  Nor  will  its  intellectual  poverty  blind  us  to  its  true  grandeur,  as  an  example  of  the  lofty 
moral  earnestness  and  the  triumj^hant  faith  which  subdued  a  reluctant  world,  and  laid  it  prostrate 
at  the  foot  of  the  cross."  ^ 

SECTION  4.  — THE   VERSION   IN   THIS   VOLUME. 

Greater  unity  would  have  been  secured  by  a  new  translation  of  the  entire  work.  Since,  how- 
ever, this  was  not  possible,  the  aim  of  the  editor  has  been  to  give  the  reader,  as  far  as  practicable, 
the  benefit  of  the  light  shed  upon  the  whole  by  the  recently  discovered  authorities.  The  portion 
already  translated  in  the  Edinburgh  volume  has  been  supplied  with  critical  annotations,  and  a 
few  exegetical  points  have  been  treated.  The  recent  editions  of  the  Greek  text  have,  of  course, 
been  consulted. 

The  newly  recovered  portion  has  been  re-translated.     Bishop  Lightfoot's  version  is  so  excel- 

'  See  vol.  ii.  p.  4;  and  comp.  Lightfoot,  Appendix,  pp.  316,  317. 

2  First  Apology,  ch.  Ixvii.  (vol.  i.  p.  186). 

3  St.  Clement,  Appendix,  p.  317. 


INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE.  515 

lent  that  the  temptation  to  use  it  was  very  great.  It  has,  of  course,  influenced  the  editor  in  many 
places.  But  the  following  version  differs  from  it  mainly  in  two  respects  :  (i)  An  effort  has  been 
made  to  preserve  the  verbal  correspondences  between  the  language  of  the  homily  and  that  of  the 
New  Testament :  hence  the  English  word  used  in  the  Revised  Version  as  an  equivalent  of  a 
Greek  term  is  given  here  as  a  similar  equivalent.  (2)  The  view  of  the  Greek  tenses  indicated  in 
Lightfoot's  renderings  does  not  always  accord  with  that  of  the  editor. 

It  may  be  added,  that  Professor  C.  J.  H.  Ropes  of  Bangor,  Me.,  kindly  sent,  for  use  in  the 
preparation  of  the  Epistle  for  this  volume,  his  manuscript  translation  and  notes.  These  have 
been  very  helpful,  and  are  entitled  to  this  acknowledgment.  It  will  be  found  that  the  American 
translation  is  less  paraphrastic  than  the  Edinburgh.  The  new  portions,  both  text  and  notes,  have 
been  printed  without  brackets  when  they  are  the  work  of  the  editor.  The  rare  additions  of  the 
general  editor  are  always  bracketed,  that  the  reader  may  readily  recognise  to  whom  the  literary 
responsibility  in  each  case  properly  belongs. 


The  following  is  the  Edinburgh  Introductory  Notice  :  — 

The  first  certain  reference  which  is  made  by  any  early  writer  to  this  so-called  Epistle  of  Clem- 
ent is  found  in  these  words  of  Eusebius  {Hist.  EccL,  iii.  38)  :  "  We  must  know  that  there  is  also 
a  second  Epistle  of  Clement.  But  we  do  not  regard  it  as  being  equally  notable  with  the  former, 
since  we  know  of  none  of  the  ancients  that  have  made  use  of  it."  Several  critics  in  modem  times 
have  endeavoured  to  vindicate  the  authenticity  of  this  Epistle.  But  it  is  now  generally  regarded 
as  one  of  the  many  writings  which  have  been  falsely  ascribed  to  Clement.  Besides  the  want  of 
external  evidence,  indicated  even  by  Eusebius  in  the  above  extract,  the  diversity  of  style  clearly 
points  to  a  different  writer  from  that  of  the  first  Epistle.  A  commonly  accepted  opinion  among 
critics  at  the  present  day  is,  that  this  is  not  an  Epistle  at  all,  but  a  fragment  of  one  of  the  many 
homilies  falsely  ascribed  to  Clement.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  however,  that  in  the  catalogue  of 
writings  contained  in  the  Alexandrian  ms.  it  is  both  styled  an  Epistle,  and,  as  well  as  the  other 
which  accompanies  it,  is  attributed  to  Clement.  As  the  ms.  is  certainly  not  later  than  the  fifth 
century,  the  opinion  referred  to  must  by  that  time  have  taken  firm  root  in  the  Church ;  but  in  the 
face  of  internal  evidence,  and  in  want  of  all  earlier  testimony,  such  a  fact  goes  but  a  small  way  to 
establish  its  authenticity. 


THE    HOMILY/ 


CHAP.     I. WE      OUGHT     TO     THINK     HIGHLY     OF 

CHRIST. 

Brethren,  it  is  fitting  that  you  should  think 
of  Jesus  Christ  as  of  God,  —  as  the  Judge  of  the 
living  and  the  dead.  And  it  does  not  become 
us='  to  think  hghtly3  of  our  salvation  ;  for  if  we 
think  little  ^  of  Him,  we  shall  also  hope  but  to 
obtain  little  from  Him.  And  those  of  us  ^  who 
hear  carelessly  of  these  things,  as  if  they  were 
of  small  importance,  commit  sin,  not  knowing 
whence  we  have  been  called,  and  by  whom,  and 
to  what  place,  and  how  much  Jesus  Christ  sub- 
mitted to  suffer  for  our  sakes.  What  return, 
then,  shall  we  make  to  Him  ?  or  what  fruit  that 
shall  be  worthy  of  that  which  He  has  given  to 
us?  For,5  indeed,  how  great  are  the  benefits^ 
which  we  owe  to  Him  !  He  has  graciously  given 
us  light ;  as  a  Father,  He  has  called  us  sons ; 
He  has  saved  us  when  we  were  ready  to  perish. 
What  praise,  then,  shall  we  give  to  Him,  or  what 
return  shall  we  make  for  the  things  which  we 
have  received??  We  were  deficient^  in  under- 
standing, worshipping  stones  and  wood,  and  gold, 
and  silver,  and  brass,  the  works  of  men's  hands  ;9 
and  our  whole  life  was  nothing  else  than  death. 
Involved  in  blindness,  and  with  such  darkness '" 
before  our  eyes,  we  have  received  sight,  and 
through  His  will  have  laid  aside  that  cloud  by 
which  we  were  enveloped.  For  He  had  com- 
passion on  us,  and  mercifully  saved  us,  observing 
the  many  errors  in  which  we  were  entangled,  as 


'  No  title,  not  even  a  letter,  is  presented  in  the  MS.  [In  C  (=  MS. 
at  Constantinople  found  by  liryennios)  the  title  is  KAr;;u.efTo?  Trpo; 
Kopifeious  B',  corresponding  (o  that  of  the  First  Epistle.  In  S  ( = 
Syriac  MS.  at  Cambridge)  there  is  a  subscription  to  the  First  Epistle 
ascribing  it  to  Clement,  then  these  words:  "  Of  the  same  the  Second 
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians."  At  the  close  this  subscription  occurs: 
"  Here  endeth  the  Second  Epistle  of  Clement  to  the  Corinthians." 

J  [C  has  here,  and  in  many  other  places,  w/nas  instead  of  rj/ia?. 
This  substitution  of  the  second  person  plural  is  one  of  its  marked  pe- 
culiarities. —  R.l 

■3  [Literally,  "  little  things;  "  Lightfoot,  "  mean  things."  —  R.] 

■*  [Lightfoot  follows  the  Syriac,  and  renders:  "  And  they  that 
listen,  as  concerning  mean  things,  do  wrong;  and  we  ourselves  do 
wrong,  not  knowing,"  etc.  But  the  briefer  reading  of  the  Greek  Mss. 
is  lectio  difficilior.  —  R.] 

5  [Only  S  has  yoip.  A  has  Se,  which  the  Edinburgh  translators 
have  rendered  "  for."     So  twice  in  chap.  iii.  —  R.] 

''  Literally,  "  holy  things." 

7  Comp.  Ps.  c.wi.  12. 

8  Literally,  "  lame." 

9  Literally,  "  of  men."     [Compare  Amobius,  vol.  vi.  p.  423.] 
'°  Literally,  "  being  full  of  such  darkness  in  our  sight." 


well  as  the  destruction  to  which  we  were  ex- 
posed," and  that  we  had  '^  no  hope  of  salvation 
except  it  came  to  us  from  Him.  For  He  called 
us  when  we  were  not,'^  and  willed  that  out  of 
nothing  we  should  attain  a  real  existence.'* 

CHAP.    II. THE     CHURCH,    FORMERLY     BARREN,    IS 

NOW    FRUITFUL. 

"  Rejoice,  thou  barren  that  bearest  not ;  break 
forth  and  cry,  thou  that  travailest  not ;  for  she 
that  is  desolate  hath  many  more  children  than 
she  that  hath  an  husband."  's  In  that  He  said, 
"  Rejoice,  thou  barren  that  bearest  not,"  He 
referred  to  us,  for  our  Church  was  barren  before 
that  children  were  given  to  her.  But  when  He 
said,  "  Cry  out,  thou  that  travailest  not,"  He 
means  this,  that  we  should  sincerely  offer  up  our 
prayers  to  God,  and  should  not,  like  women  in 
travail,  show  signs  of  weakness.'^  And  in  that 
He  said,  "  For  she  that  is  desolate  hath  many 
more  children  than  she  that  hath  an  husband," 
He  means  that'?  our  people  seemed  to  be  outcast 
from  God,  but  now,  through  believing,  have 
become  more  numerous  than  those  who  are 
reckoned  to  possess  God.'^  And  another  Scrip- 
ture saith, "  I  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but 
sinners."  '9  This  means  that  those  who  are  per- 
ishing must  be  saved.  For  it  is  indeed  a  great 
and  admirable  thing  to  establish,  not  the  things 
which  are  standing,  but  those  that  are  falling. 
Thus  also  did  Christ  desire  ^°  to  save  the  things 
which  were  perishing,^'  and  has  saved  many  by 
coming  and  calling  us  when  hastening  to  de- 
struction.^- 


"  Literally,  "  having  beheld  in  us  much  error  and  destruction." 
'-  [C,  S  (apparently;,  and  recent  editors  have  f'^oi'Tas,  "  even  when 
we  had,"  inste.ad  of  epfoi/Tt?  (A),  as  above  paraphrased.  —  R.] 
'J  Comp.  Hos.  ii.  23;   Rom.  iv.  17,  ix.  25. 

'■♦  Literally,  "  willed  us  from  not  being  to  be."    [Comp.  n.  4.  p.  365.] 
IS  Isa.  liv.  i;  Gal.  iv.  27.     [R.  V.,  "the  husband."  — R  ]    _ 
'<>  Some  render,  "  should  not  cry  out,  like  women  in  travail."    The 
text  is  doubtful.     [Lightfoot:    "  Let   us  not,  like  women  in  travail, 
grow  weary  of  offcrmg  up  our  prayers  with  simplicity  to  God." —  R.J 
■7  [''"■*'.  "since;  "  hence  Lightfoot  renders,  "He  so  spake,  be- 
cause.—  K.] 

•8  It  has  been  remarked  that  the  writer  here  implies  he  was  a 
Gentile.  ' 

'9  Matt.  ix.  13;    Luke  v.  32.     [The  briefer  form  given  above  is 
that  of  the  correct  text  in  Matthew  and  Mark  (ii.  17),  not  Luke. — 

R-1 

-o  ri}9eAT)<7-<,  "willed."  —  R.J     [Noteworthy.     2  Pet,  iii.  9.] 
-'  Comp.  Matt,  xviii.  11.     [Luke  xix.  10.  "t-.R-I 
'-  Literally,  "  already  perislung."     [Rev.  iii.  3.] 

5'7 


5iS 


THE    HOMILY   ASCRIBED    TO    CLEMENT. 


CHAP.   III. THE    DLTV    OF    CONFESSING  CHRIST. 

Since,  then,  He  has  displayed  so  great  mercy 
towards  us,  and  especiaUy  in  this  respect,  that 
we  who  are  hving  should  not  offer  sacrifices  to 
gods  that  are  dead,  or  pay  them  worship,  but 
should  attain  through  Him  to  the  knowledge  of 
the  true  Father,'  whereby  shall  we  show  that  we 
do  indeed  know  Him,-  but  by  not  denying  Him 
through  whom  this  knowledge  has  been  attained  ? 
For  He  Himself  declares,^  "  Whosoever  shall  con- 
fess Me  before  men,  him  will  I  confess  before 
jSIy  Father."  ■*  This,  then,  is  our  reward  if  we 
shall  confess  Him  by  whom  we  have  been  saved. 
But  in  what  way  shall  we  confess  Him?  By 
doing  what  He  says,  and  not  transgressing  His 
commandments,  and  by  honouring  Him  not  with 
our  lips  only,  but  with  all  our  heart  and  all  our 
mind.5  For  He  says'"  in  Isaiah,  " This  people 
honoureth  I\Ie  with  their  lips,  but  their  heart  is 
far  from  Me."  ^ 

CHAP.  rv. — TRUE   CONFESSION   OF   CHRIST. 

Let  us,  then,  not  only  call  Him  Lord,  for  that 
will  not  save  us.  For  He  saith,  "  Not  every  one 
that  saith  to  Me,  Lord,  Lord,  shall  be  saved,  but 
he  that  worketh  righteousness."  '^  Wherefore, 
brethren,  let  us  confess  Him  by  ^  our  works,  by 
loving  one  another,  by  not  committing  adultery, 
or  speaking  evil  of  one  another,  or  cherishing 
envy ;  but  Ijeing  continent,  compassionate,  and 
good.  We  ought  also  to  sympathize  with  one 
another,  and  not  be  avaricious.  By  such  '°  works 
let  us  confess  Him,"  and  not  by  those  that  are 
of  an  opposite  kind.  And  it  is  not  fitting  that 
we  should  fear  men,  but  rather  God.  For  this 
reason,  if  we  should  do  such  wicked  things, 
the  Lord  hath  said,  "  Even  though  ye  were 
gathered  together  to  Me  '^  in  My  very  bosom, 
yet  if  ye  were  not  to  keep  My  commandments, 
I  would  cast  you  off,  and  say  unto  you.  Depart 
from  Me  ;  I  know  you  not  whence  ye  are,  ye 
workers  of  iniquity."  '^ 

CHAP.  V. THIS    WORLD    SHOULD    BE    DESPISED. 

Wherefore,  brethren,  leaving  willini^Iy  our  so- 
journ in  this  present  world,  let  us  do  the  will  of 


I  [Literally,  "  the  Father  of  the  truth."  The  best  editions  have 
a  period  here.  —  R.l  ^ 

*  Literally,  "  what  is  the  knowledge  which  is  towards  Him."  [C, 
with  Bryennios.  Hilgenfeld  reads  rijs  aArj^titt^,  "  what  is  the  knowl- 
edge of  the  truth,"  instead  of  f)  jrpbs  aiiTOf,  A,  S,  Lightfoot,  and 
earlier  editors.  —  R.] 

■5  I  Aeyei  6e  xoi  auTos,  "  Yea,  He  Himself  saith,"  Lightfoot.  —  R.J 

*  Matt.  X.  32. 

5  Comp.  Matt.  xxii.  37. 

*>  f  "  Now  He  saith  also." —  R.] 

'  Isa.  xxix.  13. 

*  Matt.  vii.  21,  loosely  quoted. 
9  [Literally,  "in."— R.] 

•°  [A  defect  in  A  was  thus  supplied,  but  "these"  is  now  ac- 
cepted; soC,  S.  —  R.] 

"  Sonid  read  "  God."     I"  "  Him  "  is  correct.  —  R] 

'2  Or,  "  with  Me."  [This  is  the  more  exact  rendering  of  M"' 
i/iov.  —  R.] 

•3  The  first  part  of  this  sentence  is  not  found  in  Scripture;  for  the 
second,  comp.  Matt.  vii.  23,  Luke  xiii.  27.  [The  first  part  is  not 
even  identified  as  a  citation  from  an  apocryphal  book.  —  R.J 


Him  that  called  us,  and  not  fear  to  depart  out 
of  this  world.  For  the  Lord  saith,  "  Ye  shall 
be  as  lambs  in  the  midst  of  wolves."  '''  And 
Peter  answered  and  said  unto  Him, '5  "What, 
then,  if  the  wolves  shall  tear  in  pieces  the  lambs  ?  " 
Jesus  said  unto  Peter,  "  The  lambs  have  no  cause 
after  they  are  dead  to  fear  '^  the  wolves  ;  and  in 
like  manner,  fear  not  ye  them  that  kill  you,  and 
can  do  nothing  more  unto  you  ;  but  fear  Him 
who,  after  you  are  dead,  has  power  over  both 
soul  and  body  to  cast  them  into  hell-fire."  '7 
And  consider,'*  brethren,  that  the  sojourning  in 
the  flesh  in  this  world  is  but  brief  and  transient, 
but  the  promise  of  Christ  is  great  and  wonderful, 
even  the  rest  of  the  kingdom  to  come,  and  of 
life  everlasting.'^  By  what  course  of  conduct, 
then,  shall  we  attain  these  things,  but  by  leading 
a  holy  and  righteous  life,  and  by  deeming  these 
worldly  things  as  not  belonging  to  us,  and  not 
fixing  our  desires  upon  them  ?  For  if  we  desire 
to  possess  them,  we  fall  away  from  the  path  of 
righteousness.^" 

CHAP.    VI. THE     PRESENT    AND     FUTURE    WORLDS 

ARE    ENEMIES   TO    EACH    O'lTIER. 

Now  the  Lord  declares,  "  No  servant  can 
serve  two  masters."  ^'  If  we  desire,  then,  to 
serve  both  God  and  mammon,  it  will  be  unprofit- 
able for  us.  "  For  what  will  it  profit  if  a  man 
gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul?"^^ 
This  world  and  the  next  are  two  enemies.  The 
one  urges  to  -^  adultery  and  corruption,  avarice 
and  deceit ;  the  other  bids  farewell  to  these 
things.  We  cannot  therefore  be  the  friends  of 
both  ;  and  it  behoves  us,  by  renouncing  the  one, 
to  make  sure  ^^  of  the  other.  Let  us  reckon  ^5 
that  it  is  better  to  hate  the  things  present,  since 
they  are  trifling,  and  transient,  and  corruptible  ; 
and  to  love  those  which  are  to  come,  as  being 
good  and  incorruptible.  For  if  we  do  the  will 
of  Christ,  we  shall  find  rest ;  otherwise,  nothing 
shall  deliver  us  from  eternal  punishment,  if  we 
disobey  His  commandments.  For  thus  also 
saith  the  Scripture  in  Ezekiel,  "If  Noah,  Job, 
and  Daniel  should  rise  up,  they  should  not  de- 
liver their  children  in  captivity."  ^*'     Now,  if  men 


!'•  Matt.  X.  i6. 

'5  No  such  conversation  is  recorded  in  Scripture.     [Comp.  note 

13- R] 

■*  Or,  "  Let  not  the  lambs  fear." 
'7  Matt.  X.  28;   Luke  xii.  4,  5. 
13  Or,  "  know." 

19  The  text  and  translation  are  here  doubtful.  [All  doubt  has 
been  removed;  the  above  rendering  is  substantially  correct.  — R.J 

20  [More  exactly,"  tlie  righteous  path,"  7:95  ofiouTijsSiKaias.  —  R-] 
2'   Matt.  vi.  24;    Luke  xvi.  13. 

--  Malt.  xvi.  26.  [The  citation  is  not  exactly  according  to  any 
evangelist.  Literally,  "  For  what  advantage  is  it.  if  any  one  gain  the 
whole  (C  omits  '  whole  '  )  world,  but  forfeit  his  life,"  or"  soul."  —  R.] 

2i  Literally,  "  speaks  of."     [So  Lightfoot.  —  RJ. 

-■*  Or,  "  enjoy."  [Lightfoot:  "  but  must  bid  farewell  to  the  one, 
and  hold  companionship  with  the  other;  "  thus  preserving  the  cor- 
respondence with  the  preceding  sentence.  —  R.J 

25  The  MS.  has,  "  we  reckon."  [So  C  and  S,  but  Lightfoot  re- 
tains the  subjunctive.  —  R.J 

26  Ezek.  xiv.  14,  20. 


THE    HOMILY   ASCRIBED   TO    CLEMENT. 


519 


so  eminently  righteous '  are  not  able  by  their 
righteousness  to  deliver  their  children,  how  can 
we  hope  to  ^  enter  into  the  royal  residence  ^  of 
God  unless  we  keep  our  baptism  holy  and  unde- 
filed?  Or  who  shall  be  our  advocate,  unless  we 
be  found  possessed  of  works  of  holiness  and 
righteousness  ?  ■* 

CHAP.    VII. WE    MUST     STRIVE     IN     ORDER    TO    BE 

CROWNED. 

Wherefore,  then,  my  brethren,  let  us  struggles 
with  all  earnestness,  knowing  that  the  contest  is 
in  our  case,  close  at  hand,  and  that  many  under- 
take long  voyages  to  strive  for  a  corruptible  re- 
ward ;  ^  yet  all  are  not  crowned,  but  those  only 
that  have  laboured  hard  and  striven  gloriously. 
Let  us  therefore  so  strive,  that  we  may  all  be 
crowned.  Let  us  run  the  straight  7  course,  even 
the  race  that  is  incorruptible  ;  and  let  us  in  great 
numbers  set  out  ^  for  it,  and  strive  that  we  may 
be  crowned.  And  should  we  not  all  be  able  to 
obtain  the  crown,  let  us  at  least  come  near  to  it. 
We  must  remember  ^  that  he  who  strives  in  the 
corruptible  contest,  if  he  be  found  acting  un- 
fairly,'°  is  taken  away  and  scourged,  and  cast 
forth  from  the  lists.  What  then  think  ye?  If 
one  does  anything  unseemly  in  the  incorruptible 
contest,  what  shall  he  have  to  bear?  For  of 
those  who  do  not  preserve  the  seal"  unbroken, 
the  Scripture  saith,'-  "  Their  worm  shall  not  die, 
and  their  fire  shall  not  be  quenched,  and  they 
shall  be  a  spectacle  to  all  flesh."  "^ 

CH.^.     VIII.  THE      NECESSITY      OF     REPENTANCE 

WHILE   WE   ARE    ON    EARTH. 

As  long,  therefore,  as  we  are  upon  earth,  let 
us  practise  repentance,  for  we  are  as  clay  in  the 
hand  of  the  artificer.  For  as  the  potter,  if  he 
-make  a  vessel,  and  it  be  distorted  or  broken  in 
his  hands,  fashions  it  over  again ;  but  if  he  have 
before  this  cast  it  into  the  furnace  of  fire,  can 
no  longer  find  any  help  for  it :  so  let  us  also, 
while  we  are  in  this  world,  repent  with  our  whole 
heart  of  the  evil  deeds  we  have  done  in  the 
flesh,  that  we  may  be  saved  by  the  Lord,  while 
we  have  yet  an  opportunity  of  repentance.     For 


after  we  have  gone  out  of  the  world,  no  further 
power  of  confessing  or  repenting  will  there  be- 
long to  us.  Wherefore,  brethren,  by  doing  the 
will  of  the  Father,  and  keeping  the  flesh  holy, 
and  observing  the  commandments  of  the  Lord, 
we  shall  obtain  eternal  life.  For  the  Lord  saith 
in  the  Gospel,  "  If  ye  have  not  kept  that  which 
was  small,  who  will  commit  to  you  the  great? 
For  I  say  unto  you,  that  he  that  is  faithful  in  that 
which  is  least,  is  faithful  also  in  much."  '•+  This, 
then,  is  what  He  means  :  "  Keep  the  flesh  holy 
and  the  seal  undefiled,  that  ye  '5  may  receive 
eternal  life."  '^ 

CHAP.  IX. — WE   SHALL    BE   JUDGED    IN   THE    FLESH. 

And  let  no  one  of  you  say  that  this  very  flesh 
shall  not  be  judged,  nor  rise  again.  Consider 
ye  '7  in  what  state  ye  were  saved,  in  what  ye  re- 
ceived sight,'**  if  not  while  ye  were  in  this  flesh. 
We  must  therefore  preserve  the  flesh  as  the  tem- 
ple of  God.  For  as  ye  were  called  in  the  flesh, 
ye  shall  also  come  to  be  judged  in  the  flesh.  As 
Christ  '9  the  Lord  who  saved  us,  though  He  was 
first  a  Spirit,^"  became  flesh,  and  thus  called  us, 
so  shall  we  also  receive  the  reward  in  this  flesh. 
Let  us  therefore  love  one  another,  that  we  may 
all  attain  to  the  kingdom  of  God.  While  we 
have  an  opportunity  of  being  healed,  let  us  yield 
ourselves  to  God  that  healeth  us,  and  give  to 
Him  a  recompense.  Of  what  sort?  Repent- 
ance out  of  a  sincere  heart ;  for  He  knows  all 
things  beforehand,  and  is  acquainted  with  what 
is  in  our  hearts.  Let  us  therefore  give  Him 
praise,-'  not  with  the  mouth  only,  but  also  with 
the  heart,  that  He  may  accept  us  as  sons.  For 
the  Lord  has  said,  "Those  are  My  brethren  who 
do  the  will  of  My  Father."  - 

CHAP.  X. VICE    IS   TO    BE    FORSAKEN,  AND    VIRTUE 

FOLLOWED. 

Wherefore,  my  brethren,  let  us  do  the  will  of 
the  Father  who  called  us,  that  we  may  live  ;  and 
let  us  earnestly  ^^  follow  after  virtue,  but  forsake 


1  [Literally,  "  But  if  even  such  righteous  men."  —  R.] 

2  Literally,  "  with  what  confidence  shall  we." 

3  Wake  translates  "  kingdom,"  as  if  the  reading  had  been 
(8a<TiAeiai' ;  but  the  MS.  has  ^aai-Knov,  "palace."  [  Lightfoot  gives 
the  former  rendering,  though  accepting  ^rttnAnoi'. --  R.J 

4  [Literally,  "  holy  and  righteous  works."  —  R.J 

5  [aywiio-ujutea,  "  let  US  strive,"  as  in  the  games. —  R.] 

6  Literally,  "  that  many  set  sail  for  corrupiible  contests,"  referring 
probably  to  the  concourse  at  the  Isthmian  games. 

7  Or,  "  Let  us  place  before  us."  [  I'he  latter  rendering  is  that 
of  the  reading  found  in  A  and  C,  and  now  accepted  by  many  editors 
(ftoM-ec);  but  Lightfoot  adheres  to  flewfiti'  (so  S),  and  holds  the 
former  reading  to  be  a  corruption.  —  R.] 

^  Or,  "  set  sail." 

9  Literally,  "  know." 

•o  Literally,  "  if  he  be  found  corrupting.  '  ■      ,  n 

"'  Baptism  is  probably  meant.     [See  Eph.  i.  13  and  Acts  xi.x.  6.J 

2  [Or,  "  He  saith;  "  "  unbroken  "  is  not  necessary.  —  R.J 


12  r 


sa.  bcvi.  24. 


'■*  Comp.  Luke  .\vi.  10-12. 

15  MS.  has  "  we,"  which  is  corrected  by  all  editors  as  above.  [The 
newly  discovered  authorities  have  the  second  person;  most  recent 
editors,  however,  adopt  the  first  person,  as  lectio  dijfficilwr.  So 
Lightfoot:  but  Hilgenfeld  restores  diTroAa^ijTe  in  his  second  edition. 

'^  Some  have  thought  this  a  quotation  from  an  unknown  apocr>'- 
phal  book,  but  it  seems  ratlier  an  explanation  of  the  preceding  words. 

'7  (Editorsdiffer  as  to  the  punctuation.  Lightfoot:  "Understand 
ye.  In  what  were  ye  saved  ?  In  what  did  ye  recover  your  sight  ?_  if 
ye  were  not  in  the  flesh."  Hilgenfeld  puts  a  comma  after  yi-ure 
(understand  ye) ,  and  a  period  after  ecruierjTe  (saved).  —  R.J 

'3  Literally,  "  looked  up."  [Both  senses  of  ii^aJJAerrtii'  occur  in 
New  Testament.  —  R.J 

•9  The  MS.  has  cc?,  "  one,"  which  Wake  follows,  but  it  seems 
clearly  a  mistake  for  <u?.  [Lightfoot  reads  ei,  with  a  Syriac  fragment; 
both  C  and  S  have  fk.  —  R.]  _  ,    ,        -        u       n 

-o  [C  has  here  the  curious  reading  Aoyos  instead  of  vvtvti.o.,  but  all 
editors  retain  the  latter.  —  R.J 

-'  {\  reads  "  eternal,"  and  C,  S,  "  praise;  "  Lightfoot  and  others 
combine  the  two,  "  eternal  praise." —  R.J 

2-  Matt.  xil.  50. 

23  Literally,  "  rather." 


520 


THE   HOMILY   ASCRIBED   TO    CLEMENT. 


every  wicked  tendency '  which  would  lead  us 
into  transgression ;  and  flee  from  ungodliness, 
lest  evils  overtake  us.  For  if  we  are  diligent  in 
doing  good,  peace  will  follow  us.  On  this  ac- 
count, such  men  cannot  find  it,  i.e.,  peace,  as  are^ 
influenced  by  human  terrors,  and  prefer  rather 
present  enjoyment  to  the  promise  which  shall 
afterwards  be  fulfilled.  For  they  know  not  what 
torment  present  enjoyment  incurs,  or  what  feli- 
city is  involved  in  the  future  promise.  And  if, 
indeed,  they  themselves  only  did  such  things,  it 
would  be  the  more  tolerable  ;  but  now  they  per- 
sist in  imbuing  innocent  souls  with  their  perni- 
cious doctrines, 3  not  knowing  that  they  shall 
receive  a  double  condemnation,  both  they  and 
those  that  hear  them. 


CHAP.    XI. WE    OUGHT   TO   SERVE    GOD,    TRUSTING 

IN    HIS    PROMISES. 

Let  us  therefore  serve  God  with  a  pure  heart, 
and  we  shall  be  righteous ;  but  if  we  do  not 
serve  Him,  because  we  believe  not  the  promise 
of  God,  we  shall  be  miserable.  For  the  pro- 
phetic word  also  declares,  "  Wretched  are  those 
of  a  double  mind,  and  who  doubt  in  their  heart, 
who  say,  All  these  things  have  we  heard  even  in 
the  times  of  our  fathers ;  but  though  we  have 
waited  day  by  day,  we  have  seen  none  of  them 
accomplished.  Ye  fools  !  compare  yourselves  to 
a  tree  ;  take,  for  instance,  the  vine.  P'irst  of  all 
it  sheds  its  leaves,  then  the  bud  appears  ;  after 
that  the  sour  grape,  and  then  the  fully-ripened 
fruit.  So,  likewise,  my  people  have  borne  dis- 
turbances and  afflictions,  but  afterwards  shall 
they  receive  their  good  things."  ■♦  Wherefore, 
my  brethren,  let  us  not  be  of  a  double  mind,  but 
let  us  hope  and  endure,  that  we  also  may  obtain 
the  reward.  For  He  is  faithful  who  has  prom- 
ised that  He  will  bestow  on  every  one  a  reward 
according  to  his  works.  If,  therefore,  we  shall 
do  righteousness  in  the  sight  of  God,  we  shall 
enter  into  His  kingdom,  and  shall  receive  the 
promises,  "  which  ear  hath  not  heard,  nor  eye 


'  Literally,  "  malice,  as  it  were,  the  precursor  of  our  sins."  Some 
deem  the  text  corrupt. 

2  Literally,  according  to  the  MS.,  "  it  is  not  possible  that  a  man 
should  find  it  who  are  "  —  the  passage  being  evidently  corrupt.  [The 
evidence  of  C  and  S  does  not  clear  up  the  difficulty  here,  the  reading 
of  these  authorities  being  substantially  that  of  A.  Lightfoot  renders: 
"  For  for  this  cause  is  a  man  unable  to  attain  happiness,  seeing  that 
they  call  in  the  fears  of  men,"  etc.  Hilgenfeld  (aded  )  assumes  here 
a  considerable  gap  in  all  the  authorities,  and  inserts  two  paragraphs, 
cited  in  other  authors  as  from  Clement.  The  first  and  longer  passage 
is  from  John  of  Damascus,  and  it  may  be  accounted  for  as  a  loose 
citation  from  chap.  x.\.  in  the  recovered  portion  of  this  Epistle.  The 
other  is  from  pseudo-Justin  {Questions  to  the  Orthodox,  74).  This 
was  formerly  assigned  by  both  Hilgenfeld  and  Lightfoot  (against 
Harnack)  to  the  First  Epistle  of  Clement,  Iviii.,  in  that  portion 
wanting  in  A.  But  the  recovered  chapters  (Iviii. -Ixiii.)  contain,  ac- 
cordmg  to  C  and  S,  no  such  passage.  Lightfoot  thinks  the  reference 
in  pseudo-Justin  is  to  chap.  xvi.  of  this  homily,  and  that  the  men- 
tion of  the  Sibyl  in  the  same  author  is  not  necessarily  part  of  the 
citation  from  Clement.  Comp.  Lightfoot,  pp.  308,  447,  448,  458,  459, 
and  Hilgenfeld,  2d  ed.,  pp.  xlviii.,  77.  —  R.) 

•3  [Lightfoot,  more  literally,  "  but  now  they  continue  teaching  evil 
to  innocent  souls."  —  R.] 

*  The  same  words  occur  in  Clement's  first  episde,  chap,  xxiii. 


seen,  neither  have  entered   into   the   heart  of 

man."  s 

CHAP.    XII. — WE    ARE    CONSTANTLY   TO   LOOK   FOR 
THE    KINGDOM    OF    GOD. 

Let  us  expect,  therefore,  hour  by  hour,  the 
kingdom  of  God  in  love  and  righteousness,  since 
we  know  not  the  day  of  the  appearing  of  God. 
For  the  Lord  Himself,  being  asked  by  one  when 
His  kingdom  would  come,  replied,  "  When  two 
shall  be  one,  and  that  which  is  without  as  that 
which  is  within,  and  the  male  with  the  female, 
neither  male  nor  female."  ^  Now,  two  are  one 
when  we  speak  the  truth  one  to  another,  and 
there  is  unfeignedly  one  soul  in  two  bodies.  And 
"  that  which  is  without  as  that  which  is  within  " 
meaneth  this  :  He  calls  the  soul  "  that  which  is 
within,"  and  the  body  "  that  which  is  without." 
As,  then,  thy  body  is  visible  to  sight,  so  also  let 
thy  soul  be  manifest  by  good  works.  And  "  the 
male  with  the  female,  neither  male  nor  female," 
this  7  ,  .  . 

[The  newly  recovered  portion  follows  :]  ^  — 

.  .  .  meaneth ,9  that  a  brother  seeing  a  sister 
should  think  nothing  '°  about  her  as  of  a  female, 
nor  j-^i?"  think  anything  about  him  as  of  a  male. 
If  ye  do  these  things,  saith  He,'^  the  kingdom  of 
my  Father  shall  come. 

CH.A.P.   XIII. DISOBEDIENCE    CAUSETH    GOD's   NAME 

TO    BE    BLASPHEMED. '3 

Therefore,  brethren, '<  let  us  now  at  length  re- 
pent ;  let  us  be  sober  unto  what  is  good ;  for 
we  are  full  of  much  folly  and  wickedness.  Let 
us  blot  out  from  us  our  former  sins,  and  repent- 
ing from  the  soul  let  us  be  saved  ;  and  let  us  not 
become 's  men-pleasers,  nor  let  us  desire  to  please 
only  one  another,'''  but  also  the  men  that  are 
without,  by  our  righteousness,  that  the  Name '7 


S  I  Cor.  ii.  9. 

*  These  words  are  quoted  (Clem.  Ale.v.,  Strom.,  iii.  9,  13)  from 
the  Gospel  according  to  the  Egyptians,  no  longer  extant. 

7  Thus  ends  the  MS.,  but  what  followed  will  be  found  in  Clem. 
Alex,  as  just  cited. 

8  For  details  respecting  the  version  here  given,  see  Introductory 
Notice,  pp.  514,  515. 

9  Or,  more  correctly,  both  here  and  above,  "  by  this  He  meaneth." 
'°  All  editors  read  ovaer  tjypom'i,  but  C  has  (bpovei,  which  is  un- 

grammatical.  In  this  clause,  after  iya  we  would  expect  nrjSei';  but, 
as  Lightfoot  suggests,  oiidcv  may  be  combined  as  a  substantive  idea 
with  H/jAuKor;   comp.  the  use  of  oii  with  participles. 

"  For  M'l^e  (so  C)  Gebhardt  would  substitute  iJ.r}S'  ijSe,  while  S 
supplies  in  full,  quuin  soror  videbit/ratrein,  an  obvious  interpreta- 
ment. 

'-  This  seems  to  be  an  explanation  of  the  saying  above  referred 
to,  and  not  a  citation;  similar  cases  occur  in  the  homily. 

'3  The  headings  to  the  chapters  have  been  supplied  by  the  editor, 
but  in  so  rambling  a  discourse  they  are  in  some  cases  necessarily 
unsatisfactory. 

■<  Hilgenfeld  reads  /noi'  instead  of  oSi';  so  S  apparently.  The 
chapters  are  usually  introduced  with  ovv  (nine  times)  or  cuo-re  (five 
times). 

'S  yivui\xt6a\   Lightfoot,  "  be  found." 

•6  Literally,"  ourselves,"  eai'Tois;  but  the  reciprocal  sense  is  com- 
mon in  Hellenistic  Greek,  and  is  here  required  by  the  context. 

"  Comp.  Acts  v.  41,  where  the  correct  text  omits  avTov.  The 
Revised  Version  properly  capitalizes  "  Name  "  in  that  passage. 


THE   HOMILY   ASCRIBED   TO    CLEMENT. 


521 


be  not  blasphemed  on  account  of  us."  For  the 
Lord  also  saith,  "  Continually  ^  My  name  is  blas- 
phemed among  all  the  Gentiles,  "3  and  again, 
"  Woe  •*  to  him  on  account  of  whom  My  name 
is  blasphemed."  Wherein  is  it  blasphemed? 
In  your  not  doing  what  I  desire.5  For  the 
Gentiles,  when  they  hear  from  our  mouth  the 
oracles  of  God,^  marvel  at  them  as  beautiful 
and  great ;  afterwards,  when  they  have  learned 
that  our  works  are  not  worthy  of  the  words  we 
speak,  they  then  turn  themselves  to  blasphemy, 
saying  that  it  is  some  fable  and  delusion.  For 
when  they  hear  from  us  that  God  saith,7  "  There 
is  no  thank  unto  you,  if  ye  love  them  that  love 
you  ;  but  there  is  thank  unto  you,  if  ye  love  your 
enemies  and  them  that  hate  you  ;  "  ^  when  they 
hear  these  things,  they  marvel  at  the  excellency 
of  the  goodness  ;  but  when  they  see  that  we  not 
only  do  not  love  them  that  hate  us,  but  not  even 
them  that  love  us,  they  laugh  us  to  scorn,  and 
the  Name  is  blasphenied. 

CHAP.    XIV.  —  THE    LFVING    CHURCH    IS    THE    BODY 
OF   CHRIST. 

Wherefore,''  brethren,  if  we  do  the  will  of  God 
our  Father,  we  shall  be  of  the  first  Church,  that 
is,  spiritual,  that  hath  been  created  before  the 
sun  and  moon ; '°  but  if  we  do  not  the  will  of 
the  Lord,  we  shall  be  of  the  scripture  that  saith, 
"  My  house  was  made  a  den  of  robbers."  "  So 
then  let  us  choose  to  be  of  the  Church  of  life,'- 
that  we  may  be  saved.  I  do  not,  however,  sup- 
pose ye  are  ignorant  that  the  living  Church  is 
the  body  of  Christ ;  '^  for  the  Scripture  saith, 
"  God  made  man,  male  and  female."  '•*  The 
male  is  Christ,  the  female  is  the  Church,  And 
the  Books '5  and  the  h}^o's,\\&% plainly declare'^^  that 

'  C  here,  and  in  many  other  cases,  reads  i>iaos ;  a  comparison  of 
MSS.  shows  that  It  is  a  correction  of  the  scribe. 

,  2  Lightfoot  renders  "la  irai'Tos,  "  every  way.  "  but  the  temporal 
sense  is  common  in  Hellenistic  Greek,  and  here  required  by  the 
Hebrew. 

3  Isa.  lii   5,  with  -naalv  inserted. 

*  Lightfoot  reads,  icxl  TraAti'  Ouot'^  following  the  Syriac.  C  has 
Kdl  \i.6.  There  is  difficuby  in  identifying  this  second  quotation; 
comp.  Ezek.  xxxvi.  20-23.  Lightfxit  thinks  it  probable  that  the 
preacher  used  two  different  f^rms  of  Isa.  hi.  5 

5  This  sentence  is  not  part  of  the  citation,  but  an  explanation,  the 
words  being  used  as  if  spoken  by  God.  The  Syriac  text  seeks  to 
avoid  this  dilTicuhy  by  reading,  "  by  our  not  doing  what  we  sa)r." 

f"  Here  rk  Aoyia  ToO  <dto\j  is  used  of  the  Scriptures,  and  with  dis- 
tinct reference  to  the  New  Testament;   see  next  note. 

7  In  view  of  the  connection,  this  must  mean  "  God  in  His  oracles;  " 
a  significant  testimony  to  the  early  belief  in  the  inspiration  of  the 
Gospels. 

^  Luke  vi.  27,  32,  freely  combined;  comp.  Matt.  v.  44,  46.  The 
use  of  xapt!  UM"'  shows  that  the  quotation  is  from  the  former  Gospel. 

9  too-Te,  as  at  the  beginning  of  chaps,  vii.,  x. 
10  Comp.  Ps.  Ixxii.  (LXX.  Ixxi.)  5,  ty. 

"  Jer.  vii.  11.     Comp.  Matt.  xxi.  13:  Mark  xi.  \T  Luke  xix.  46. 
'2  Harnack  says,  "The  Jewi.sh  synagogue  is  the  church  of  death." 
Lightfoot,  more  correctly,  accepts  a  contrast  "  between  mere  extern.il 
membership  in  the  visible  body  and  spiritual  communion  m  the  celes- 
tial counterpart  " 

'3  Comp.  Eph.  i.  23  and  many  similar  passages. 

'•*  Gen.  1.  27;  comp.  Eph.  v.  31-33. 

'5  The  reference  here  is  probably  to  the  Old-Testament  "books," 
while  the  term  "  Apostles"  may  mean  the  New  Testament  in  whole 
or  part.  The  more  direct  reference  probably  is  to  Genesis  and  Ephe- 
sians. 

">  Lightfoot  inserts  in  brackets  Acyouo-iv,  S^Aoi',  rendering  as  above. 
Hilgenfeld  suggests  >^a<j\.v  oi6ot«,  "  Ye  know  that  the  books,  etc., 


the  Church  is  not  of  the  present,  but  from  the 
beginning.'^  For  she  was  spiritual,  as  our  Jesus 
also  was,  but  was  manifested  in  the  last  days  that 
He  '^  might  save  us.  Now  the  Church,  being 
spiritual,  was  manifested  in  the  flesh  of  Christ, 
thus  signifying  to  us  that,  if  any  of  us  keep  '9 
her  in  the  flesh  and  do  not  corrupt  her,  he  shall 
receive  her  again  ^°  in  the  Holy  Spirit :  for  this 
flesh  is  the  copy  of  the  spirit.  No  one  then  who 
corrupts  the  copy,  shall  partake  of  the  original.^' 
This  then  is  what  He  meaneth,  "  Keep  the  flesh," 
that  ye  may  partake  of  the  spirit."  But  if  we 
say  that  the  flesh  is  the  Church  and  the  spirit 
Christ,^^  then  he  that  hath  shamefully  used  the 
flesh  hath  shamefully  used  the  Church.  Such 
a  one  then  shall  not  partake  of  the  spirit,  which 
is  Christ.  Such  life  and  incorruption  this  flesh  ^^ 
can  partake  of,  when  the  Holy  Spirit  is  joined 
to  it.  No  one  can  utter  or  speak  "what  the 
Lord  hath  prepared  "  for  His  elect.-5 

CRA.P.  XV. FAITH   AND  LOVE  THE  PROPER  RETURN 

TO    GOD. 

Now  I  do  not  think  I  have  given  you  any  light 
counsel  concerning  self-control,^*^  which  if  any 
one  do  he  will  not  repent  of  it,  but  will  save 
both  himself  and  me  who  counselled  him.  For 
it  is  no  light  reward  to  turn  again  a  wandering 
and  perishing  soul  that  it  may  be  saved.-^  For 
this  is  the  recompense-^  we  have  to  return  to 
God  who  created  us,  if  he  that  speaketh  and 
heareth  both  speaketh  and  heareth  with  faith 
and  love.  Let  us  therefore  abide  in  the  things 
which  we  believed,  righteous  and  holy,  that  with 
boldness  we  may  ask  of  God  who  saith,  "  While 
thou  art  yet  speaking,  I  will  say,  Lo,  I  am  here."^^ 
For  this  saying  is  the  sign  of  a  great  promise ; 
for  the  Lord  saith  of  Himself  that  He  is  more 
ready  to  give  than  he  that  asketh  to  ask?°    Being 

say  that."  Bryennios  joins  this  sentence  to  the  preceding,  taking  the 
whole  as  dependent  on  ayvoeii'.  Ropes  tenders  accordingly,  making  a 
parenthesis  from  "  for  the  Scripture  "  to  "  the  Church."  In  any  case 
a  verb  of  saying  must  be  supplied,  as  in  the  Syriac. 

17  di/wflti'  has  a  local  and  a  temporal  sense;  the  latter  is  obviously 
preferable  here. 

'8  "  Jesus  "  is  the  subject  of  the  latter  part  of  the  sentence. 

■9  "  Keep  her  pure;  "  comp.  chap.  viii.  Lightfoot  renders  n^ptlv, 
"guard,"  here  and  elsewhere. 

=°  The  verb  corresponds  with  that  rendered  "  partake  "  in  what 
follows. 

^'  "Copy,"  rii'TiTuTTO?,  ai/TiTujToi'.  Comp.  Heb.  ix.  24;  i  Pet  iii. 
21.  Our  use  of  "  antitype  "  is  different.  The  antithesis  here  is  aiStv- 
TiKoi',  the  original,  or  archetype.  This  mystical  interpretation  has  a 
Platonic  basis. 

22  Comp.  the  close  of  chap.  viii. 

23  Lightfoot  calls  attention  to  the  confusion  of  metaphors;  but 
there  is  also  evidence  of  that  false  exegesis  which  made  "  flesh"  and 
"  spirit"  equivalent  to  "  body  "  and  "  soul,"  —  an  error  which  always 
leads  to  further  mistakes. 

-♦  Here  the  word  "  flesh  "  is  used  in  an  ambiguous  sense. 

25  I  Cor.  ii.  9. 

26  jr«pi  iyKpardas,  "  temperance "  in  the  wide  New-Testament 
sense.  Lightfoot,  "continence;"  in  these  days  the  prominent  dan- 
ger was  from  libidinous  sins. 

27  Comp.  Jas.  v.  19,  20,  with  which  our  pass.agc  has  many  verbal 
correspondences. 

28  "  A  favorite  word  with  our  author,  especially  in  this  connection." 

—  I.IG1ITF(50T. 

29  Isa.  Iviii.  9,  LXX. 

30  en  TO  6i6o»'at  tov  alTovvTOi ;  the  sense  of  the  elliptical  construc- 
tion is  obviously  as  above. 


522 


THE    HOMILY    ASCRIBED    TO    CLEMENT. 


therefore  partakers  of  so  great  kindness,  let  us 
not  be  envious  of  one  another  •  in  the  obtain- 
ing of  so  many  good  things.  For  as  great  as  is 
the  pleasure  which  these  sayings  have  for  them 
that  have  done  them,  so  great  is  the  condemna- 
tion they  have  for  them  that  have  been  disobe- 
dient. 

CR-y.    XVI. — THE   EXCELLENCE   OF  ALMSGIVING. 

Wherefore,  brethren,  having  received  no  small 
occasion  ^  for  repentance,  while  we  have  the  op- 
portunity,3  let  us  turn  unto  God  that  called  us, 
while  we  still  have  Him  as  One  that  receiveth 
us.  For  if  we  renounce  ■♦  these  enjoyments  and 
conquer  our  soul  in  not  doing  these  its  evil  de- 
sires, we  shall  partake  of  the  mercy  of  Jesus. 
But  ye  know  that  the  day  of  judgment  even 
now  "  Cometh  as  a  burning  oven,"  s  and  some 
"of  the  heavens  shall  melt,"  and  all  the  earth 
shall  be  as  lead  melting  on  the  fire,^  and  then 
the  hidden  and  open  works  of  men  shall  appear. 
Almsgiving  therefore  is  a  good  thing,  as  repent- 
ance from  sin  ;  fasting  is  better  than  prayer,  but 
almsgiving  than  both  ;  ^  "  but  love  covereth  a 
multitude  of  sins."  ^  But  prayer  out  of  a  good 
conscience  delivereth  from  death.  Blessed  is 
every  one  that  is  found  full  of  these ;  for  alms- 
giving lighteneth  the  burden  of  sin.'? 

CR^P.    XVII. THE    DANGER    OF    IMPENITENCE. 

Let  us  therefore  repent  from  the  whole  heart, 
that  no  one  of  us  perish  by  the  way.  For  if 
we  have  commandments  that  we  should  also 
practise  this,'°  to  draw  away  men  from  idols  and 
instruct  them,  how  much  more  ought  a  soul 
already  knowing  God  not  to  perish  !  Let  us 
therefore  assist  one  another  that  we  may  also 
lead  up  those  weak  as  to  what  is  good,"  in  order 
that  all  may  be  saved  ;  and  let  us  convert  and 
admonish  one  another.'^  And  let  us  not  think 
to  give  heed  and  believe  now  only,  while  we  are 
admonished  by  the  presbyters,  but  also  when  we 


'  eovTott.    Here  again  in  the  reciprocal  sense;  comp.  chap.  xiii. 

2  a'Jopfi')''  Aafioi'Tti;,  as  in  Rom.  vii.  8,  ii. 

3  (Crtipoi/  exofTe?,  "seeing  that  we  have  time"  (Lightfoot).  But 
"  opportunity  "  is  more  exact. 

*  arroTa^ui/xefla,  "  bid  farewell  to;  "  comp.  chap.  vi. 

5  Comp.  .Mai.  iv.  i. 

6  Comp.  Isa.  xxxiv.  4,  which  resembles  the  former  clause,  and  2 
Pet.  iii.  7,  10,  where  the  same  figures  occur.  The  text  seems  to  be 
corrupt:  Tii-f?  ("some")  is  sustained  by  both  the  Greek  and  the 
Syriac,  but  this  limitation  is  so  peculiar  as  to  awaken  suspicion;  still, 
the  notion  of  several  heavens  might  have  been  in  the  author's  mind. 

'  Comp.  Tobit  xii.  8,  9;  but  the  position  given  to  almsgiving 
seems  to  be  contradicted  by  the  next  sentence.  Lightfoot  seems  to 
suspect  a  corruption  of  text  here  also,  but  in  the  early  Church  there 
was  often  an  undue  emphasis  placed  upon  almsgiving. 

8  I  Pet.  iv.  8.     Comp.  Prov.  x.  12;  Jas.  v.  20. 

9  Literally,  "  becometh  a  lightener  (KOi)<|)t(r/aa)  of  sin;"  comp. 
Ecclus.  iii.  30. 

'0  Lightfoot,  with  Syriac,  reads  '<-vn.  icai  toCto  n-pairtrco/nf  c.  C  omits 
ii'a,  and  reads  ■nfto.aaoy.iv,  "  If  we  have  commandments  and  practise 
this." 

"  Here  Lightfoot  thinks  a  verb  has  probably  fallen  out  of  the  text. 

'2  Bryeiinios  thus  connects:  "  in  order  that  all  may  be  saved,  and 
may  convert,"  etc. 


have  returned  home,'^  remembering  the  com- 
mandments '+  of  the  Lord ;  and  let  us  not  be 
dragged  away  by  worldly  lusts,  but  coming 's  more 
frequently  let  us  attempt  to  make  advances  in  the 
commandments  of  the  Lord,  that  all  being  of 
of  the  same  mind  '^  we  may  be  gathered  together 
unto  life.  For  the  Lord  said,  "  I  come  to  gather 
together  all  the  nations,  tribes,  and  tongues."  ^^ 
This  He  speaketh  of  the  day  of  His  appearing, 
when  He  shall  come  and  redeem  us,  each  one 
according  to  his  works. '^  And  the  unbelievers 
"  shall  see  His  glory,"  and  strength  ;  and  they 
shall  think  it  strange  when  they  see  the  sov- 
ereignty '9  of  the  world  in  Jesus,  saying,  Woe 
unto  us.  Thou  wast  He,^°  and  we  did  not  know 
and  did  not  believe,  and  we  did  not  obey  the 
presbyters  when  they  declared  unto  us  concern- 
ing our  salvation.  And  "  their  worm  dieth  not, 
and  their  fire  is  not  quenched,  and  they  shall  be 
for  a  spectacle  unto  all  flesh."  ^'  He  speaketh 
of  that  day  of  judgment,  when  they  shall  see 
those  among  us  ^^  that  have  been  ungodly  and 
acted  deceitfully  with  the  commandments  of 
Jesus  Christ.  But  the  righteous  who  have  done 
well  and  endured  torments  and  hated  the  enjoy- 
ments of  the  soul,  when  they  shall  behold  those 
that  have  gone  astray  and  denied  Jesus  through 
their  words  or  through  their  works,  how  that 
they  are  punished  with  grievous  torments  in  un- 
quenchable fire,  shall  be  giving  glory  to  God, 
saying,  There  will  be  hope  for  him  that  hath 
served  God  with  his  whole  heart. 

CH.4P.     XVIII. THE     PRE./^CHER     CONFESSETH      HIS 

OWN   SINFULNESS. 

Let  us  also  become  of  the  number  of  them 
that  give  thanks,  that  have  served  God,  and  not 
of  the  ungodly  that  are  judged.  For  I  myself 
also,  being  an  utter  sinner,-^  and  not  yet  escaped 
from  temptation,  but  still  being  in  the  midst  of 
the  engines  ^"^  of  the  devil,  give  diligence  to  fol- 


'3  "  This  clearly  shows  that  the  work  before  us  is  a  sermon  de- 
livered in  church"  (Lightfoot).  The  preacher  is  himself  one  of"  the 
presbyters;  "  comp.  chap.  xix.  It  is  possible,  but  cannot  be  proven, 
that  he  was  the  head  of  the  presbyters,  the  parochial  bishop. 

■•<  kvTa.K\i.a.jmv,  not  the  technical  word  for  the  commandments  of 
the  Decalogue  (ei'ToAoi). 

'5  .Syriac,  "  praying,"  which  Lightfoot  thinks  may  be  correct;  but 
■rroo<Ti(>\att.iv'0\.  might  very  easily  be  mistaken  for  irpoo-eu^OjU.fi'Ot. 
The  former  means  coming  m  worship;  comp.  Heb.  x.  i,  22. 

'6  2  Cor.  xiii.  n;   Phil.  ii.  2. 

'"  Isa.  Ixvi.  18.  But  "  tribes  "is  inserted;  comp.  Dan.  iii.  7.  The 
phrase  "shall  see  His  glory"  is  from  the  passage  in  Isaiah.  The 
language  seems  to  be  put  into  the  mouth  of  Christ  by  the  preacher. 

^^  This  implies  various  degrees  of  reward  among  these  redeemed. 

'9  TO  /Soo'iAeioi';  not  exactly  "  the  kingdom,"  rather  "  the  kingly 
rule."  iv  toj  'IjjcroO  is  rightly  expkiined  by  Lightfoot,  "  in  the  hands, 
in  the  power,  of  Jesus;  "  ^eviadijaovTai,  is  rendered  above  "  shall 
think  it  strange,"  as  in  i  Pet.  iv.  4,  12. 

20  "  He  "  is  properly  supplied,  as  frequently  in  the  Gospels.  There 
seems  to  be  a  reminiscence  of  John  viii.  24  and  similar  passages. 

2'  Isa.  Ixvi.  24;  comp.  chap.  vii.  above. 

'^  C  reads  iitJ-iV,  as  often,  for  iiixlf,  Syriac,  accepted  by  all  editors. 

23  TraidaiJ.apTo\6<;^  occurring  only  here;  but  a  similar  word,  irai'- 
0afxdpTriTo^ ,  occurs  m  the  Teaching,  v.  2,  Apostolical  Constitu- 
tions, vii.  18,  and  Barnabas,  xx. 

24  Tois  opydvoi?;  comp.  \%x\z\.,  Rom. ,  \\. ,  Ante-Nicene  Fathers, 
i.  p.  75,  where  the  word  is  rendered  "  instruments,"  and  applied  to 
the  teeth  of  the  wild  beast.s  in  the  amphitheatre.  Here  Lightfoot 
renders  "  engines,"  regarding  the  metaphor  as  military. 


THE    HOMILY    ASCRIBED    TO    CLEMENT. 


523 


low  after  righteousness,  that  I  may  have  strength  to 
come  even  near  it/  fearing  the  judgment  to  come. 

CHAP.    XIX. HE   JUSTIFIETH    HIS    EXHORTATION. 

Wherefore,  brethren  and  sisters,-  after  the  God 
of  truth  liath  been  heard,^  I  read  to  you  an  en- 
treaty •*  that  ye  may  give  heed  to  the  things  that 
are  written,  in  order  that  ye  may  save  both  your- 
selves and  him  that  readeth  among  you.  For  as 
a  reward  I  ask  of  you  that  ye  repent  with  the 
whole  heart,  thus  giving  to  yourselves  salvation 
and  life.  For  by  doing  this  we  shall  set  a  goal  5 
for  all  the  young  who  are  minded  to  labour^  on 
behalf  of  piety  and  the  goodness  of  God.  And 
let  us  not,  unwise  ones  that  we  are,  be  affronted 
and  sore  displeased,  whenever  some  one  admon- 
isheth  and  turneth  us  from  iniquity  unto  right- 
eousness. For  sometimes  while  we  are  practising 
evil  things  we  do  not  perceive  it  on  account  of 
the  double-mindedness  and  unbelief  that  is  in 
our  breasts,  and  we  are  "  darkened  in  our  under- 
standing "  ^  by  our  vain  lusts.  Let  us  then  prac- 
tise righteousness  that  we  may  be  saved  unto  the 
end.  Blessed  are  they  that  obey  these  ordi- 
nances. Even  if  for  a  little  time  they  suffer  evil 
in  the  world,^  they  shall  enjoy  the  immortal  fruit 

'  The  phrase  Kav  eyyus  auTi)?  impHes  a  doubt  of  attaining  the 
aim,  in  accord  with  the  tone  of  humiUty  which  obtains  in  this  chapter. 

2  Comp.  the  opening  sentence  of  Barnabas,  "  Sons  and  daugh- 
ters," Ante-.Vice>ie  Fathers,  i.  p.  137;   see  also  chap.  xx. 

•5  If  any  doubt  remained  as  to  the  character  of  this  writing,  it  would 
be  removed  by  this  sentence.  The  passage  is  elliptical,  .uera  I'ov 
9iov  T^;  iiA>)S€ias,  but  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  the  meaning.  The 
Scripture  was  read,  and  listening  to  it  was  regarded  as  hearing  the 
voice  of  God,  whose  words  of  truth  were  read  Then  followed  the 
sermon  or  exhortation;  comp.  Justin,  First  Apology,  chap.  Ixvii. 
(vol.  i.  p.  186).  That  lessons  from  some  at  least  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment were  included  at  the  date  of  this  homily,  seems  quite  certain; 
comp.  the  references  to  the  New  Testament  in  chaps,  ii.,  iii.,  iv.,  and 
elsewhere.    It  is  here  implied  that  this  homily  was  written  and  "  read." 

"*  The  word  eVrevi't?,  here  used,  means  intercession,  or  supplica- 
tion, to  God  (comp.  I  Tim.  ii.  i,  iv.  5)  in  early  Christian  liter.iture: 
but  the  classical  sense  is  "entreaty:  "  so  in  the  opening  senterce  of 
Justin,  First  Apology  (vol.  i.  p.  163,  where  it  is  rendered  "  petition  "). 

5  Lightfoot,  with  Syriac  and  most  editors,  reads  <skot:6v\  but  C 
has  KOTToi',  so  Bryennios. 

.*  C  had  originally  iti.\o<joiitiv  (accepted  by  Hilgenfeld),  but  was 
corrected  to  'SiAon-oi'tif.  The  latter  is  confirmed  by  the  Syriac,  and 
now  generally  accepted,  though  Hilgenfeld  uses  the  other  reading- to 
support  his  view  that  Clement  of  Alexandria  was  the  author. 

7  Eph.  iv.  18. 

8  C  inserts  touto);  so  Bryennios,  Hilgenfeld,  and  others.  Light- 
foot  omits,  with  Syriac.  The  punctuation  above  given  is  that  of 
Bryennios  and  Lightfoot.     Hilgenfeld  joins  this  clause  with  what 

jprecedes. 


of  the  resurrection.  Let  not  then  the  godly  man 
be  grieved,  if  he  be  wretched  in  the  times  that 
now  are  ;  a  blessed  time  waits  for  him.  He,  liv- 
ing again  above  with  the  fathers,  shall  be  joyful 
for  an  eternity  without  grief. 

CHAP.    XX.  —  CONCLUDING  WORD   OF   CONSOLATION. 
DOXOLOGY. 

But  neither  let  it  trouble  your  understanding, 
that  we  see  the  unrighteous  having  riches  and 
the  servants  of  God  straitened.  Let  us  there- 
fore, brethren  and  sisters,  be  believing  :  we  are 
striving  in  the  contest  ^  of  the  living  God,  we 
are  exercised  by  the  present  life,  in  order  that  we 
may  be  crowned  by  that  to  come.  No  one  of 
the  righteous  received  fruit  speedily,  but  await- 
eth  it.  For  if  God  gave  shortly  the  recompense 
of  the  righteous,  straightway  we  would  be  exer- 
cising ourselves  in  business,  not  in  godliness  ;  for 
we  would  seem  to  be  righteous,  while  pursuing 
not  what  is  godly  but  what  is  gainful.  And  on 
this  account  Divine  judgment  surprised  a  spirit 
that  was  not  righteous,  and  loaded  it  with 
chains. '° 

To  the  only  God  invisible,"  the  Father  of 
truth,  who  sent  forth  to  us  the  Saviour  and 
Prince  of  incorruption,'^  through  whom  also  He 
manifested  to  us  the  truth  and  the  heavenly 
life,  to  Him  be  the  glory  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen. '3 


9  Tretpav  aflAouMfi';  the  construction  is  classical,  and  the  figure 
common  in  all  Greek  literature. 

'°  The  verbs  here  are  aorists,  and  have  been  rendered  by  the  Eng- 
lish past  tense;  the  present  participle  (mjj  6»' Sikoioi')  describing  the 
character  of  the  "  spirit  "  must,  according  to  English  usage,  conform 
to  the  main  verbs.  Lightfoot  says,  "  The  aorist  here  has  its  common 
gnontic  sense;  "  and  he  therefore  interprets  the  passage  as  a  general 
statement:  "  Sordid  motives  bring  their  own  punishment  in  a  judicial 
blindness."  But  this  gnomic  sense  of  the  aorist  is  not  common.  C 
reads  (5eiT»xo!,  which  yields  this  sense:  "and  a  chain  weighed  upon 
him."  Hilgenfeld  refers  the  passage  to  these  Christians  who  suffered 
persecution  for  other  causes  than  those  of  righteousness.  Harnack 
thinks  the  author  has  in  mind  Satan,  as  the  prince  of  avarice,  and 
regards  him  as  already  loaded  with  chains.  If  the  aorist  is  taken  in 
its  usual  sense,  this  is  the  preferable  explanation;  but  the  meaning  is 
obscure. 

"  I  Tim.  i.  17. 

'-  Acts  iii.  15,  V.  ji ;  comp.  Heb.  ii.  10. 

•3  The  do.itology  is  interesting,  as  indicating  the  early  custom  of 
thus  closing  a  homily.  Tlic  practice,  fitting  in  itself,  naturally  fol- 
lowed the  examples  in  the  Epistles. 


THE    NICENE    CREED. 


THE   CREED 
As  set  forth  at  Niaea,"^  A.D.  323. 

We  believe  in  one  God,  the  Father  Almighty,  Maker  of  all  things,  visible  and  invisible  : 

And  in  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  begotten  of  the  Father,  only  begotten,  that  is, 
of  the  substance  of  the  Father ; 

God  of  God ;  Light  of  light ;  very  God  of  very  God ;  begotten,  not  made ;  being  of  one 
substance  with  the  Father, 

By  whom  all  things  were  made,  both  things  in  heaven  and  things  in  earth  : 

Who  for  us  men  and  for  our  salvation  came  down,  and  was  incarnate,  and  was  made  man : 

He  suffered,  and  rose  again  the  third  day  : 

And  ascended  into  heaven  : 

And  shall  come  again  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead. 

And  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  etc.^ 

THE   RATIFICATION. 

And  those  who  say  There  ivas  a  time  zuhen  He  was  not,  or  that  Before  He  was  begotten  He  was  not,  or  that  He 
was  made  out  of  nothing  ;  or  who  say  that  The  Son  of  God  is  of  any  other  substance,  or  that  He  is  changeable 
or  unstable,  —  these  the  Catholic  and  Apostolic  Church  anathematizes. 


ADDENDA, 

As  authorized  at  Constantinople,  A.D.  j8i. 

(a)  Of  heaven  and  earth. 

{i))  Begotten  of  the  Father  before  all  worlds. 

(c)  By  the  Holy  Ghost  of  the  Virgin  Mary. 
(^)  Was  crucified  also  for  us,  under  Pontius  Pilate, 

((?)  And  was  buried. 

(/)  Sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Father, 
(g)  Whose  kingdom  shall  have  no  end. 
(h)  The  Lord,  the  Giver  of  life, 
Who  proceedeth  from  the  Father  ;  3 
Who  with  the  Father  and  the  Son  together  is  worshipped  and  glorified ; 

1  It  was  the  old  Creed  of  Jerusalem  slightly  amended,  and  made  the  liturgic  symbol  of  Christendom,  and  the  exponent  of  Catholic 
orthodoxy.  Compare  the  Creed  of  Casarea,  Biirbidge,  p.  334.  But  see  this  whole  subject  admirably  illustrated  for  popular  study  by  Bur- 
bidge,  Liturgies  ajid  Offices  of  the  Church,  p.  330,  etc.,  London,  Bells,  1885. 

2  Here  the  ic.t.A.  is  to  be  understood,  as  in  the  liturgies  where  a  known  form  is  begun  and  left  imperfect.  The  clauses  (see  Cyril  of  Jeru- 
salem, Catechet.,  lect.  xviii.)  are  found  in  the  Creed  of  Jerusalem,  thus:  "  In  one  baptism  of  repentance  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  ia 
one  Holy  Catholic  Church;  and  in  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh;  and  in  eternal  life." 

3  The  addition  of  the  Filioque,  in  the  West,  is  theologically  true,  but  of  no  authority  here.     See  Pearson,  On  the  Creed. 


THE    NICENE    CREED.  525 


Who  spake  by  the  prophets  : 

In  one  Holy  CathoHc  and  Apostolic  Church. 

We  acknowledge  one  baptism  for  the  remission  of  sins. 

We  look  for  the  resurrection  of  the  dead, 

And  the  life  of  the  world  to  come.     Amen. 

This  Nicseno-Constantinopolitan  Creed  was  solemnly  ratified  by  the  Council  of  Ephesus  (a.d. 
431)  with  the  decree'  that  "No  one  ^  shall  be  permitted  to  introduce,  write,  or  compose  ar^y 
other  faith-^  besides  that  which  was  defined  by  the  holy  Fathers  assembled  in  the  city  of  Nice, 
with  the  presence  of  the  Holy  Ghost." 

'  Canon  vil. 

2  No  one.  This  re-affirms  the  action  of  Nicaa  itself,  and  forbids  the  imposition  of  anything  novel  as  a  creed  by  any  authority  what- 
ever. Nothing,  therefore,  which  has  not  been  set  forth  by  Nicene  authority  (or  by  the  supplementing  and  co-equal  councils  of  the  whole 
Church,  from  the  same  primitive  sources)  can  b^  a  creed,  strictly  speaking.  It  may  be  an  orthodox  confession,  like  the  Quicutique  Vult, 
but  cannot  be  imposed  in  terms  of  communion,  any  more  than  the  Te  Deuin. 

3  Any  other  faith.  The  composition  and  setting  forth  of  another  faith,  as  terms  of  communion,  by  Plus  IV.,  bishop  of  Rome,  a.d. 
1564,  and  its  acceptance,  with  additional  dogmas,  at  the  opening  of  the  Vatican  Council  (so-called),  a.d.  1869,  brought  the  whole  Papal 
communion  under  this  anathema  of  Ephesus. 


EARLY    LITURGIES. 


INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE 

TO 

EARLY  LITURGIES. 


It  is  in  curious  contrast  with  the  work  of  Brett  and  others  Hke-minded  that  we  have  in  these 
Edinburgh  translations  a  reflection  from  the  minds  of  divines  who  are  unused  to  hturgies^  and 
who  have  no  interest  in  their  elucidation.  For  the  mere  reader  this  is  not  an  advantage ;  but  the 
student  who  goes  to  the  originals  will  find  that  it  affords  at  times  no  inconsiderable  help.  These 
translations  are  "  inartificially  drawn,"  as  the  lawyers  say.  They  are  so  much  Greek  and  Latin 
rendered  grammatically  by  competent  scholars,  who  have  no  theories  to  sustain,  and  who  are 
equally  devoid  of  tfchnique  and  of  a  disposition  to  exhibit  it  for  the  support  of  preconceptions. 
Not  infrequently  one  gets  a  new  view  of  certain  stereotyped  expressions  from  the  way  in  which 
they  are  here  handled.  The  liturgiologist  finds  his  researches  freshened  by  etymologies  he  had 
hardly  thought  of,  here  literally  rendered.  Of  course,  these  are  mere  specimens,  and  no  one  can 
use  them  for  argument,  except  by  comparison  with  the  Greek,  or  the  Latin  of  Renaudot,  or  the 
originals  in  Syriac  or  Coptic  ;  but  they  will  prove  very  useful  in  many  ways.  The  whole  science  is 
in  its  infancy ;  and  we  have  no  specimen  of  a  primitive  Uturgy  unless  it  be  the  Clementine,  so 
called.  The  specimens  here  given  are  like  cloth  of  gold  (Ps.  xlv.  13),  moth-eaten  and  patched, 
and  spangled  over  with  tinsel  \  and  the  true  artist  has  only  die  one  object  in  view,  —  to  restore  it, 
that  is,  to  the  king's  daughter,  as  it  was  aforetime. 

The  following  is  the  announcement  of  the  Messrs.  Clark  in  the  Edinburgh  edition  :  "  The 
Liturgy  of  St.  James  has  been  translated  by  William  Macdonald,  M.A. ;  that  of  the  Evangelist  Mark 
by  George  Ross  Merry,  B.A. ;  and  that  of  the  Holy  Apostles  by  Dr.  Donaldson." 

It  will  be  obser\ed  that  the  translations  are  given  in  the  Edinburgh  series  with  hardly  a  line 
of  comment,  and  with  no  editorial  helps  to  the  reader  whatever.  These  have  been  scantily  sup- 
plied, here  and  there,  where  the  case  seemed  to  require  some  elucidation  ;  and  in  a  few  instances 
I  have  ventured  to  reduce  a  word  or  two  in  the  rendering  to  liturgical  jjhraseology. 

The  interest  which  has  recently  been  awakened  in  liturgiology,  and  which  exists  among  the 
learned  so  generally,  will  justify  me  in  stating  somewhat  at  large  the  considerations  which  are  pre- 
requisites to  an  intelligent  study  of  these  compilations.  I  shall  not  depart  from  my  rule,  nor 
formulate  my  personal  convictions ;  but  I  must  indicate  sources  of  information  not  mentioned  by 
the  Edinburgh  editors,  only  remarking,  that,  while  they  have  cited  the  learned  and  excellent  Dr. 
Neale,  with  others  who  advance  untenable  claims  in  some  instances,  I  shall  refer  to  writers  of  a 
more  moderate  school,  such  as  have  taken  a  less  narrow  and  more  historic  view  of  the  whole 
matter.  By  claiming  too  much,  and  by  reading  their  own  ideas  back  into  the  ancient  exemplars, 
many  good  and  learned  men  have  overdone  their  argument,  and  confused  scriptural  simplicity 
with  the  artificial  systems  of  post-Nicene  ages.  Earnest  and  worthy  of  respect  as  they  are,  I 
must  therefore  prefer  a  class  of  writers  who  breathe  the  spirit  of  the  ante-Nicene  Fathers  as 

better  elucidating  the  primitive  epoch  and  its  principles,  alike  in  doctrine  and  worship. 

529 


530  INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE. 

Hippolytus,  in  a  few  terse  sentences,  has  pointed  out  the  epoch  of  David,  in  its  vast  import, 
as  the  dawning  of  Christianity  itself.'  More  elaborately,  a  recent  writer  of  great  erudition  has 
expounded  the  same  historic  fact,  and  given  us  the  pivot  of  Hebrew  history  on  which  turns  the 
whole  system  of  that  "goodly  fellowship  of  prophets"  who  heralded  the  Sun  of  righteousness 
as  successive  constellations  rise  before  the  day.  The  learned  Dean  Payne-Smith,  more  minutely 
than  Hippolytus,  identifies  Samuel,  the  master  of  David,  as  the  great  instrument  of  God  in 
shaping  the  institutions  of  Moses  to  be  a  prelude  to  the  Advent ;  in  other  words,  transforming 
a  local  and  tribal  religion  into  that  of  Catholicity.  The  value  of  the  Dean's  condensed  and 
luminous  elaboration  of  this  cardinal  truth  can  hardly  be  overstated. 

But,  to  go  behind  even  the  Dean's  stand-point,  we  shall  better  comprehend  the  era  of  which, 
under  God,  Samuel  was  the  author,  by  noting  the  immense  importance  of  that  specific  Mosaic 
ordinance  which  not  only  made  it  possible,  but  which  proves  that  an  all-wise  prolepsis  governed 
the  whole  law  of  Moses.  We  generally  conceive  of  the  Mosaic  system  as  one  of  unlimited 
hecatombs  and  burnt-offerings.  On  the  contrary,  it  was  a  system  restricting  and  limiting  the 
unsystematized  primeval  institution  of  sacrifice,  which  had  done  its  work  by  passing  into  the 
universal  religions  and  rituals  of  Gentilism.^  When  the  seminal  idea  of  expiation,  atonement, 
and  the  blood  of  innocence  as  a  propitiation  for  guilt,  was  communicated  to  all  the  families  of  the 
earth,  the  Mosaic  institutions  limited  sacrifices  for  the  faithful,  and  localized  them  with  marvellous 
significance.  Previously  the  faithful  everywhere  had  imitated  the  sacrifices  of  their  fathers, 
Noah  and  Abraham,  who  reared  their  altars  everywhere,  as  Job  also  did,  —  wherever  they  dwelt  or 
sojourned.  Now  mark  the  first  step  towards  a  more  spiritual  worship,  based,  nevertheless,  on  the 
fundamental  principle  of  sacrifice.     Moses  ordains  as  follows  :  — 

r.  "When  ye  go  over  Jordan,  and  dwell  in  the  land  which  the  Lord  your  God  giveth  you,  .  .  .  then  there 
shall  be  a  place  which  the  Lord  your  God  shall  choose  to  cause  His  name  to  dwell  there  ;  thither  shall  ye  bring 
all  that  J  command  you,  your  burnt-offerings,"  etc.^ 

2.  "  Take  heed  to  thyself  that  thou  offer  not  thy  burnt-offerings  in  every  place  that  thou  seest ;  but  in  the 
place  which  the  Lord  shall  choose  in  one  of  the  tribes,  there  thou  shalt  offer  thy  burnt-offerings,  and  there  thou 
shalt  do  all  that  I  command  thee.""* 

3.  "  If  the  place  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  chosen  to  put  His  name  there,  be  too  far  from  thee  "  [i.e., 
for  frequent  sacrifices  ;  observe,  nevertheless,  the  law  as  to  the  sanctity  of  blood  in  thy  cojnmon  use  of  meats,  and 
forbear  to  sacrifice,  till  the  opportunity  comes],  "only  thy  holy  things  which  thou  hast,  and  thy  vows,  thou  shalt 
take,  and  go  unto  the  place  which  the  Lord  shall  choose ;  and  thou  shalt  offer  thy  burnt-offerings,  the  flesh  and  the 
blood,  upon  the  altar  of  the  Lord  thy  God."^ 

4.  "Three  times  in  a  year  shall  all  thy  males  appear  before  the  Lord  thy  God,  in  the  place  which  He  shall 
choose."  ^ 

5.  "  Thou  mayest  not  sacrifice  the  Passover  within  any  of  thy  gates  ;  .  .  .  but  at  the  place  which  the  Lord 
thy  God  shall  choose  to  place  His  name  in,  there  thou  shalt  sacrifice  the  Passover." 

Note,  further,  that  all  this  provision  and  prewhlon  was  part  of  the  great  Messianic  system, 
which  reached  its 'Crisis  in  the  time  of  David,  as  prophetic  of  "  the  Son  of  David." 

It  was  the  ofiice  of  Samuel  to  take  the  Mosaic  ordinances  just  there,  and  to  shape  them  for 
the  advent  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  for  His  sacrifice  upon  Calvary,  and  for  the  setting-up  of  His 
universal  kingdom. 

The  Institutions  of  Samuel,  therefore,  were  in  essence  institutions  for  the  Gospel-day,  and 
they  were  completed  by  the  anointing  of  David  as  king,  and  by  his  prophetic  mission  to  provide 
the  Psalter  (of  which  more,  by  and  by)  ;  then  the  Ark  came  out  of  curtains,  and  the  Lord  chose 
and  appointed  the  place  of  which  Moses  had  spoken,  —  none  other  than  the  spot  where  Abraham 
had  rehearsed  in  type  the  Sacrifice  and  Resurrection  of  Christ,  according  as  it  was  written  :  ^ 

'  Vol.  V.  note  2,  p.  170.  *  Deut.  xii.  24. 

2  Vol.  vl.  p.  542,  Elucidation  VI.  s  Deut.  xii.  21,  xiv.  24. 

3  Deut.  xii.  6.  6  Exod.  xxiii.  17;  Deut.  xvi.  16. 

7  Gen.  xxii.  14. 


INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE.  531 


"  Jehovah-Jireh  .  .  .  in  the  mount  of  the  Lord  it  shall  be  seen."  Thus,  all  sacrifice  acceptable 
to  God  was  shown  to  have  reference  to  the  Paschal  Lamb,  who  on  that  mount  of  the  Lord 
should  be  sacrificed,  and  rise  again,  as  was  accomplished  in  a  figure  aforetime.' 

And  next,  the  Psalmist  commemorates  the  putting  away  of  the  migratory  Tabernacle,  and  the 
rest  of  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  in  the  place  designed  for  the  grand  accomplishment  of  redemp- 
tion ("  the  sure  mercies  of  David  "),  as  follows  :  ^  — 

"  He  refused  the  tabernacle  of  Joseph,  and  chose  not  the  tribe  of  Ephraim  :  but  chose  the 
tribe  of  Judah,  the  Mount  Zion  which  He  loved.  And  He  built  His  sanctuary  like  high  palaces, 
like  the  earth  which  He  hath  established  for  ever." 

Thus,  localized  sacrifice  was  made  to  designate  the  j/,^/ where  the  one  propitiatory  sacrifice 
should  be  offered,  "  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world  ;  "  and  that  spot  in  turn  interpreted  the  great 
canon  of  redemption,^  — 

"  Without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission :  " 

and  all  this,  being  accomplished  in  the  Messiah,  passed  away  for  ever.  The  veil  of  the  Temple 
was  rent  when  Jesus  cried,  "  It  is  finished." 

And  now  let  us  note  the  "  Institutions  of  Samuel."  The  localizing  of  the  Temple-worship 
made  way  for  the  clearer  revelation  of  spiritual  sacrifices  ;  the  Temple  itself  was  to  be  supplied 
with  an  expository  liturgy.  Moreover,  a  liturgical  system,  revolving  about  the  central  worship 
of  the  Temple,  was  to  be  brought  to  every  man's  door  by  the  establishment  of  the  synagogue  for 
the  villages  of  Israel. +  The  synagogue-worship  became,  therefore,  the  education  and  preparation 
of  the  faithful  for  the  simple  and  spiritual  worship  of  the  new  law.  This  our  Lord  Himself 
expounded  in  the  grand  Catholicity  of  His  words  to  the  outcast  Samaritans  :  — 

"  The  hour  cometh,  when  ye  shall  neither  in  this  mountain,  nor  yet  at  Jerusalem,  worship  the  Father.  .  .  .  lUit  the 
hour  Cometh,  and  now  is,  when  the  true  worshippers  shall  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth,"'*  etc. 

We  have  seen  that  the  hour  promised  by  Malachi  was  supposed  by  the  Ante-Nicene  leathers 
to  be  here  intended  :  "My  name  shall  be  great  among  the  Gentiles;  and  in  every  place  incense 
shall  be  offered  unto  My  name,  and  a  pure  offering."  ^ 

The  student  of  this  series  must  have  observed  that  the  primitive  writers  were  universally 
impressed  with  these  principles, ^  and  they  are  essential  to  the  study  of  the  liturgies  here  intro- 
duced into  the  series  by  the  Edinburgh  editors.  For  other  purposes,  expounding  the  prophetic 
system,  on  a  text  of  St.  Peter,  Dean  Payne-Smith  has  incidentally  elucidated  these  ideas  so  fully, 
and  with  such  originality,  that  I  leave  the  student  to  consult  his  pages,^  with  only  the  following 
important  hints  to  those  who  may  fail  to  see  them  :  — 

1.  We  find  the  prophet  Samuel  instituting  "Schools  of  the  Prophets,"  out  of  which  grew  the 
synagogue  system  supplying  the  Rabbinical  education  to  Israel,  and  furnishing  chiefs  to  the  syna- 
gogues.    See  Acts  iii.  24  ;  and  compare  i  Sam.  x.  5,  xix.  20,  and  Chron.  ix.  22.'' 

2.  We  find  the  institution  of  choral  worship  and  the  chanting  of  hymns  —  e.g.,  of  Moses  and 
Miriam,  and  Hannah  (Samuel's  mother)  —  in  full  operation  under  Samuel. 

3.  We  find  David  at  this  juncture  inspired,  as  "  the  sweet  singer  of  Israel,"  to  supi)ly  the 
Psalter,  which  in  divers  arrangements  has  continued  among  Christians  to  be  the  marrow  of 
public  worship  "  in  every  place,"  and  throughout  the  world. 

4.  The  reading  of  the  law  and  the  prophets  was  now  set  in  order ;  and  not  only  was  the 
Temple  supplied  with  teachers,  but  also  the  villages  in  every  tribe."' 

5.  Thus  the  Christian  Church  was  provided  with  a  system  of  worship   from   the   hour  of  its 


'  Heb.  xi.  19.  *  Mai.  i.  ii. 

2  Ps.  Ixxviii.  67-69.  '  This  series /ajj/;« /  but,  e.g.,  vol.  i.  pp.  138,  482,  and  v.  p.  290,  note  i 

3  Heb.  ix.  22.  *  As  above  mentioned  in  his  work  on  Prophecy.  See  p.  530. 
-•  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  12,  Ixxiv.  6,  9  See  also  Cruden  on  the  word  "  school  "  in  his  Concordance. 
S  John  iv.  21-23.  '°  Dean  Smith,  Prophecy,  etc.,  p.  124. 


532  INTRODUCTORY    NOTICE. 

institution,'  the  synaxis  succeeding  the  synagogue  ;  the  "  ministration  of  the  word  "  being  enriched 
by  Gospels  and  Epistles,  by  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs,  and  by  "  the  prayers  "  (based 
upon  the  Shemone  esre)^  which  now  began  to  be  composed  and  multiplied  in  the  churches. 
Touching  "  free  prayer "  as  exemplified  in  the  first  ages,  see  St.  Cyprian's  Epistles  more 
especially  :  ^  "  Let  us  pray  for  the  lapsed,"  etc. 

6.  It  is  most  significant,  that,  as  St.  Paul  was  not  present  at  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Sup- 
per, he  was,  nevertheless,  "  not  behind  the  chiefest  of  the  Apostles,"  even  in  this.  He  also  "  re- 
ceived "  the  whole  knowledge  of  the  institution,  and  became,  in  so  far,  the  author  of  an  original 
Gospel  in  his  details  of  Christ's  great  oblation  of  Himself.  Hereupon,  he  adds  the  sacrificial 
expositions '' of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  and  "delivered  the  ordinances  "  to  every  church"^ 
{Kara  rd^Lv),  providing  for  order  and  decorum  in  divine  offices. 

This  he  seems  to  have  done  as  "  Liturge  "  and  "  Hierurge,"  or  evangelical  priest,^  "  minisfer- 
ing  in  sacrifice  7  the  Gospel  of  God,"  etc. 

Compare,  then,  with  the  Scriptures,  Justin  Martyr's  account  of  the  early  worship  of  Christians  ; 
and  after  consulting  the  (so-called  )  "  Clementine  Liturgy,"  ^  the  student  will  be  qualified  to  form 
an  enlightened  judgment  upon  the  primitive  and  the  interpolated  elements  of  the  following  litur- 
gies. For  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  they  are  reflected  from  mss.,  not  one  of  which  has  any 
claim  to  represent  the  Ante-Nicene  period.  To  purify  them,  therefore,  by  Scripture,  and  the 
truly  primitive  testimonies  of  this  series,  is  a  task  yet  remaining  to  be  accomplished,  and  one 
which  may  well  invoke  the  most  conscientious  and  patient  labours  of  the  most  learned  in  the  land. 

Here  follows  the  Edinburgh  Introductory  Notice  :  — 

The  word  Liturgy  has  a  special  meaning  as  applied  to  the  following  documents.  It  denotes 
the  serv^ice  used  in  the  celebration  of  the  Eucharist. 

Various  liturgies  have  come  down  to  us  from  antiquity ;  and  their  age,  authorship,  and  genu- 
ineness have  been  matter  of  keen  discussion.  In  our  own  country  two  writers  on  this  subject 
stand  specially  prominent :  the  Rev.  William  Palmer,  INI. A.,  who  in  his  Origiiies  LitiirgiccB'^  gave  a 
dissertation  on  Primitive  Liturgies  ;  and  the  Rev.  J.  Mason  Neale,  who  devoted  a  large  portion  of 
his  life  to  liturgies,  edited  four  of  them  in  his  Tetralogia  Litiirgica,^°  five  of  them  in  his  Liturgies 
of  St.  Mark,  St.  James,  St.  Ckmciit,  St.  Chrysostom,  and  St.  Basil,^^  and  discussed  them  in  a 
masterly  manner  in  several  works,  but  especially  in  his  Generat  Introduction  to  a  History  of  the 
Holy  Kasteni  Church.^^ 

Ancient  liturgies  are  generally  divided  into  four  families,  —  the  Liturgy  of  the  Jerusalem 
Church, '3  adopted  throughout  the  East;  the  Alexandrian, '■♦  used  in  Egypt  and  the  neighbouring 
countries  ;  and  the  Roman  and  Gallican  Liturgies.  To  these  Neale  has  added  a  fifth,  the  Liturgy 
of  Persia  or  Edessa. 

There  is  also  a  liturgy  not  included  in  any  of  these  families  —  the  Clementine.  It  seems  never 
to  have  been  used  in  any  public  service.  It  forms  part  of  the  eighth  book  of  the  Apostolical 
Constitutions.^'^ 

*  Acts  i.  4  (Greek),  14,  ii.  i,  42,  iv.  24. 

*  Vol.  V.  Elucidation  III.  p.  559. 
3  Ibid.,  Elucidation  VI.  p.  412. 

•♦  See  Field,  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  London,  Rivingtons,  1 882. 

5  I  Cor.  vii.  17,  xi.  2,  25,  33,  etc.,  xiv.  34-40. 

6  See  vol.  V.  p.  409. 

'  Revised  Version  of  iSSi. 

'  See  Apostolic  Constitutions,  p.  489,  supra, 

9  Oxford,  1832. 
'°  London,  1849. 
''  Second  ed.  London,  1868. 
'2  London,  1850. 
"  [Or  of  St.  James,  so  called.] 
'■•  [Called  the  Liturgy  of  St.  Mark.] 

'S  [It  is  most  valuable,  and  indicates  the  usages  of  a  period  near  the  age  of  Justin  Martyr.  It  is  typical  of  an  original  from  which  the 
Liturgy  of  St.  James  itself  is  derived.     It  was  probably  used  in  Gaul,  if  not  also  in  Rome.] 


INTRODUCTORY    NOTICE.  53; 


The  age  ascribed  to  these  documents  depends  very  much  on  the  temperament  and  incUnation 
of  the  inquirer.  Those  who  have  great  reverence  for  them  think  that  they  must  have  had  an 
apostolic  origin,  that  they  contain  the  apostolic  form,  first  handed  down  by  tradition,  and  then 
committed  to  writing,  but  they  allow  that  there  is  a  certain  amount  of  interpolation  and  addition 
of  a  date  later  than  the  Nicene  Council.  Such  words  as  "  consubstantial  "  and  "  mother  of  God  " 
bear  indisputable  witness  to  this.  Others  think  that  there  is  no  real  historical  proof  of  their  early 
existence  at  all,  —  that  they  all  belong  to  a  late  date,  and  bear  evident  marks  of  having  been 
written  long  after  the  age  of  the  apostles.' 

There  can  scarcely  be  a  doubt  that  they  were  not  committed  to  writing  till  a  comparatively  late 
day.  Those  who  think  that  their  origin  was  apostolic  allow  this.  "  The  period,"  says  Palmer,^ 
"  when  liturgies  were  first  committed  to  writing  is  uncertain,  and  has  been  the  subject  of  some 
controversy.  Le  Brun  contends  that  no  liturgy  was  written  till  the  fifth  century ;  but  his  argu- 
ments seem  quite  insufficient  to  prove  this,  and  he  is  accordingly  opposed  by  Muratori  and  other 
eminent  ritualists.  It  seems  certain,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  liturgy  of  the  Apostolical  Con- 
stitutions was  written  at  the  end  of  the  third  or  beginning  of  the  fourth  century ;  and  there  is  no 
reason  to  deny  that  others  may  have  been  written  about  the  same  time,  or  not  long  after." 

Neale  ^  sums  up  the  results  of  his  study  in  the  following  words  :  "  I  shall  content  myself  there- 
fore with  assuming,  ( i )  that  these  liturgies,  though  not  composed  by  the  Apostles  whose  names 
they  bear,  were  the  legitimate  development  of  their  unwritten  tradition  respecting  the  Christian 
Sacrifice ;  the  words,  probably,  in  the  most  important  parts,  the  general  tenor  in  all  portions,  de- 
scending unchanged  from  the  apostolic  authors.  (2)  That  the  Liturgy  of  St.  James  is  of  earlier 
date,  as  to  its  main  fabric,  than  a.d.  200 ;  that  the  Clementine  Office  is  at  least  not  later  than 
260  ;  that  the  Liturgy  of  St.  Mark  is  neariy  coeval  with  that  of  St.  James  ;  while  those  of  St.  Basil 
and  St.  Chrysostom  are  to  be  referred  respectively  to  the  saints  by  whom  they  purport  to  be  com- 
posed. In  all  these  cases,  several  manifest  insertions  and  additions  do  not  alter  the  truth  of  the 
general  statement." 

1.  The  Roman  Liturgy.  The  first  writer  who  is  supposed  to  allude  to  a  Roman  Liturgy  is 
Innocentius,  in  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century ;  but  it  may  well  be  doubted  whether  his  words 
refer  to  any  liturgy  now  extant.*  Some  have  attributed  the  authorship  of  the  Roman  Liturgy  to 
Leo  the  Great,  who  was  made  bishop  of  Rome  in  a.d.  45 1  ;  some  to  Gelasius,  who  was  made 
bishop  of  Rome  in  a.d.  492  ;  and  some  to  Gregory  the  First,  who  was  made  bishop  of  Rome  in 
A.D.  590.  Such  being  the  opinions  of  those  who  have  given  most  study  to  the  subject,  we  have 
not  deemed  it  necessary  to  translate  it,  though  Probst,  in  his  Liturgie  dcr  drei  ersten  cliristlichen 
yahrhunderte,^  probably  out  of  affection  for  his  own  Church,  has  given  it  a  place  beside  the 
Clementine  and  those  of  St.  James  and  St.  Mark. 

2.  The  Galilean  has  still  less  claim  to  antiquity.  In  fact,  Daniel  marks  it  among  the  spurious.^ 
Mabillon  tries  to  prove  that  three  ecclesiastics  had  a  share  in  the  authorship  of  this  liturgy : 
Musaeus,  presbyter  of  Marseilles,  who  died  after  the  middle  of  the  fifth  century;  Sidonius,  bishop 
of  Auvergne,  who  died  a.d.  494;  and  Hilary,  bishop  of  Poictiers,  who  died  a.d.  366. ^  Palmer 
strives  to  show  with  great  ingenuity  that  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  Gallican  Liturgy  may  have 
been  originally  derived  from  St.  John  ;  but  his  arguments  are  merely  conjectures. 

3.  The  Liturgy  of  St.  James,  the  Liturgy  of  the  ("hurch  of  Jerusalem.  .Xsseman,  Zaccaria,  Dr. 
Brett,  Palmer,  Trollope,  and  Neale,  think  that  the  main  structure  of  this  liturgy  is  the  work  of  St. 
James,  while  they  admit  that  it  contains  some  evident  interjjolations.     Leo  Allatius,  Bona,  Bellar- 

'  [A  fair  view  of  their  origin  is  to  be  found  in  Sir  William  Palmer's  Origines  Liturgica,  Oxford,  1832.] 

2  Origines  Liturgicee,  p.  11. 

3  General  Introduction  to  the  History  of  the  Holy  Eastern  Church,  p.  319. 

■♦  [If  Justin  Martyr  describes  the  liturgy  used  in  Rome,  when  he  lived  there  under  the  Antonines,  then  it  was  nearly  identical  with  tlie 
**  Clementine,"  and  had  reached  them  from  the  East.     See  vol.  i.  p.  185,  this  series.] 

5  Tiibingen,  1870. 

6  vaQoi.     Codex  Liturgicus,  vol.  iv.  p.  35,  note. 
">  Palmer,  vol.  i   p.  144. 


534  INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE. 

mine,  Baronius,  and  some  others,  think  that  the  whole  is  the  genuine  production  of  the  apostle. 
Cave,  Fabricius,  Dupin,  Le  Nourry,  Basnage,  Tillemont,  and  many  others,  think  that  it  is  entirely 
destitute  of  any  claim  to  an  apostolic  origin,  and  that  it  belongs  to  a  much  later  age.' 

"  From  the  Liturgy  of  St.  James,"  says  Neale,  "  are  derived,  on  the  one  hand,  the  forty  Syro- 
Jacobite  offices  :  on  the  other,  the'  Csesarean  office,  or  Liturgy  of  St.  Basil,  with  its  offshoots ;  that 
of  St.  Chrysostom,  and  the  Armeno-Gregorian."^ 

There  are  only  two  manuscripts  of  the  Greek  Liturgy  of  St.  James,  —  one  of  the  tenth,  the 
other  of  the  twelfth  century,  —  with  fragments  of  a  third. ^  The  first  edition  appeared  at  Rome  in 
1526.  In  more  recent  times  it  has  been  edited  by  Rev.  W.  TroUope,  M.A.,4  Neale  in  the  two 
works  mentioned  above,  and  Daniel  in  his  Codex  Liturgicus.  Bishop  Rattray  edited  the  Anaph- 
ora,^  and  attempted  to  separate  the  original  from  the  interpolations,  "  though,"  says  Neale,  "  the 
supposed  restoration  is  unsatisfactory  enough."  Bunsen,  in  his  Analecta  Ante-Nica-na^  has  tried 
to  restore  the  A/iaphora  to  the  state  in  which  it  may  have  been  in  the  fourth  century,  "  as  far  as 
was  possible  —  gua?itum  fieri potuit.''^ 

4.  The  Liturgy  of  St.  Mark,  the  liturgy  of  the  church  of  Alexandria.  The  same  difference  of 
opinion  exists  in  regard  to  the  age  and  genuineness  of  this  liturgy  as  we  found  existing  in  regard 
to  that  of  St.  James,  and  the  same  scholars  occupy  the  same  relative  position. 

The  offshoots  from  St.  Mark's  Liturgy  are  St.  Basil,  St.  Cyril,  and  St.  Gregory,  and  the  Ethi- 
opic  Canon  or  Liturgy  of  All  Apostles.  In  regard  to  the  Liturgy  of  St.  Cyril,  Neale  says  that  it  is 
"  to  all  intents  and  purposes  the  same  as  that  of  St.  Mark ;  and  it  seems  highly  probable  that  the 
Liturgy  of  St.  Mark  came,  as  we  have  it  now,  from  the  hands  of  St.  Cyril,  or,  to  use  the  expression 
of  Abu'lberkat,  that  Cyril  '  perfected  '  it."  7 

There  is  only  one  manuscript  of  the  Liturgy  of  St.  Mark,  probably  belonging  to  the  twelfth 
century.  The  first  edition  appeared  at  Paris  in  1583.  The  liturgy  is  given  in  Renaudot's  Litiir- 
giarii/n  OrientaliuDi  Collectio,  torn.  i.  pp.  120-148,^  in  Neale's  two  works,  and  in  Daniel's  Codex 
Liturgicus. 

5.  The  Liturgy  of  the  Apostles  Adaeus  and  Maris.  This  liturgy  has  been  brought  promi- 
nently forward  by  Neale,  who  says  :  "  It  is  generally  passed  over  as  of  very  inferior  importance, 
and  Renaudot  alone  seems  to  have  been  prepared  to  acknowledge  in  some  degree  its  great  antiq- 
uity." 9  He  thinks  that  it  is  "  one  of  the  earliest,  and  perhaps  the  very  earliest,  of  the  many 
formularies  of  the  Christian  Sacrifice."  '°  It  is  one  of  the  three  Nestorian  liturgies,  the  other 
two  being  that  of  Nestorius  and  that  of  Theodore  the  interpreter. 

A  Latin  translation  of  it  is  given  in  Renaudot's  Collectio,'-^  which  is  reprinted  in  Daniel's 
Codex  Liturgicus.  It  is  from  this  version  that  our  translation  is  made.  Several  prayers  and 
hymns  are  indicated  only  by  the  initial  words,  and  the  rubrical  directions  are  probably  of  a 
much  later  date  than  the  text. 

The  Liturgies  are  divided  into  two  parts,  —  the  part  before  "  Lift  we  up  our  hearts,"  and  the 
part  after  this.     The  first  is  termed  the  Proanaphoral  Part,  the  second  the  Anaphora. 

Trollope  describes  what  he  conceives  to  be  the  form  of  worship  in  the  early  Church,  thus  :  '^ 
"The  service  of  this  day  divided  itself  into  two  parts  ;  at  the  latter  of  which,  called  in  the  Eastern 

'  [Here  the  weight  of  authorities  is  clearly  on  this  side.  J 

^  General  Introd. ,  p.  317. 

3  [Palmer  gives  proof  of  its  currency  at  an  early  period  in  some  details.     O.  S.,  vol.  i.  p.  42.] 

■♦  Edinburgh,  T.  &  T.  Clark,  1848. 

5  London,  1744. 

6  Vol.  iii.      [Grabe  also  attempted  this.] 

''  General  Introd.,  p.  324.  [From  the  poverty  of  ms.  authority,  we  can  only  form  a  judgment  by  comparison  with  the  Clementine  and 
with  other  more  fully  represented  originals.] 

8  Editio  secunda  correctior.     Francofutti  ad  Moenum,  1S47. 

9  General  Introd.,  p.  319. 
'°  Ibid.,  p.  323. 

"  Tom.  ii.  pp.  578-592,  ed.  sec. 
^^  Introduction,  p.  11. 


INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE.  535 


churches  Liturgia  mystica,  and  in  the  Western  Missa  fideliian,  none  but  perfect  and  approved 
Christians  were  allowed  to  be  present.  To  the  Missa  Catechmnenorum,  or  that  part  of  the  ser- 
vice which  preceded  the  prayers  peculiar  to  communicants  only,  not  only  believers,  but  Gentiles, 
were  admitted,  in  the  hope  that  some  might  possibly  become  converts  to  the  faith.  After  the 
Psalms  and  Lessons  with  which  the  service  commenced,  as  on  ordinary  occasions,  a  section  from 
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  or  the  Epistles  was  read ;  after  which  the  deacon  or  presbyter  read  the 
Gospel.  Then  followed  an  exhortation  from  one  or  more  of  the  presbyters ;  and  the  bishop  or 
president  delivered  a  Hotnily  or  Sermon,  explanatory,  it  should  seem,  of  the  Scripture  which 
had  been  read,  and  exciting  the  people  to  an  imitation  of  the  virtues  therein  exemplified.  When 
the  preacher  had  concluded  his  discourse  with  a  doxology  in  praise  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  a 
deacon  made  proclamation  for  all  infidels  and  non-communicants  to  withdraw  ;  then  came  the  dis- 
missal of  the  several  classes  of  catechumens,  energumens,  competents,  and  penitents,  after  the 
prayers  for  each  respectively,  as  on  ordinary  days  \  and  the  Missa  fidelium  commenced.  This 
office  consisted  of  two  parts,  essentially  distinct :  viz.,  of  prayers  for  the  faithful,  and  for  man- 
kind in  general,  introductory  to  the  Oblation ;  and  the  Anaphora  or  Obhition  itself.  The  intro- 
ductory part  varied  considerably  in  the  formularies  of  different  churches ;  but  in  the  Anaphora 
all  the  existing  liturgies  so  closely  agree,  in  substance  at  least,  if  not  in  words,  that  they  can 
only  be  reasonably  referred  to  the  same  common  origin.'  Their  arrangement,  indeed,  is  not 
always  the  same  ;  but  the  following  essential  points  belong,  without  exception,  to  them  all :  — 
I.  The  Kiss  of  Peace  ;  2.  The  form  beginning,  Z///  up  your  hearts ;  3.  The  Hymn,  Therefore  with 
angels,  etc.;  4.  Commemoration  of  the  words  of  Institution;  5.  The  Oblation;  6.  Prayer  of 
Consecration ;  7.  Prayers  for  the  Church  on  Earth  ;  8.  Prayers  for  the  Dead ;  9.  The  Lord's 
Prayer;   10.  Breaking  of  the  Bread ;  11.  Communion." 

Neale  gives  a  more  minute  ac(^ount  of  the  different  parts  of  the  service.     He  divides  the 
Proanaphoral  portion  into  parts  in  the  following  manner  :  -  — 

(  I.  The  Preparatory  Prayers. 

II.  The  Initial  Hymn  or  Introit. 
"  I.  Liturgy  (or  Jlfissa)  of  the     j  III.  The  Little  Entrance. 


Catechumens.  |  IV.  The  Trisagion. 

V.  The  Lections. 


VI.  The  Prayers  after  the  Gospel,  and  expulsion  of  the  Catechumen. 


C  I.  The  Prayers  for  the  Faithful, 

,  ^ .  ,,,.>,  n.  The  Great  Entrance. 

"Liturgy  {or  Musa)  of  ^  j^^    ^,^^  Offertory. 


the  Faithful 


IV.  The  Kiss  of  Peace. 
V.  The  Creed." 


The  Anaphora  he  divides  into  four  parts  in  the  following  manner :  ^  — 


f 


I.  The  Preface. 
^  ,  II.  The  Prayer  of  the  Triumphal  Hymn. 

.    .  ■{  III.  The  Triumphal  Hynm. 

^    *  !  IV.  Commemoration  of  Our  Lord's  Life. 

L  V.  Commemoration  of  Institution. 


C  VI.  Words  of  Institution  of  the  Bread, 

j  VII.  Words  of  Institution  of  the  Wine. 

"  The  Consecration.              •^  VHI.  Oblation  of  the  P.ody  and  Blood. 

!  IX.  Introductory  Prayer  for  the  Descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

V.  X.  Prayer  for  the  Sanctification  of  Elements. 


'  [Hence  the  value  of  these  liturgies  is  to  be  sought  iii  the  points  of  their  agreement  and  their  comparative  concord  with  the  Clementine.] 

2  General  Introduction,  p.  359. 

3  Ibid.,  p.  463. 


536  INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE. 

f  XI.  General  Intercession  for  Quick  and  Dead. 

"  Tlie  great                     j  XII.  Prayer  before  the  Lord's  Prayer. 

Intercessory  Prayer.               I  XIII.  The  Lord's  Prayer. 

I  XIV.  The  Embolismus. 

XV.  The  Prayer  of  Inclination. 

XVI.  The  //o/y  Things  for  Holy  Persons. 

XVII.  The  Fraction. 

XVIII.  The  Confession. 

XIX.  The  Communion. 

I.        XX.  The  Antidoron  :  and  Prayers  of  Thanksgiving." 

The  whole  subject  is  discussed  by  Mr.  Neale  with  extraordinary  minuteness,  fulness  of  detail, 
and  perfect  mastery  of  his  subject ;  and  to  his  work  we  refer  those  who  wish  to  prosecute  the 
study  of  the  subject.' 


"The  Communion. 


GENERAL   NOTE   BY  THE   AMERICAN    EDITOR. 

I  HAVE  found  a  few  less  noted  works  most  useful  in  my  own  studies,  which  began  with  Palmer's 
Origines  on  their  first  publication,  followed  up  by  Brett,  and  then  by  Renaudot.  The  publications 
of  Drs.  Neale  and  Littledale  are  sufficiently  referred  to  elsewhere ;  and  I  purposely  omit  the  men- 
tion of  many  purely  Anglican  authorities,  as  well  as  costly  works  from  other  European  sources. 

1.  Freeman's  Principles  of  Divine  Sendee,  etc.^  A  work  of  incomparable  utility  to  those  who 
would  comprehend  the  Jewish  ritual  and  its  preparations  for  Christian  worship. 

2.  Badger's  Nestorians  and  their  Rituals? 

3.  Warren's  Liturgy  and  Ritual  of  the  Celtic  Church  ;  ^  replete  with  information  hitherto 
inaccessible. 

4.  Scudamore's  Notitia  Eucharistica;^  Anglican,  but  full  of  general  information. 

5.  Trevor's  Catholic  Doctrine  of  Sacrifice,  etc.  ■,^  a  candid  and  learned  study  of  this  subject, 
and  free  from  fanatical  or  visionary  conceptions. 

6.  Hammond's  Liturgies,  etc.,?  elsewhere  spoken  of. 

7.  Burbidge,  Liturgies  and  Offices,^  of  which  I  have  only  lately  discovered  the  value. 

8.  Field's  Apostolic  Liturgy  and  the  Ep.  to  the  Hebre^vs  ;'i  open  to  some  objections,  but  full 
of  valuable  and  suggestive  information. 

9.  Pfaffius,  Christ.  Math.  His  invaluable  Dissertatio  de  Oblatione,  etc.'°  A  high  Lutheran 
authority  of  great  learning. 

10.  Marriott's  Testimony  of  the  Catacombs;"  learned  and  instructive. 


■  [A  very  fair  reviewal  of  Neale's  theoretical  statements  may  be  found  in  Hammond's  LUtifgies,  Eastern  and  Western,  Oxford,  1878.] 

2  Oxford,  Parker,  1855. 

3  London,  Masters,  1852. 

*  Oxford,  University  Press,  1881. 

5  London,  Rivingtons,  1872. 

6  Oxford,  Parker,  1876. 

7  Oxford,  University  Press,  1878.     Also  Ancient  Liturgy  of  Antioch,  Oxford,  1879. 

8  London,  Bells,  1885. 

9  London,  Rivingtons,  1882. 

'0  The  Hague,  Scheurler,  1715.  Let  me  give  the  title  of  this  rare  book  more  fully,  thus:  S.  Irenai  Fragmenta  Anecdota,  etc.,  quce 
illustravit ,  denique  Litnrgia  Grceca  Jo.  Em.  Grabii,  et  dissertatione  de prcejudiciis  theologicis  auxii  Ckristopk.  Matth.  P/ajffius. 
Of  whom  see  Lardner,  Credit.,  i.  17.     See  vol.  i.  p.  574,  note  5. 

"  London,  Hatchards,  1870.     Valuable  for  its  study  of  the  "  Autun  Inscription." 


EARLY    LITURGIES.' 


THE   DIVINE   LITURGY   OF   JAMES,  THE    HOLY   APOSTLE   AND    BROTHER 

OF   THE    LORD. 


The  Priest? 

I.  O  Sovereign  Lord  our  God,  contemn  me 
not,  defiled  with  a  multitude  of  sins  :  for,  behold, 
I  have  come  to  this  Thy  divine  and  heavenly 
mystery,  not  as  being  worthy ;  but  looking  only 
to  Thy  goodness,  I  direct  my  voice  to  Thee  : 
God  be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner ;  I  have  sinned 
against  Heaven,  and  before  Thee,  and  am  un- 
worthy to  come  into  the  presence  of  this  Thy 
holy  and  spiritual  table,  upon  which  Thy  only- 
begotten  Son,  and  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is 
mystically  set  forth  as  a  sacrifice  for  me,  a  sin- 
ner, and  stained  with  every  spot.  Wherefore  I 
present  to  Thee  this  supplication  and  thanks- 
giving, that  Thy  Spirit  the  Comforter  may  be 
sent  down  upon  me,  strengthening  and  fitting 
me  for  this  service  ;  and  count  me  worthy  to 
make  known  without  condemnation  the  word, 
delivered  from  Thee  by  me  to  the  people,  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  with  whom  Thou  art 
blessed,  together  with  Thy  all-holy,  and  good, 
and  quickening,  and  consubstantial -^  Spirit,  now 
and  ever,  and  to  all  eternity.     Amen. 

Prayer  of  the  standing  beside  the  altar. 

II.  Glory  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son,  and 
to  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  triune  light  of  the  God- 
head, which  is  unity  subsisting  in  trinity,  divided, 
yet  indivisible  :  for  the  Trinity  is  the  one  (iod 
Almighty,  whose  glory  the  heavens  declare,  and 
the  earth  His  dominion,  and  the  sea  His  might, 
and  every  sentient  and  intellectual  creature  at 
all  times  proclaims  His  majesty  :  for  all  glory 
becomes  Him,  and  honour  and  might,  greatness 
and  magnificence,  now  and  ever,  and  to  all 
eternity.     Amen. 

'  [This  title  is  misleading,  as  we  have  no  copies  of  the  originals 
of  these  hturgies,  and  they  are  encnislcd  with  the  ideas  of  later  ages. 
I  shall  distinguish  between  the  interpolations  legitimately  made  by 
councils  and  the  manifest  corruptions  which  contradict  Scripture  and 
ancient  authors.     NB.:    I  print  the  deacon's  parts  as  such.) 

*   \_A  Lavabo:  he  prepares  himself  by  the  prayer  for  purification.] 
3  [Here  is  a  token  of  theological  but  legitimate  interpolation.] 


Prayer  of  the  ineense  at  the  beginning.^ 

III.  Sovereign  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  O  Word  of 
God,  who  didst  freely  offer  Thyself  a  blameless 
sacrifice  upon  the  cross  to  God  even  the  Father, 
the  coal  of  double  nature,  that  didst  touch  the 
lips  of  the  prophet  with  the  tongs,  and  didst  take 
away  his  sins,  touch  also  the  hearts  oi  us  sinners, 
and  purify  us  from  every  stain,  and  ])resent  us 
holy  beside  Thy  holy  altar,  that  we  may  offer 
Thee  a  sacrifice  of  praise  :  and  accept  from  us, 
Thy  unprofitable  servants,  this  incense  as  an  odour 
of  a  sweet  smell,  and  make  fragrant  the  evil 
odour  of  our  soul  and  body,  and  purify  us  with 
the  sanctifying  power  of  Thy  all-holy  Spirit :  for 
Thou  alone  art  holy,  who  sanctifiest,  and  art 
communicated  to  the  faithful ;  and  glor)'  becomes 
Thee,  with  Thy  eternal  Father,  and  Thy  all-holy, 
and  good,  and  quickening  Spirit,  now  and  ever, 
and  to  all  eternity.     Amen. 

Prayer  of  the  eomviencanent. 

IV.  O  beneficent  King  eternal,  and  Creator  of 
the  universe,  receive  'i'hy  Church,  coming  unto 
Thee  through  Thy  Christ :  fulfil  to  each  what  is 
profitable  ;  lead  all  to  perfection,  and  make  us 
perfectly  worthy  of  the  grace  of  Thy  sanctifi- 
cation,  gathering  us  together  within  Thy  holy 
Church,  which  Thou  hast  purchased  by  the 
precious  blood  of  Thy  only-begotten  Son,  and 
our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  with  whom 
Thou  art  blessed  and  glorified,  together  with 
Thy  all-holy,  and  good,  and  quickening  Spirit, 
now  and  ever,  and  to  all  eternity.     Amen. 

TJie  Deacon. 

V.  Let  us  again  pray  to  the  Lord. 

The  Priest,  prayer  of  the  incense  at  the  entrance 
%f  the  congregation. 

God,  who  didst  accept  the  gifts  of  .Xbel,  the 
sacrifice  of  Noah  and  of  Abram,  the  incense  of 

<  [On  the  lawful  and  unlawful  additions  to  these  liturgies,  see 
Hickes'  Christian  Priesthood  (Oxford,  1847),  p.  151.] 

537 


538 


EARLY    LITURGIES. 


Aaron  and  of  Zacharias,  accept  also  from  the 
hand  of  us  sinners  this  incense  for  an  odour  of 
a  sweet  smell,  and  for  remission  of  our  sins,  and 
those  of  all  Thy  people  ;  for  blessed  art  I'hou, 
and  glory  becomes  Thee,  the  Father,  and  the 
Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  now  and  ever. 

The  Deacon. 
Sir,  pronounce  the  blessing.' 

The  Priest  prays. 

Our  Lord  and  God,  Jesus  Christ,  who  through 
exceeding  goodness  and  love  not  to  be  restrained 
wast  crucified,  and  didst  not  refuse  to  be  pierced 
by  the  spear  and  nails ;  who  didst  provide  this 
mysterious  and  awful  service  as  an  everlasting 
memorial  for  us  perpetually  :  bless  Thy  ministry 
in  Christ  the  God,  and  bless  our  entrance,  and 
fully  complete  the  presentation  of  this  our  ser- 
vice by  Thy  unutterable  compassion,  now  and 
ever,  and  to  all  eternity.     Amen. 

The  responsive  prayer  from  the  Deacon. 

VI.  The  Lord  bless  us,  and  make  us  worthy  seraphi- 
cally  to  offer  gifts,  and  to  sing  the  oft-sung  hymn  of  the 
divine  Tnsagion,  by  the  fulness  and  exceeding  abun- 
dance of  all  the  perfection  of  holiness,  now  and  ever. 

Then  the  Deacon  begins  to  sing  in  the  entrance.^ 

Thou  who  art  the  only-begotten  Son  and  Word  of 
God,  immortal ;  who  didst  submit  for  our  salvation  to 
become  flesh  of  the  holy  God-mother,^  and  ever-virgin 
Mary ;  who  didst  immutably  become  man  and  wast  cru- 
cified, O  Christ  our  God,  and  didst  by  Thy  death  tread 
death  under  foot ;  who  art  one  of  the  Holy  Trinity, 
glorified  together  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Spirit, 
save  us. 

The  Priest  says  this  prayer  from  the  gates  to  the 
altar. 

vii.  God  Almighty,  Lord  great  in  glory,  who 
hast  given  to  us  an  entrance  into  the  Holy  of 
Holies,  through  the  sojourning  among  men  of 
Thy  only-begotten  Son,  our  Lord,  and  God,  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  we  supplicate  and  invoke 
Thy  goodness,  since  we  are  fearful  and  trembling 
when  about  to  stand  at  Thy  holy  altar;  send 
forth  upon  us,  O  God,  Thy  good  grace,  and 
sanctify  our  souls,  and  bodies,  and  spirits,  and 
turn  our  thoughts  to  piety,  in  order  that  with  a 
pure  conscience  we  may  bring  unto  Thee  gifts, 
offerings,  and  fruits  for  the  remission  of  our 
transgressions,  and  for  the  propitiadon  of  all 
Thy  people,  by  the  grace  and  mercies  and 
loving-kindness  of  Thy  only-begotten  Son,  with 
whom  Thou  art  blessed  to  all  etertiity.     Amen. 


'  This   is   addressed   to  the  priest.     Some  translate,  "  O   Lord, 

bless  us."     [This  latter  is  the  more  primitive  idea.] 
^  [The  Lesser  Etitrntirc  with  the  Holy  Gospels.] 
3  [The  T/ieotoce  01  L>ei/>ara.    Of  course,  added  after  the  Council 

of  Chalcedon.J 


After  the  approach  to  the  altar,  the  Priest  says  :  — 

VIII.  Peace  be  to  all. 

The  People. 
And  to  thy  spirit. 

The  Priest. 

The  Lord  bless  us  all,  and  sanctify  us  for  the 
entrance  and  celebration  of  the  divine  and  pure 
mysteries,  giving  rest  to  the  blessed  souls  among 
the  good  and  just,  by  His  grace  and  loving- 
kindness,  now  and  ever,  and  to  all  eternity. 
Amen. 

Then  the  Deacon  says  the  bidding p7-ayer.'> 

IX.  In  peace  let  us  beseech  the  Lord. 

For  the  peace  that  is  from  above,  and  for 
God's  love  to  man,  and  for  the  salvation  of  our 
souls,  let  us  beseech  the  Lord. 

For  the  peace  of  the  whole  world,  for  the 
unity  of  all  the  holy  churches  of  God,  let  us 
beseech  the  Lord. 

For  the  remission  of  our  sins,  and  forgiveness 
of  our  transgressions,  and  for  our  deliverance 
from  all  tribulation,  wrath,  danger,  and  distress, 
and  from  the  uprising  of  our  enemies,  let  us 
beseech  the  Lord. 

Tlien  the  Singers  sing  the  Trisagion  Hymn. 

Holy  God,  holy  mighty,  holy  immortal,  have  mercy 
upon  us. 

Tlien  the  Priest  prays,  bowing. 

X.  O  compassionate  and  merciful,  long-suffer- 
ing, and  very  gracious  and  true  God,  look  from 
Thy  prepared  dwelling-place,  and  hear  us  Thy 
sujDpliants,  and  deliver  us  from  every  tem])tation 
of  the  devil  and  of  man ;  withhold  not  Thy  aid 
from  us,  nor  bring  on  us  chastisements  too  heavy 
for  our  strength  :  for  we  are  unable  to  overcome 
what  is  opposed  to  us ;  but  Thou  art  able,  Lord, 
to  save  us  from  everything  that  is  against  us. 
Save  us,  O  God,  from  the  difficulties  of  this 
world,  according  to  Thy  goodness,  in  order  that, 
having  drawn  nigh  with  a  pure  conscience  to 
Thy  holy  altar,  we  may  send  up  to  Thee  without 
condemnation  the  blessed  hymn  Trisagion,  to- 
gether with  the  heavenly  powers,  and  that,  hav- 
ing performed  the  service,  well  i^leasing  to  Thee 
and  divine,  we  may  be  counted  worthy  of  eternal 
hfe. 

{Aloud.) 

Because  Thou  art  holy.  Lord  our  God,  and 
dwellest  and  abidest  in  holy  places,  we  send  up 
the  praise  and  the  hymn  Trisagion  to  Thee,  the 
Father,  and  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  now 
and  ever,  and  to  all  eternity. 


*  [See  a  specimen  of  the  imlimited  capacity  for  extension  of  these 
prayers,  in  vol.  v.  p.  412,  Elucidation  VI.,  this  series.] 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


539 


The  People. 
Amen. 

The  Priest. 

XL  Peace  be  to  all. 

The  People. 
And  to  thy  spirit. 

The  Singers. 

Alleluia. 

Then  tliere  are  jrad  in  order '  tlie  holy  o)-acles 
of  the  Old  Testament,  and  of  the  prophets  ;  and 
the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God  is  set  forth, 
a?id  His  sufferings  and  resurrection  from  the 
dead,  His  ascension  into  heaven,  and  His  second 
appearing  zuith  glory  ;  and  this  takes  place  daily 
in  the  holy  and  divine  service.^ 

After  the  reading  and  instruction   the  Deacon 
says  :  — 

XII.  Let  us  all  say,  Lord,  be  merciful.^ 

Lord  Almighty,  the  God  of  our  fathers  ; 

We  beseech  Thee,  hear  us. 

For  the  peace  which  is  from  above,  and  for 
the  salvation  of  our  souls  ; 
Let  us  beseech  the  Lord. 

For  the  peace  of  the  whole  world,  and  the 
unity  of  all  the  holy  churches  of  God  ; 

Let  us  beseech  the  Lord. 

For  the  salvation  and  help  of  all  the  Christ- 
loving  people ; 

We  beseech  Thee,  hear  us. 

For  our  deliverance  from  all  tribulation,  wrath, 
danger,  distress,  from  captivity,  bitter  death,  and 
from  our  iniquities ; 

•    We  beseech  Thee,  hear  us. 

For  the  people  standing  round,  and  waiting 
for  the  rich  anel  plenteous  mercy  tiiat  is  from 
Thee  ; 

We  beseech  Thee,  be  merciful  and  gracious. 

Save  Thy  people,  O  Lord,  and  bless  Thine 
inheritance. 

Visit  Thy  world  in  mercy  and  compassion. 

Exalt  the  horn  of  Christians  by  the  power  of 
the  precious  and  quickening  cross. 

We  beseech  Thee,  most  merciful  Lord,  hear  us  pray- 
ing to  Thee,  and  have  mercy  upon  us. 

The  People  {thrice). 
Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 


'  [At  great  length.    Ct.  Justin  Martyr,  vol.  i.  p.  iS6,  this  series.] 
^  [The  reading  of  the  Scriptures  in  the  common  tongue  is  a  very 
precious  part  of  the  daily  offices  in  the  East.  1 
3  [Frequent  Amens  are  to  be  supposed.] 


The  Deacon. 

XIII.  For  the  remission  of  our  sins,  and  forgiveness 
of  our  transgressions,  and  for  our  deliverance  from  all 
tribulation,  wrath,  danger,  and  distress,  let  us  beseech 
the  Lord. 

Let  US  all  entreat  from  the  Lord,  that  we  may 
pass  the  whole  day,  perfect,  holy,  peaceful,  and 
without  sin. 

Let  us  entreat  from  the  Lord  a  messenger  of 
peace,  a  faithful  guide,  a  guardian  of  our  souls 
and  bodies. 

Let  us  entreat  from  the  Lord  forgiveness  and 
remission  of  our  sins  and  transgressions. 

Let  us  entreat  from  the  Lord  the  things  which 
are  good  and  proper  for  our  souls,  and  peace  for 
the  world. 

Let  us  entreat  from  the  Lord,  tliat  we  may 
spend  the  remaining  period  of  our  life  in  peace 
and  health. 

Let  us  entreat  that  the  close  of  our  lives  may 
be  Christian,  witliout  i)ain  and  without  shame, 
and  a  good  plea  at  the  dread  and  awful  judg- 
ment-seat of  Christ. 

The  Priest. 

xiv.  For  Thou  art  the  gospel  and  the  light. 
Saviour  and  keeper  of  our  souls  and  bodies, 
God,  and  Thy  only-begotten  Son,  and  Thy  all- 
holy  Spirit,  now  and  ever. 


Amen.'* 


The  People. 
The  Priest. 


God,  who  hast  taught  us  Thy  divine  and  sav- 
ing oracles,  enlighten  the  souls  of  us  sinners  for 
the  comprehension  of  the  things  which  have 
been  before  spoken,  so  that  we  may  not  only  be 
seen  to  be  hearers  of  spiritual  things,  but  also 
doers  of  good  deeds,  striving  after  guileless 
faith,  blameless  life,  and  pure  conversation. 

{Aloud.) 

In  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  with  whom  Thou 
art  blessed,  together  with  Thy  all-holy,  good, 
and  quickening  Spirit,  now  and  always,  and  for 
ever. 

The  People. 
Amen. 

The  Priest. 
XV.  Peace  be  to  all. 


••  [Here  there  is  an  evident  interpolation,  not  Mariolatrous,  yet 
not  primitive,  as  follows:]  — 

T/ie  Priest. 
Commemorating  with   all  the  holy  and  just,  our  all-holy,  pure, 
most  glorious  Lady,  the  God-mother,  and  ever-virgin  Man-,  let  us 
devote  ourselves,  and  one  another,  and  our  whole  life,  to  Christ  our 
God. 


T/ie  People. 


To  Thee,  Lord. 


540 


EARLY    LITURGIES. 


The  People. 
And  to  Thy  spirit. 

The  Deacon. 
Let  us  bow  our  heads  to  the  Lord. 


T'he  People. 


To  Thee,  Lord. 


The  Priest  prays,  saying :  — 

O  Sovereign  giver  of  life,  and  provider  of 
good  things,  who  didst  give  to  mankind  the 
blessed  hope  of  eternal  life,  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  count  us  worthy  in  holiness,  and  perfect 
this  Thy  divine  service  to  the  enjoyment  of 
future  blessedness. 

{Aloiul.) 

So  that,  guarded  by  Thy  power  at  all  times, 
and  led  into  the  light  of  truth,  we  may  send  up 
the  praise  and  the  thanksgiving  to  Thee,  the 
Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  now  and 
ever. 

The  People. 
Amen. 

The  Deacon. 

xvr.  Let  none  remain  of  the  catechumens,  none  of 
the  unbaptized,  none  of  those  who  are  unable  to  join 
with  us  in  prayer.     Look  at  one  another.'     The  door. 

All  erect :  ^  let  us  again  pray  to  the  Lord. 

II.3 

The  Priest  says  the  prayer  of  iticense. 

Sovereign  Almighty,  King  of  Glory,  who  know- 
est  all  things  before  their  creation,  manifest  Thy- 
self to  us  calling  upon  Thee  at  this  holy  hour, 
and  redeem  us  from  the  shame  of  our  trans- 
gressions ;  cleanse  our  mind  and  our  thoughts 
from  impure  desires,  from  worldly  deceit,  from 
all  influence  of  the  devil ;  and  accept  from  the 
hands  of  us  sinners  this  incense,  as  Thou  didst 
accept  the  offering  of  Abel,  and  Noah,  and 
Aaron,  and  Samuel,  and  of  all  Thy  saints,  guard- 
ing us  from  everything  evil,  and  preserving  us 
for  continually  pleasing,  and  worshipping,  and 
glorifying  Thee,  the  Father,  and  Thy  only-be- 
gotten Son,  and  Thy  all-holy  Spirit,  now  and 
always,  and  for  ever. 

And  the  Readers  begin  the  Clicnibic  Hymn. 

Let  all  mortal  flesh  be  silent,  and  stand  with 
fear  and  trembling,  and  meditate  nothing  earthly 
within  itself:  — 

For  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords, 
Christ  our  God,  comes  forward  to  be  sacrificed, 


'  [So  as  to  be  sure  no  enemy  was  among  the  faithful.] 
^  These    clauses    are   elliptical.      After   "prayer"   supply   "re- 
main; "  the  door  is  for  "  shut  the  door;  "  and  "  all  erect,"  for  "  stand 
alt  erect." 

3  [Here  begins  the  Liturgy  of  the  Faithful.] 


and  to  be  given  for  food  to  the  faithful ;  and  the 
bands  of  angels  go  before  Him  with  every  power 
and  dominion,  the  many-eyed  cherubim,  and 
the  six-winged  seraphim,  covering  tlieir  faces, 
and  crying  aloud  the  hymn,  Alleluia,  Alleluia, 
Alleluia. 

Tlie  Priest,  bringing  in  the  holy  gifts, '^  says  this 
prayer :  — 

XVII.  O  God,  our  God,  who  didst  send  forth 
the  heavenly  bread,  the  food  of  the  whole  world, 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  be  a  Saviour,  and 
Redeemer,  and  Benefactor,  blessing  and  sancti- 
fying us,  do  Thou  Thyself  bless  this  offering, 
and  graciously  receive  it  to  Thy  altar  above  the 
skies  : 

Remember  in  Thy  goodness  and  love  those 
who  have  brought  it,  and  those  for  whom  they 
have  brought  it,  and  preserve  us  without  con- 
demnation in  the  service  of  Thy  divine  mysteries  : 
for  hallowed  and  glorified  is  Thy  all-honoured 
and  great  name,  Father,  and  Son,  and  Holy 
Spirit,  now  and  ever,  and  to  all  eternity. 

The  Priest. 
Peace  be  to  all. 

The  Deacon. 
Sir,  pronounce  the  blessing. 

The  Priest. 

Blessed  be  God,  who  blesseth  and  sanctifieth 
us  all  at  the  presentation  of  the  divine  and  pure 
mysteries,  and  giveth  rest  to  the  blessed  souls 
among  the  holy  and  just,  now  and  always,  and 
to  all  eternity. 

The  Deacon. 

XVIII.  Let  us  attend  in  wisdom. 

The  Priest  begins. 

I  believe  in  one  God,  Father  Almighty,  Maker 
of  heaven  and  earth,  and  in  one  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God  :  and  the  rest  of  tlie  Creed. 

Tlicn  he  prays,  bowing  his  neck. 

XTX.  God  and  Sovereign  of  all,  make  us,  who 
are  unworthy,  worthy  of  this  hour,  lover  of 
mankind  ;  that  being  pure  from  all  deceit  and  all 
hypocrisy,  we  may  be  united  with  one  another 
by  the  bond  of  peace  and  love,  being  confirmed 
by  the  sanctification  of  Thy  divine  knowledge 
through  Thine  only-begotten  Son,  our  Lord, and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  with  whom  Thou  art 
blessed,  together  with  Thy  all-holy,  and  good, 
and  quickening  Spirit,  now  and  ever,  and  to  all 
eternity.     Amen. 


*  [Here  is  the  Great  Eiiirnfice,  or  bringing-in  of  the  unconse- 
crated  elements.  It  has  a  symbolical  meaning  (Heb.  i.  6)  now 
forgotten;  and  here,  instead  of  the  glorified  Christ,  no  doubt  the 
superstitious  do  adore  bread  and  wine  in  ignorance.] 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


541 


The  Deacon. 

XX.  Let  us  stand  well,  let  us  stand  reverently,  let  us 
stand  in  the  fear  of  God,  and  with  compunction  of  heart. 
In  peace  let  us  pray  to  the  Lord. 

The  Priest 

For  God  of  peace,  mercy,  love,  compassion, 
and  loving-kindness  art  Thou,  and  Thine  only- 
begotten  Son,  and  Thine  all-holy  Spirit,  now  and 
ever. 

77^1?  People. 

Amen. 


The  Priest. 


Peace  be  to  all. 


The  People. 

And  to  thy  spirit. 

The  Deacon. 

Let  us  salute  one  another  with  an  holy  kiss.'  Let  us 
bow  (Sur  heads  to  the  Lord. 

The  Priest  bows,  saying  this  prayer :  — 

XXI.  Only  Lord  and  merciful  God,  on  those 
who  are  bowing  their  necks  before  Thy  holy 
altar,  and  seeking  the  spiritual  gifts  that  come 
from  Thee,  send  forth  Thy  good  grace ;  and 
bless  us  all  with  every  spiritual  blessing,  that 
cannot  be  taken  from  us,  Thou,  who  dwellest 
on  high,  and  hast  regard  unto  things  that  are 


lowly. 


{Aloud.) 


For  worthy  of  praise  and  worship  and  most 
glorious  is  Thy  all-holy  name,  Father  and  Son 
and  Holy  Spirit,  now  and  always,  and  to  all 
eternity. 

The  Deacon. 

Sir,  pronounce  the  blessing. 

The  Priest. 

The  Lord  will  bless  us,  and  minister  with  us 
all  by  His  grace  and  loving-kindness. 

And  again. 

The  Lord  will  bless  us,  and  make  us  worthy 
to  stand  at  His  holy  altar,  at  all  times,  now  and 
always,  and  for  ever. 

And  again. 

Blessed  be  God,  who  blesseth  and  sanctifieth 
us  all  in  our  attendance  upon,  and  service  of. 
His  pure  mysteries,  now  and  always,  and  for 
ever. 


'  [The  sexes  sat  apart,  the  salutations  of  each  confined  to  its 
own;  an  apostohc  feature,  i  Pet.  v.  14  fl  alibi ;  and  sec  Clementine, 
p.  486,  supra.  Note  that  beautiful  tribute  of  Augustine  to  the  purity 
of  primitive  rites,  "  Honesta  utrinsque  sexus  discretionc,"  Ciz'.  Dei, 
lib.  ii.  cap.  xxviii.  p.  77,  ed.  Migne.J  Sec  vol.  ii.  291  and  iii.  686, 
this  series.] 


The  Deacon  makes  the  Universal  Litany. 
x.xii.  In  peace  let  us  pray  to  the  Lord. 

77/1?  People. 
O  Lord,  have  mercy. 

77;^  Deacon. 

Save  us,  have  mercy  upon  us,  pity  and  keep  us,  O 
God,  by  Thy  grace. 

For  the  peace  that  is  from  above,  and  the 
loving-kindness  of  God,  and  the  salvation  of  our 
souls ; 

Let  us  beseech  the  Lord. 

For  the  peace  of  the  whole  world,  and  the 
unity  of  all  the  holy  churches  of  God  ; 
Let  us  beseech  the  Lord. 

For  those  who  bear  fruit,  and  labour  honour- 
ably in  the  holy  churches  of  (jod  ;  for  those  who 
remember  the  poor,  the  widows  and  the  orphans, 
the  strangers  and  needy  ones ;  and  for  those 
who  have  requested  us  to  mention  them  in  our 
prayers ; 

Let  us  beseech  the  Lord. 

For  those  who  are  in  old  age  and  infirmity, 
for  the  sick  and  suffering,  and  those  who  are 
troubled  by  unclean  spirits,  for  their  .speedy  cure 
from  God  and  their  salvation ; 

Let  us  beseech  the  Lord. 

For  those  who  are  passing  their  days  in  vir- 
ginity, and  celibacy,  and  discipline,  and  for  those 
in  holy  matrimony  ;  and  for  the  holy  fathers  and 
brethren  agonizing  in  mountains,^  and  dens,  and 
caves  of  the  earth  ; 

Let  us  beseech  the  Lord. 

For  Christians  sailing,  travelling,  living  among 
strangers,  and  for  our  brethren  in  captivity,  in 
exile,  in  prison,  and  in  bitter  slavery,  their  peace- 
ful return  ; 

Let  us  beseech  the  Lord. 

For  the  remission  of  our  sins,  and  forgiveness 
of  our  transgressions,  and  for  our  deliverance 
from  all  tribulation,  wrath,  danger,  and  con- 
straint, and  uprising  against  us  of  enemies ; 

Let  us  beseech  the  Lord. 

For  favourable  weather,  peaceful  showers,  be- 
neficent dews,  abundance  of  fruits,  the  perfect 
close  of  a  good  season,  and  for  .the  crown  of  the 
year; 

Let  us  beseech  the  Lord. 

For  our  fathers  and  brethren  present,  and 
praying  with  us  in  this  holy  hour,  and  at  every 
season,  their  zeal,  labour,  and  earnestness ; 

Let  us  beseech  the  Lord. 


2  [A  token  of  the  Ante-Nicene  age,  though  some  think  of  the 
later  asceticism.] 


542 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


For  every  Christian  soul  in  tribulation  and 
distress,  and  needing  the  mercy  and  succour  of 
God;  for  the  return  of  the  erring,  the  health 
of  the  sick,  the  deliverance  of  the  captives,  the 
rest  of  the  fathers  and  brethren  that  have  fallen 
asleep  aforetime  ; 

Let  us  beseech  the  Lord. 

For  the  hearing  and  acceptance  of  our  prayer 
before  God,  and  the  sending  down  on  us  His 
rich  mercies  and  compassion. 

Let  us  beseech  the  Lord.' 

And  for  the  offered,  precious,  heavenly,  unut- 
terable, pure,  glorious,  dread,  awful,  divine  gifts, 
and  the  salvation  of  the  priest  who  stands  by 
and  offers  them  ; 

Let  us  offer  supplication  to  God  the  Lord. 

The  People. 
O  Lord,  have  mercy. 

(^Thrice  ^ 

Then  the  Priest  makes  the  sign  of  the  cross  on  the 
gi/ts,^  and,  standing,  speaks  separately  thus  :  — 

XXIII.  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  and  on 
earth  peace,  good-will  among  men,  etc. 

{Thrice.) 

Lord,  Thou  wilt  open  my  lips,  and  my  mouth 
shall  show  forth  Thy  praise. 

{Th}'ice.) 

Let  my  mouth  be  filled  with  Thy  praise,  O 
Lord,  that  I  may  tell  of  l"hy  glory,  of  Thy 
majesty,  all  the  day. 

{Thrice.) 

Of  the  Father.  Amen.  And  of  the  Son. 
Amen.  And  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  x^men.  Now 
and  always,  and  to  all  eternity.     Amen. 

And  bowing  to  this  side  and  to  that,^  he  says  :  — 

XXIV.  Magnify  the  Lord  with  me,  and  let  us 
exalt  His  name  together. 

And  they  answer,  bowing  :  — 

The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon  thee,  and 
the  power  of  the  Highest  shall  overshadow  thee.'' 

Then  the  Priest,  at  great  length  :  — 

O  Sovereign  Lord,  who  hast  visited  us  in  com- 
passion and  mercies,  and  hast  freely  given  to  us. 


'  [Here  an  interpolation  as  follows:  "  Let  us  commemorate  our 
all-holy,  pure,  most  glorious,  blessed  lady,  God-mother,  and  ever- 
virgin  Mary,  and  all  the  holy  and  just,  that  we  may  all  find  mercy 
through  their  prayers  and  intercessions."  On  which,  and  like  inter- 
polations (the  Clementine  free  from  all  this),  see  Scudamore,  p.  381. J 

2  [Strongly  censured  by  Hickes  as  a  superstitious  innovation  (p. 
153),  with  other  evils  introduced  after  the  pseudo-Council  of  Nice, 
A.D.  787,  of  which  this  is  the  least.] 

3  (The  Gospel  and  the  Epistle  sides.] 

■*  ["  And  Mary  said,  My  soul  doth  magnify,"  etc.] 


Thy  humble  and  sinful  and  unworthy  servants, 
boldness  to  stand  at  Thy  holy  altar,  and  to  offer 
to  Thee  this  dread  and  bloodless  sacrifice  for 
our  sins,  and  for  the  errors  of  the  j^eople,  look 
upon  me  Thy  unprofitable  servant,  and  blot  out 
my  transgressions  for  Thy  compassion's  sake  ; 
and  purify  my  lips  and  heart  from  all  pollution 
of  flesh  and  spirit ;  and  remove  from  me  every 
shameful  and  foolish  thought,  and  fit  me  by  the 
power  of  Thy  all-holy  Spirit  for  this  service  ;  and 
receive  me  graciously  by  Thy  goodness  as  I  draw 
nigh  to  Thy  altar. 

And  be  pleased,  O  Lord,  that  these  gifts 
brought  by  our  hands  may  be  acceptable,  stoop- 
ing to  my  weakness  ;  and  cast  me  not  away  from 
Thy  presence,  and  abhor  not  my  unworthiness ; 
but  pity  me  according  to  Thy  great  mercy,  and 
according  to  the  multitude  of  Thy  mercies  pass 
by  my  transgressions,  that,  having  come  before 
Thy  glory  without  condemnation,  I  may  be 
counted  worthy  of  the  protection  of  Thy  only- 
begotten  Son,  and  of  the  illumination  of  Thy 
all-holy  Spirit,  that  I  may  not  be  as  a  slave  of 
sin  cast  out,  but  as  Thy  servant  may  find  grace 
and  mercy  and  forgiveness  of  sins  before  Thee, 
both  in  the  world  that  now  is  and  in  that  which 
is  to  come. 

I  beseech  Thee,  Almighty  Sovereign,  all- 
powerful  Lord,  hear  my  prayer;  for  Thou  art 
He  who  workest  all  in  all,  and  we  all  seek  in  all 
things  the  help  and  succour  that  come  from  Thee 
and  Thy  only-begotten  Son,  and  the  good  and 
quickening  and  consubstantial  Spirit,  now  and 
ever. 

XXV.  O  God,  who  through  Thy  great  and  un- 
speakable love  didst  send  forth  Thy  only-begot- 
ten Son  into  the  world,  in  order  that  He  might 
turn  back  the  lost  sheep,  turn  not  away  us  sin- 
ners, laying  hold  of  Thee  by  this  dread  and 
bloodless  sacrifice ;  for  we  trust  not  in  our  own 
righteousness,  but  in  Thy  good  mercy,  by  which 
Thou  purchasest  our  race. 

We  entreat  and  beseech  Thy  goodness  that  it 
may  not  be  for  condemnation  to  Thy  people 
that  this  mystery  for  salvation  has  been  adminis- 
tered by  us,  but  for  remission  of  sins,  for  renewal 
of  souls  and  bodies,  for  the  well-pleasing  of  Thee, 
God  and  Father,  in  the  mercy  and  love  of  Thy 
only-begotten  Son,  with  whom  Thou  art  blessed, 
together  with  Thy  all-holy  and  good  and  quick- 
ening Spirit,  now  and  always,  and  for  ever.s 

XXVI.  O  Lord  God,  who  didst  create  us,  and 
bring  us  into  life,  who  hast  shown  to  us  ways  to 
salvation,  who  hast  granted  to  us  a  revelation  of 
heavenly  mysteries,  and  hast  appointed  us  to  this 
ministry  in  the  power  of  Thy  all-holy  Spirit, 
grant,  O  Sovereign,  that  we  may  become  servants 
of  Thy  new  testament,  ministers   of  Thy  pure 

S  [In  such  places  Aniens  are  to  be  supposed.] 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


.543 


mysteries,  and  receive  us  as  we  draw  near  to 
Thy  holy  altar,  according  to  the  greatness  of  Thy 
mercy,  that  we  may  become  worthy  of  offering 
to  Thee  gifts  and  sacrifices  for  our  transgressions 
and  for  those  of  the  people ;  and  grant  to  us,  O 
Lord,  with  all  fear  and  a  pure  conscience  to  offer 
to  Thee  this  spiritual  and  bloodless  sacrifice,  and 
graciously  receiving  it  unto  Thy  holy  and  spirit- 
ual altar  above  the  skies  for  an  odour  of  a  sweet 
spiritual  smell,  send  down  in  answer  on  us  the 
grace  of  Thy  all-holy  Spirit. 

And,  O  God,  look  upon  us,  and  have  regard 
to  this  our  reasonable  service,  and  accept  it,  as 
Thou  didst  accept  the  gifts  of  Abel,  the  sacrifices 
of  Noah,  the  priestly  offices  of  Moses  and  Aaron, 
the  peace-offerings  of  Samuel,  the  repentance  of 
David,  the  incense  of  Zacharias.  As  Thou  didst 
accept  from  the  hand  of  Thy  apostles  this  true 
service,  so  accept  also  in  Thy  goodness  from  the 
hands  of  us  sinners  these  offered  gifts  ;  and  grant 
that  our  offering  may  be  acceptable,  sanctified 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  a  propitiation '  for  our 
transgressions  and  the  errors  of  the  people  ;  and 
for  the  rest  of  the  souls  ^  that  have  fallen  asleep 
aforetime  ;  that  we  also.  Thy  humble,  sinful,  and 
unworthy  servants,  being  counted  worthy  without 
guile  to  serve  Thy  holy  altar,  may  receive  the 
reward  of  faithful  and  wise  stewards,  and  may 
find  grace  and  mercy  in  the  terrible  day  of  Thy 
just  and  good  retribution. 

Prayer  of  the  veilJ' 

XXVII.  We  thank  Thee,  O  Lord  our  God,  that 
Thou  hast  given  us  boldness  for  the  entrance  of 
Thy  holy  places,  which  Thou  hast  renewed  to  us 
as  a  new  and  living  way  through  the  veil  of  the 
flesh  ■•  of  Thy  Christ.  We  therefore,  being 
counted  worthy  to  enter  into  the  place  of  the 
tabernacle  of  Thy  glory,  and  to  be  within  the 
veil,  and  to  behold  the  Holy  of  Holies,  cast  our- 
selves down  before  Thy  goodness  : 

Lord,  have  mercy  on  us  :  since  we  arc  full  of 
fear  and  trembling,  when  about  to  stand  at  Thy 
holy  altar,  and  to  offer  this  dread  and  bloodless 
sacrifice  for  our  own  sins  and  for  the  errors  of 
the  people  :  5  send  forth,  O  God,  Thy  good 
grace,  and  sanctify  our  souls,  and  bodies,  and 
spirits  ;  and  turn  our  thoughts  to  holiness,  that 
with  a  pure  conscience  we  may  bring  to  Thee  a 
peace-offering,  the  sacrifice  of  praise  : 

By  the  mercy  and  loving-kindness  of  Thy 
only-begotten  Son,  with  whom  Thou  art  blessed. 


together  with  Thy  all-holy,  and  good,  and  quick- 
ening Spirit,  now  and  always  : 


'   [Propitiation,  not  expiation.] 

2  [See  vol.  V.  pp.  222-223.] 

3  [See  Field  on  "  the  meaning  of  the  veil,"  p.  294,  where  he  dif- 
fers from  authors  who  make  it  a  late  innovation;  also  pp.  448,  449J 

*  [This  great  primitive  thought  has  been  frittered  away  by  refer- 
ences to  the  veil  covering  tlie  oblation.  J 
5  [Based  on  Heb.  v.  1-3.] 


Amen. 

Peace  be  to  all 


The  People. 
The  Priest. 

The  Deacon. 


Let  us  stand  reverently,  let  us  stand  in  the  fear  of 
God,  and  with  contrition  :  let  us  attend  to  the  holy 
communion  service,  to  offer  peace  to  God. 

The  People. 
The  offering  of  peace,  the  sacrifice  of  praise. 

The  Priest.     \_A  veil  is  no'v  withdrawn  from  the 
oblation  of  bread  and  wine.'\ 

And,  uncovering  the  veils  that  darkly  invest 
in  symbol^  this  sacred  ceremonial,  do  Thou  re- 
veal it  clearly  to  us  :  fill  our  intellectual  vision 
with  absolute  light,  and  having  purified  our  pov- 
erty from  every  pollution  of  flesh  and  spirit,  make 
it  worthy  of  this  dread  and  awful  approach  :  for 
Thou  art  an  all-merciful  and  gracious  (lod,  and 
we  send  up  the  praise  and  the  thanksgiving  to 
Thee,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  now,  and 
always,  and  for  ever. 

HL 

THE    ANAPHOR.A. 

Then  he  says  aloud :  — 

XXVIII.  The  love  of  the  Lord  and  Father,  the 
grace  of  the  Lord  and  Son,  and  the  fellowship 
and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  be  with  us  all. 

The  People. 
And  wjtli  thy  spirit. 

The  Priest. 
Let  us  lift  up  our  minds  and  our  hearts.7 

The  People. 
It  is  becoming  and  right. 

Then  the  Priest  prays. 

Verily  it  is  becoming  and  right,  proper  and 
due  to  praise  Thee,  to  sing  of  Thee,  to  bless 
Thee,  to  worship  Thee,  to  glorify  Thee,  to  give 
Thee  thanks,  Maker  of  every  creature  visible  and 
invisible,  the  treasure  of  eternal  good  things,  the 
fountain  of  life  and  immortality,  God  and  Lord 
of  all : 

Whom  the  heavens  of  heavens  praise,  and  all 
the  host  of  them  ;  tlie  sun,  and  the  moon,  and 
all  the  choir  of  the  stars  ;  earth,  sea,  and  all  that 
is  in  them;  Jerusalem,  the  heavenly  assembly, 

*  [See  more  on  the  veil  in  Kield,  p.  492] 

7  [The  Sursiim  corJa,  found  in  all  liturgies.] 


544 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


and  church  of  the  first-born  that  are  written  in 
heaven ;  spirits  of  just  men  and  of  prophets ; 
sonls  of  martyrs  and  of  apostles  ;  angels,  arch- 
angels, thrones,  dominions,  principalities,  and 
authorities,  and  dread  powers ;  and  the  many- 
eyed  cherubim,  and  the  '  six-winged  seraphim, 
which  cover  their  faces  with  two  wings,  their 
feet  with  two,  and  with  two  they  fly,  crying  one 
to  another  with  unresting  lips,  with  unceasing 
praises  : 

{Ahwd.) 

With  loud  voice  singing  the  victorious  hymn 
of  Thy  majestic  glory,  crying  aloud,  praising, 
shouting,  and  saying  :  — 

The  People. 

Holy,  holy,  holy,  O  Lord  of  Sabaoth,  the 
heaven  and  the  earth  are  full  of  Thy  glory. 
Hosanna  in  the  highest ;  blessed  is  He  that 
Cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Hosanna  in 
the  highest.' 

The  Priest,  making  the  sign  of  the  cross  ^  07i  the 
gifts,  says :  — 

XXIX.  Holy  art  Thou,  King  of  eternity,  and 
Lord  and  giver  of  all  holiness  ;  holy  also  Thy 
only-begotten  Son,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by 
whom  Thou  hast  made  all  things  ;  holy  also  Thy 
Holy  Spirit,  which  searches  all  things,  even  Thy 
deep  things,  O  God  :  holy  art  Thou,  almighty, 
all-powerful,  good,  dread,  merciful,  most  com- 
passionate to  Thy  creatures  ;  who  didst  make 
man  from  earth  after  Thine  own  image  and  like- 
ness ;  who  didst  give  him  the  joy  of  paradise  ; 
and  when  he  transgressed  Thy  commandment, 
and  fell  away,  didst  not  disregard  nor  desert 
him,  O  Good  One,  but  didst  chasten  him  as  a 
merciful  father,  call  him  by  the  law,  instruct 
him  by  the  prophets  ;  and  afterwards  didst  send 
forth  Thine  only-begotten  Son  Himself,  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  into  the  world,  that  He  by  His 
coming  might  renew  and  restore  Thy  image  ; 

Who,  having  descended  from  heaven,  and 
become  flesh  of  tbe  Holy  Spirit  and  Virgin  God- 
mother'' Mary,  and  having  sojourned  among 
men,  fulfilled  the  dispensation  for  the  salvation 
of  our  race;  and  being  about  to  endure  His 
voluntary  and  life-giving  death  by  the  cross.  He 
the  sinless  for  us  the  sinners,  in  the  night  in 
which  He  was  betrayed,  nay,  rather  delivered 
Himself  up  for  the  life  and  salvation  of  the 
world, 

Then  the  Priest  holds  the  bread  in  his  hand,  and 
says  :  — 

XXX.  Having  taken  the  bread  in  His  holy  and 
pure  and  blameless  and  immortal  hands,  lifting 

'  [See  Hammond's  Lit.  of  Antipch,  etc.,  p.  15,  note  29,] 
^  [Compare  the  Clementine,  p.  488;  and  note  differences.! 
3  [a  token  of  Posl-Nicene  origin.     Vol.  v.  p.  zjy,  Elucid.  I.] 


up  His  eyes  to  heaven,  and  showing  it  to  Thee, 
His  God  and  Father,  He  gave  thanks,  and  hal- 
lowed, and  brake,  and  gave  it  to  us,-*  His  disciples 
and  apostles,  saying  :  — 

The  Deacons  say  .-5  — 
For  the  remission  of  sins  and  life  everlasting. 

Then  he  says  aloud :  — 

Take,  eat :  this  is  my  body,  broken  for  you, 
and  given  for  remission  of  sins. 

The  People. 
Amen. 

Then  he  takes  the  cup,  and  says  :  — 

In  like  manner,  after  supper,  He  took  the  cup, 
and  having  mixed  wine  and  water,  lifting  up  His 
eyes  to  heaven,  and  presenting  it  to  Thee,  His 
God  and  Father,  He  gave  thanks,  and  hallowed 
and  blessed  it,  and  filled  it  with  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  gave  it  to  us  His  disciples,  saying,  Drink  ye 
all  of  it ;  this  is  my  blood  of  the  mtvf  testament 
shed  for  you  and  many,  and  distributed  for  the 
remission  of  sins. 

The  People. 
Amen. 

The  Priest. 

This  do  in  remembrance  of  me  ;  for  as  often 
as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do 
show  forth  the  Lord's  death,  and  confess  His 
resurrection,  till  He  come. 

The  Deacons  say  :  — 
We  believe  and  confess : 

The  People. 

We  show  forth  Thy  death,  O  Lord,  and  confess 
Thy  resurrection. 

Tlie  Priest  {Ohlation). 

XXXI.  Remembering,  therefore,  His  life-giving 
sufferings.  His  saving  cross.  His  death  and  His 
burial,  and  resurrection  from  the  dead  on  the 
third  day,  and  His  ascension  into  heaven,  and 
sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  Thee,  our  Ciod  and 
Father,  and  His  second  glorious  and  awful  ap- 
pearing, when  He  shall  come  with  glory  to  judge 
the  quick  and  the  dead,  and  render  to  every  one 
according  to  His  works  ;  even  we,  sinful  men, 
offer  unto  Thee,  O  Lord,  this  dread  and  blood- 
less sacrifice,  praying  that  Thou  wilt  not  deal 
with  us  after  our  sins,  nor  reward  us  according 
to  our  iniquities  ; 

But  that  Thou,  according  to  Thy  mercy  and 


<  [Supposed  by  some  to  be  a  relic  of  the  original  formula  as  the 
Apostles  delivered  it.     On  the  synaxis,  see  vol.  v.  p.  259,  Elucid.  II. J. 

5  [These  abrupt  interjections  of  the  deacon  arc  made  while  the 
priest  proceeds.     This  \ogic.x\\y /oilows  what  the  priest  subjoins.] 


EARLY    LITURGIES. 


545 


Thy  unspeakable  loviftg-kindness,  passing  by  and 
blotting  out  the  handwriting  against  us  Thy  sup- 
pliants, wilt  grant  to  us  Thy  heavenly  and  eternal 
gifts  (which  eye  hath  not  seen,  and  ear  hath  not 
heard,  and  which  have  not  entered  into  the  heart 
of  man')  that  thou  hast  prepared,  O  God,  for 
those  who  love  Thee  ;  and  reject  not,  O  loving 
Lord,  the  people  for  my  sake,  or  for  my  sin's 
sake  : 

Then  he  says,  thrice  :  — 

For  Thy  people  and  Thy  Church  supplicate 
Thee. 

The  People. 

Have  mercy  on  us,  O  Lord  our  God,  Father 
Almighty. 

Again  the  Priest  says  {Invocation)  :  — 

xxxir.  Have  mercy  upon  us,  O  God  Almighty. 

Have  mercy  upon  us,  O  God  our  Saviour. 

Have  mercy  upon  us,  O  God,  according  to 
Thy  great  mercy,  and  send  forth  on  us,  and  on 
these  offered  gifts,  Thy  all-holy  Spirit. 

Then,  bowing  his  neck,  he  says  :  — 

The  sovereign  and  quickening  Spirit,  that  sits 
upon  the  throne  with  Thee,  our  God  and  Father, 
and  with  Thy  only-begotten  Son,  reigning  with 
Thee  ;  the  consubstantial  -  and  co-eternal ;  that 
spoke  in  the  law  and  in  the  prophets,  and  in  Thy 
New  Testament ;  that  descended  in  the  form  of 
a  dove  on  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  the  river 
Jordan,  and  abode  on  Him  ;  that  descended  on 
Thy  apostles  in  the  form  of  tongues  of  fire  in 
the  upper  room  of  the  holy  and  glorious  Zion 
on  the  day  of  Pentecost :  this  Thine  all-holy 
Spirit,  send  down,  O  Lord,  upon  us,  and  upon 
these  offered  holy  gifts  ; 

And  rising  up,  he  says  aloud :  — 

That  coming,  by  His  holy  and  good  and  glo- 
rious appearing,  He  may  sanctify  this  bread,  and 
make  it  the  holy  body  of  Thy  Christ.^ 

The  People. 
Amen. 

The  Priest. 

And  this  cup  the  precious  blood  of  Thy 
Christ. 

The  People. 
Amen. 

The  Priest  by  himself  standing. 

XXXIII.  That  they  may  be  to  all  that  partake 
of  them  for  remission  of  sins,  and  for  life  ever- 


'  To  conceive.    [A  feeble  interpolation  in  the  Edinburgh  edition.] 

^  [Post-Nicene,  but  legitimate.] 

3  ^Understood  mystically  and  spiritually  down  to  a  late  period, 
even  in  the  West.  See  Ratramni  De  Corpore  et  Sanguine,  Oxon., 
1S3S.     Note  the  inference  as  to  time  of  sanctification.] 


lasting,  for  the  sanctification  of  souls  and  of 
bodies,  for  bearing  the  fruit  of  good  works,  for 
the  stablishing  of  Thy  Holy  Catholic  Church, 
which  Thou  hast  founded  on  the  Rock  of  Faith,+ 
that  the  gates  of  hell  may  not  prevail  against  it ; 
delivering  it  from  all  heresy  and  scandals,  and 
from  those  who  work  iniquity,  keeping  it  till  the 
fulness  of  the  time. 

And  having  bowed,  he  says  :  — 

XXXIV.  We  present  them  to  Thee  also,  O 
Lord,  for  the  holy  places,  which  Thou  hast  glo- 
rified by  the  divine  appearing  of  Thy  Christ, 
and  by  the  visitation  of  Thy  all-holy  Spirit ; 
especially  for  the  glorious  Zion,  the  mother  of 
all  the  churches  ;  5  and  for  Thy  Holy,  Catholic, 
and  Apostolic  Church  throughout  the  world : 
even  now,  O  Lord,  bestow  ui)on  her  the  rich 
gifts  of  Thy  all-holy  Spirit. 

Remember  also,  O  Lord,  our  holy  fethers  and 
brethren  in  it,  and  the  bishops  in  all  the  wodd, 
who  rightly  divide  the  word  of  Thy  truth. 

Remember  also,  O  Lord,  every  city  and 
country,  and  those  of  the  true  faith  dwelling  in 
them,  their  peace  and  security. 

Remember,  O  Lord,  Christians  sailing,  trav- 
elling, sojourning  in  strange  lands ;  our  fathers 
and  brethren,  who  are  in  bonds,  prison,  cap- 
tivity, and  exile ;  who  are  in  mines,  and  under 
torture,  and  in  bitter  slavery. 

Remember,  O  Lord,  the  sick  and  afflicted, 
and  those  troubled  by  unclean  spirits,  their 
speedy  healing  from  Thee,  O  God,  and  their 
salvation. 

Remember,  O  Lord,  every  Christian  soul  in 
affliction  and  distress,  needing  Thy  mercy  and 
succour,  O  God ;  and  the  return  of  the  erring. 

Remember,  O  Lord,  our  fathers  and  brethren, 
toiling  hard,  and  ministering  unto  us,  for  Thy 
holy  name's  sake. 

Remember  all,  O  Lord,  for  good  :  have  mercy 
on  all,  O  Lord,  be  reconciled  to  us  all :  give 
peace  to  the  multitudes  of  Thy  people  :  put 
away  scandals  :  bring  wars  to  an  end  :  make  the 
uprising  of  heresies  to  cease  :  grant  Thy  peace 
and  Thy  love  to  us,  O  God  our  Saviour,  the 
ho])e  of  all  the  ends  of  the  earth. 

Remember,  O  Lord,  favourable  weather,  peace- 
ful showers,  beneficent  dews,  abundance  of  fruits, 
and  to  crown  tlie  year  with  Thy  goodness  ;  for 
the  eyes  of  all  wait  on  Thee,  and  Thou  givest 
their  food  in  due  season  :  thou  openest  Thy 
hand,  and  fillest  every  living  thing  with  glad- 
ness. 

Remember,  O  Lord,  those  who  bear  fruit,  and 
labour  honourably  in  the  holy  ^  of  Thy  Church  ; 


*  [Sec  vol.  V.  Elucidation  \'II.  p.  561.] 

5  [An  honorary  title  conceded  to  Jerusalem  by  the  Second  Gen- 
eral Council:  rqs  6e  yt  ixriTphi;  anaauii'  tu)v  eKK\r)<Tiu>v.j 

<>  Services.  [Otherwise,  "  who  do  good  works  in  Thy  holy 
churches."] 


546 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


and  thoseavho  forget  not  the  poor,  the  widows," 
the  orphans,  the  strangers,  and  the  needy ;  and 
all  who  have  desired  us  to  remember  them  in 
our  prayers. 

Moreover,  O  Lord,  be  pleased  to  remember 
those  who  have  brought  these  offerings  this  day 
to  Thy  holy  altar,  and  for  what  each  one  has 
brought  tliem  or  with  what  mind,  and  those  per- 
sons who  have  just  now  been  mentioned  to  Thee. 

Remember,  O  Lord,  according  to  the  multi- 
tude of  Thy  mercy  and  compassion,  me  also, 
Thy  humble  and  unprofitable  servant ;  and  the 
deacons  who  surround  Thy  holy  altar,  and  gra- 
ciously give  them  a  blameless  life,  keep  their 
ministry  undefiled,  and  purchase  for  them  a  good 
degree,  that  we  may  find  mercy  and  grace,  with 
all  the  saints  that  have  been  well  pleasing  to 
Thee  since  the  world  began,  to  generation  and 
generation  —  grandsires,  sires,  patriarchs,  proph- 
ets, apostles,  martyrs,  confessors,  teachers,  saints, 
and  every  just  spirit  made  perfect  in  the  faith  of 
Thy  Christ. 

XXXV.  '  Hail,  Mary,  highly  favoured  :  the  Lord 
is  with  Thee  ;  blessed  art  thou  among  women, 
and  blessed  the  fruit  of  thy  womb,  for  thou  didst 
bear  the  Saviour  of  our  souls.^ 

The  Deacons. 
xxxvi.  Remember  us,  O  Lord  God. 

The  Priest,  botoing,  says  :  — 

Remember,  O  Lord  God,  the  spirits  and  all 
flesh,  of  whom  we  have  made  mention,  and  of 
whom  we  have  not  made  mention,  who  are  of  the 
true  faith,  from  righteous  Abel  unto  this  day : 
unto  them  do  Thou  give  rest  there  in  the  land 
of  the  living,  in  Thy  kingdom,  in  the  joy  of 
paradise,  in  the  bosom  of  Abraham,  and  of  Isaac, 
and  of  Jacob,  our  holy  fathers ;  whence  pain, 
and  grief,  and  lamentation  have  fled  :  there  the 
light  of  Thy  countenance  looks  upon  them,  and 
enlightens  them  for  ever.^' 

Make  the  end  of  our  lives  Christian,  accept- 


'  [The  Angelical  Salutation  is  here  an  evident  interpolation,  mar- 
ring the  grand  unities  of  the  liturgy.] 
2  [I  place  in  a  note  what  follows:]  — 

T/ien  ike  Priest  says  aloud :  — 

Hail  in  the  highest,  our  all-holy,  pure,  most  blessed,  glorious 
Lady,  the  God-mother  and  ever-virgin  ^Iary. 

T/ie  Singers. 
Verily  it  is  becoming  to  bless  Thee,  the  God-bearing,  the  ever- 
blessed,  and  all-blameless,  and  mother  of  our  God,  more  honourable 
than  the  cherubim,  and  incomparably  more  glorious  than  the  ser- 
aphim; thee,  who  didst  bear  with  purity  God  the  Word,  thee  ihe 
true  God-mother,  we  magnify. 

And  again  they  sing:  — 

In  thee,  highly  favoured,  all  creation  rejoices,  the  host  of  angels, 
and  the  race  of  men;  hallowed  temple,  and  spiritual  paradise,  pride 
of  virgins,  of  whom  God  was  made  flesh  and  our  God,  who  was  before 
eternity,  became  a  little  child:  for  He  made  Thy  womb  His  throne, 
and  Thy  bowels  more  capacious  than  the  heavens.  In  thee,  O  highly 
favoured  one,  all  creation  rejoices:   glory  unto  thee. 

5  [A  prayer  entirely  corresponding  with  the  primitive  ideas.  See 
vol.  VI.  p.  488,  and  elucidation,  p.  541. J 


able,  blameless,  and  peaceM,  O  Lord,  gathering 
us  together,  O  Lord,  under  the  feet  of  Thine 
elect,  when  Thou  wilt,  and  as  Thou  wilt ;  only 
without  shame  and  transgressions,  through  Thy 
only-begotten  Son,  our  Lord  and  God  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ :  for  He  is  the  only  sinless  one  who 
hath  appeared  on  the  earth. 

The  Deacon. 

And  let  us  pray :  — 

For  the  peace  and  establishing  of  the  whole 
world,  and  of  the  holy  churches  of  God,  and  for 
the  purposes  for  which  each  one  made  his  offer- 
ing, or  according  to  the  desire  he  has  :  and  for 
the  people  standing  round,  and  for  all  men,  and 
all  women  : 

The  People. 

And  for  all  men  and  all  women.     {A?nen.) 

The  Priest  says  aloud :  — 

Wherefore,  both  to  them  and  to  us,  do  Thou 
in  Thy  goodness  and  love  : 

The  People. 

Forgive,  remit,  pardon,  O  God,  our  trans- 
gressions, voluntary  and  involuntary :  in  deed 
and  in  word  :  in  knowledge  and  in  ignorance  : 
by  night  and  by  day  :  in  thought  and  intent :  in 
Thy  goodness  and  love,  forgive  us  them  all. 

The  Priest. 

Through  the  grace  and  compassion  and  love 
of  Thy  only-begotten  Son,  with  whom  Thou  art 
blessed  and  glorified,  together  with  the  all-holy, 
and  good,  and  quickening  Spirit,  now  and  ever, 
and  to  all  eternity. 

The  People. 
Amen. 

The  Priest. 
XXXVII.  Peace  be  to  all : 

The  People. 
And  to  thy  spirit. 

The  Deacon. 

Again,  and  continually,  in  peace  let  us  pray  to  the 
Lord. 

For  the  gifts  to  the  Lord  God  presented  and 
sanctified,  precious,  heavenly,  unspeakable,  pure, 
glorious,  dread,  awful,  divine  ; 

Let  us  pray. 

That  the  Lord  our  God,  having  graciously  re- 
ceived them  to  His  altar  that  is  holy  and  above 
the  heavens,  rational  and  spiritual,  for  the  odour 
of  a  sweet  spiritual  savour,  may  send  down  in 
answer  upon  us  the  divine  grace  and  the  gift  of 
the  all-holy  Spirit ; 

Let  us  pray. 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


547 


Having  prayed  for  the  unity  of  the  faith,  and 
the  communion  of  His  all-holy  and  adorable 
Spirit ; 

Let  us  commend  ourselves  and  one  another,  and  our 
whole  life,  to  Christ  our  God  : 


Amen. 


The  People. 


The  Priest  prays. 

XXXVIII.  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  and 
God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  the  glorious  Lord, 
the  blessed  essence,  the  bounteous  goodness, 
the  God  and  Sovereign  of  all,  who  art  blessed 
to  all  eternity,  who  sittest  upon  the  cherubim, 
and  art  glorified  by  the  seraphim,  before  whom 
stand  thousand  thousands  and  ten  thousand 
times  ten  thousand  hosts  of  angels  and  arch- 
angels :  Thou  hast  accepted  the  gifts,  offerings, 
and  fruits  brought  unto  Thee  as  an  odour  of  a 
sweet  spiritual  smell,  and  hast  been  pleased  to 
sanctify  them,  and  make  them  perfect,  O  good 
One,  by  the  grace  of  Thy  Christ,  and  by  the 
presence  of  Thy  all-holy  Spirit. 

Sanctify  also,  O  Lord,  our  souls,  and  bodies, 
and  spirits,  and  touch  our  understandings,  and 
search  our  consciences,  and  cast  out  from  us 
every  evil  imagination,  every  impure  feeling, 
every  base  desire,  every  unbecoming  thought, 
all  envy,  and  vanity,  and  hypocrisy,  all  lying,  all 
deceit,  every  worldly  affection,  all  covetousness, 
all  vainglory,  all  indifference,  all  vice,  all  passion, 
all  anger,  all  malice,  all  blasphemy,  every  mo- 
tion of  the  flesh  and  spirit  that  is  not  in  accord- 
ance with  Thy  holy  will : 

{Aloud.) 

And  count  us  worthy,  O  loving  Lord,  with 
boldness,  without  condemnation,  in  a  pure 
heart,  with  a  contrite  spirit,  with  unshamed 
face,  with  sanctified  lips,  to  dare  to  call  upon 
Thee,  the  holy  God,  Father  in  heaven,  and  to 
say, 

77/1?  People. 

Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven  :  hallowed  be 
Thy  name  ;  and  so  on  to  the  doxology. 

The  Priest,  bowing,  says  {the  Embolism  ')  :  — 

And  lead  us  not  into  temptation.  Lord,  Lord 
of  Hosts,  who  knowest  our  frailty,  but  deliver 
us  from  the  evil  one  and  his  works,  and  from  all 
his  malice  and  craftiness,  for  the  sake  of  Thy 
holy  name,  which  has  been  placed  upon  our 
humility : 

{Aloud.) 

For  Thine  is  the  kingdom,  the  jiower,  and  the 
glory.  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  now  and 
for  ever.  

'  [In  all  early  liturgies  always  following  the  Lord's  Prayer,  lo 
accentuate  the  petition  against  the  evil  one.  It  hurls  back  his  "  fiery 
darts,"  as  it  were;   whence  this  name.] 


The  People. 
Amen. 

The  Priest. 

XXXIX.  Peace  be  to  all. 

The  People. 
And  to  thy  spirit. 

The  Deacon. 
Let  us  bow  our  heads  to  the  Lord. 

The  People. 
To  Thee,  O  Lord. 

The  Priest  pi-ays,  speaking  thus  :  — 
To   Thee,  O    Lord,   we   Thy   servants   have 
bowed  our  heads  before  Thy  holy  altar,  waiting 
for  the  rich  mercies  that  are  from  Thee. 

Send  forth  upon  us,  O  Lord,  Thy  plenteous 
grace  and  Thy  blessing ;  and  sanctify  our  souls, 
bodies,  and  spirits,  that  we  may  become  worthy 
communicants  and  partakers  of  Thy  holy  mys- 
teries, to  the  forgiveness  of  sins  and  life  everlast- 
ing : 

{Aloud.) 

For  adorable  and  glorified  art  Thou,  our  God, 
and  Thy  only-begotten  Son,  and  Thy  all-holy 
Spirit,  now  and  ever. 


Amen. 


The  People. 


The  Priest  sa\s  aloud :  — 


And  the  grace  and  the  mercies  of  the  holy 
and  consubstantial,  and  uncreated,  and  adorable 
Trinity,  shall  be  with  us  all.^ 

The  People. 
And  with  thy  spirit. 

TJie  Deacon. 
In  the  fear  of  God,  let  us  attend. 

The  Priest  says  secretly  .•  ^  — 

O  holy  Lord,  that  abidest  in  holy  places,  sanc- 
tify us  by  the  word  of  Thy  grace,  and  by  the 
visitation  of  Thy  all-holy  Spirit :  for  Thou,  O 
Lord,  hast  said.  Ye  will  be  holy,  for  I  am  holy. 
O  Lord  our  God,  incomprehensible  Word  of 
God,  one  in  substance  with  the  Father  and  the 
Holy  Spirit,  co-eternal  and  indivisible,  accept  the 
jMirc  hymn,  in  Tiiy  holy  and  bloodless  sacrifices  ; 
with  the  cherubim,  and  seraphim,  and  from  me, 
a  sinful  man,  cr}ing  and  saying  :  — 

He  takes  up  the  gifts  and  saith  aloud :  — 
XL.  The  holy  things  unto  holy. 


=  [Duplicated,  with  other  parts,  in  the  Greek  copies  ] 
3  [The  taking-iip  of  the  gii"ts  is  here  erroneously  introduced  in  th« 
Edinburgh  edition.] 


548 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


The  People. 

One  only  is  holy,  one  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to 
the  glory  of  God  the  Father,  to  whom  be  glory 
to  all  eternity. 

The  Deacon. 

xi.i.  For  the  remission  of  our  sins,  and  the 
propitiation  of  our  souls,  and  for  every  soul  m 
tribulation  and  distress,  needing  the  mercy  and 
succour  of  God,  and  for  the  return  of  the  erring, 
the  healing  of  the  sick,  the  deliverance  of  the 
captives,  the  rest  of  our  fathers  and  brethren, 
who  have  fallen  asleep  aforetime ; 

Let  us  all  say  fervently,  Lord,  have  mercy : 

The  People  {twelve  times). 
Lord,  have  mercy.' 

Then  the  Priest  breaks  the  bread,  atid  holds  the 
half  in  his  right  hand,  and  the  half  in  his 
left,  and  dips  that  in  his  right  hand  in  the 
chalice,  saving :  — 

The  union  of  the  all-holy  body  and  precious 
blood  of  our  Lord  and  God  and  Saviour,  Jesus 
Christ. 

Then  he  makes  the  sign  of  the  c7-oss  on  that  in 
his  left  hand:  then  zoith  tJiat  lahich  has  bee?i 
signed  the  other  half :  then  fortlnoith  he  begins 
to  divide,  and  before  all  to  give  to  each  chalice 
a  single  piece,  saying :  — 

It  has  been  made  one,  and  sanctified,  and 
perfected,  in  the  name  of  the  Fatlier,  and  of  the 
Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  now  and  ever. 

And  when  he  makes  the  sign  of  the  cross  on  the 
bread,  he  says  :  — 

Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  the  Son  of  the 
Father,  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world, 
sacrificed  for  the  life  and  salvation  of  the  world. 

And  when  he  gives  a  single  piece  to  each  chalice, 
he  says  :  — 

A  holy  portion  of  Christ,  full  of  grace  and 
truth,  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to 
whom  be  the  glory  and  the  power  to  all  eternity. 

Then  he  begins  to  divide,  and  to  say  :  — 

XMi.  The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd,  I  shall  not 
want.     In  green  pastures,  and  so  on.- 

Then, 
I  will  bless  the  Lord  at  all  times,  and  so  on.^ 

Then, 
I  will  extol  Thee,  my  God,  O  King,  and  so  on.* 


'  [The  publican's  prayer,  adapted  to  the  Christian  worship:  iAaer- 
er)Ti  ixoi,  is  the  plea  for  mercy  through   propitiation.     Luke  xviii. 

^  Ps.  xxiii. 
3  Ps.  xxxiv. 
■♦  Ps.  cxlv. 


Then, 
O  praise  the  Lord,  all  ye  nations,  a?td  so  on.^ 

The  Deacon. 
Sir,  pronounce  the  blessing. 

TJie  Priest. 
The  Lord  will  bless  us,  and  keep  us  without 
condemnation  for  the  communion  of  His  pure 
gifts,  now  and  always,  and  for  ever. 

And  when  they  have  filled^  the  Deacon  says :  — 
Sir,  pronoinice  the  blessing. 

The  Priest  says  :  — 
The  Lord  will  bless  us,  and  make  us  w^orthy 
with  the  pure  touchings  of  our  fingers  to  take 
the  live  coal,  and  place  it  upon  the  mouths 
of  the  faithful  for  the  purification  and  renewal  of 
their  souls  and  bodies,  now  and  always. 

Then, 
O  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good  ;  who  is 
parted  and  not  divided  ;  distributed  to  the  faith- 
ful and  not  expended  ;  for  the  remission  of  sins, 
and  the  life  everlasting  ;  now  and  always,  and  for 
ever. 

The  Deacon. 
In  the  peace  of  Christ,  let  us  sing  : 

The  Singers. 
O  taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good. 

Tlie  Priest  says  the  prayer  before  the  communion. 

O  Lord  our  God,  the  heavenly  bread,  the  life 
of  the  universe,  I  have  sinned  against  Heaven, 
and  before  Thee,  and  am  not  worthy  to  partake 
of  Thy  pure  mysteries  ;  but  as  a  merciful  God, 
make  me  worthy  by  Thy  grace,  without  con- 
demnation to  partake  of  Thy  holy  body  and 
precious  blood,  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  life 
everlasting.7 

XLiii.  Then  he  distributes  to  the  cleigy ;  and 
when  the  deacons  take  the  disks  ^  and  the  chal- 
ices for  distribution  to  the  people,  the  Deacon, 
toho  takes  the  first  disk,  says  :  — 

Sir,  pronounce  the  blessing. 

The  Priest  replies  :  — 
Glory  to  God  who  has  sanctified  and  is  sanc- 
tifying us  all. 

The  Deacon  says :  — 
Be  Thou  exalted,  O  God,  over  the  heavens, 
and  Thy  glory  over  all  the  earth,  and  Thy  king- 
dom endureth  to  all  eternity.'^ 


S  Ps.  cxvii. 

<>  [Here  the  chalice  is  filled  for  participation.] 
'  I  Here  the  presbyter  receives. J 
^  Or  patens. 

9  1  Here  are  difficulties  explained  by  Drs.  Neate  and  Littledale  in 
their  Translation,  etc.,  p.  6o.j 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


549 


And  when  the  Deacon  is  about  to  put  it  on  the 
side- tab le,"^  the  Priest  says  :  — 

Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord  our  God  for 
ever. 

The  Deacon. 
In  the  fear  of  God,  and  in  faith  and  love,  draw  nigh. 

The  People. 

Blessed  is  He  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord.2 

And  again,  zohen  he  sets  down  the  disk  upon  the 
side- table,  he  says :  — 
Sir,  pronounce  the  blessing. 

The  Priest. 

Save  Thy  people,  O  God,  and  bless  Thine  in- 
heritance. 

The  Priest  again.^ 
Glory  to  our  God,  who  has  sanctified  us  all. 

And  7vhen  he  has  put  the  chalice  back  on  the  holy 
table,  the  Priest  says :  — 
Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord  to  all  eternity. 

The  Deacons  and  the  People  say :  — 
Fill  our  mouths  with  Thy  praise,  O  Lord,  and 
fill  our  lips  with  joy,  that  we  may  sing  of  Thy 
glory,  of  Thy  greatness  all  the  day. 

And  again :  — 

We  render  thanks  to  Thee,  Christ  our  God, 
that  Thou  hast  made  us  worthy  to  partake  of 
Thy  body  and  blood,  for  the  remission  of  sins, 
and  for  life  everlasting.  Do  Thou,  in  Thy  good- 
ness and  love,  keep  us,  we  pray  Thee,  without 
condenmation. 

The  prayer  of  incense  at  the  last  entrance. 
XLiv.  We  render  thanks  to  Thee,  the  Saviour 
and  God  of  all,  for  all  the  good  things  Thou  hast 
given  us,  and  for  the  participation  of  Thy  holy 
and  pure  mysteries,  and  we  offer  to  Thee  this 
incense,  praying :  Keep  us  under  the  shadow  of 
Thy  wings,  and  count  us  worthy  till  our  last 
breath  to  partake  of  Thy  holy  rites  for  the  sancti- 
fication  of  our  souls  and  bodies,  for  the  inherit- 
ance of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  :  for  Thou,  O 
God,  art  our  sanctification,  and  we  send  up 
praise  and  thanksgiving  to  Thee,  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Spirit. 

The  Deacon  begins  in  the  entrance. 

Glory  to  Thee,  glory  to  Thee,  glory  to  Thee, 
O  Christ  the  King,  only-begotten  Word  of  the 
P'ather,  that  Thou  hast  counted  us,  Thy  sinful 
and  unworthy  servants,  worthy  to  enjoy  thy  i>ure 


mysteries  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  for  hfe 
everlasting  :  glory  to  Thee.-* 

And  when  he  has  made  the  entrance,  the  Deacon 
begins  to  speak  thus  :  — 

XLV.  Again  and  again,  and  at  all  times,  in  peace,  let 
us  beseech  the  Lord. 

That  the  participation  of  His  Holy  rites  may 
be  to  us  for  the  turning  away  from  every  wicked 
thing,  for  our  support  on  the  journey  to  life  ever- 
lasting, for  the  communion  and  gift  of  the  Holy 
Spirit ; 

Let  us  pray. 

The  Priest  prays. 
Commemorating  our  all-holy,  pure,  most  glori- 
ous, blessed  Lady,  the  God- Mother  and  Ever- 
Virgin  Mary,5  and  all  the  saints  that  have  been 
well-pleasing  to  Thee  since  the  world  began,  let 
us  devote  ourselves,  and  one  another,  and  our 
whole  life,  to  Christ  our  God  : 

The  People. 
To  Thee,  O  Lord. 

The  Priest. 
XLVi.  O  God,  who  through  Thy  great  and  un- 
speakable love  didst  condescend  to  the  weakness 
of  Thy  servants,  and  hast  counted  us  worthy  to 
partake  of  this  heavenly  table,  condemn  not  us 
sinners  for  the  participation  of  Thy  pure  mys- 
teries ;  but  keep  us,  O  good  One,  in  the  sancti- 
fication of  Thy  Holy  Spirit,  that  being  matie 
holy,  we  may  find  part  and  inheritance  with  all 
Thy  saints  that  have  been  well-pleasing  to  Thee 
since  the  world  began,  in  the  light  of  Thy  counte- 
nance, through  the  mercy  of  Thy  only-begotten 
Son,  our  Lord  and  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ, 
with  whom  Thou  art  blessed,  together  with  Thy 
all-holy,  and  good,  and  quickening  Spirit :  for 
blessed  and  glorified  is  Thy  all-precious  and 
glorious  name.  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  now 
and  ever,  and  to  all  eternity. 


The  People. 
The  Priest. 


The  side-table  or  credence.] 

Here  the  l.iity  are  communicated.  [ 

Compare  Neale's  Tetralogia  Liturgica,  p.  192.] 


Amen, 

Peace  be  to  all. 

The  People. 
And  to  thy  spirit. 

The  Deacon. 
XLVii.  Let  us  bow  our  heads  to  the  Lord. 

The  Priest. 
O  God,  great  and  marvellous,  look  upon  Thy 
servants,  for  we  have  bowed  our  heads  to  Thee. 
Stretch  forth  Thy  hand,  strong  and  full  of  bless- 

*  [Here  arc  contusions;  but  sec  Ncalo  and  Littledale,  p.  62, 
note  20. 1 

5  I  Inlerpolated,  but  not  Mariolatrous:  llic  TTi^w/:;!:^  is  commemo- 
rated, nut  adored. J 


550 


EARLY    LITURGIES. 


ings,  and  bless  Thy  people.  Keep  Thine  inherit- 
ance, that  always  and  at  all  times  we  may  glorify 
Thee,  our  only  living  and  true  God,  the  holy  and 
consubstantial '  Trinity,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost,  now  and  ever,  and  to  all  eternity. 

{Aloud.) 
For  unto  Thee  is  becoming  and  is  due  praise 
from   us   all,   and   honour,  and   adoration,  and 
thanksgiving,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  now 
and  ever. 

The  Deacon. 
XLViii.  In  the  peace  of  Christ  let  us  sing: 

And  again  he  says  :  — 
In  the  peace  of  Christ  let  us  go  on : 

The  People. 

In  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Sir,  pronounce  the 
blessing.^ 

Dismission  prayer,  spoken  by  the  Deacon. 

Going  on  from  glory  to  glory,  we  praise  Thee, 
the  Saviour  of  our  souls.  Glory  to  Father,  and 
Son,  and  Holy  Spirit  now  and  ever,  and  to  all 
eternity.  We  praise  Thee,  the  Saviour  of  our 
souls. 

The  Priest  says  a  prayer  from  the  altar  to  the 
sacristy. 

XLix.  Going  on  from  strength  to  strength,  and 
having  fullilled  all  the  divine  service  in  Thy 
temple,  even  now  we  beseech  Thee,  O  Lord  our 
God,  make  us  worthy  of  perfect  loving-kindness  ; 
make  straight  our  path  :  root  us  in  Thy  fear,  and 
make  us  worthy  of  the  heavenly  kingdom,  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  with  whom  Thou  art 
blessed,  together  with  Thy  all-holy,  and  good, 
and  quickening  Spirit,  now  and  always,  and  for 
ever. 

The  Deacon. 

L.  Again  and  again,  and  at  all  times,  in  peace  let  us 
beseech  the  Lord. 

Prayer  said  in  the  saci-isty  after  the  dismissal. 

Thou  hast  given  unto  us,  O  Lord,  sanctifica- 
tion  in  the  communion  of  the  all-holy  body  and 
precious  blood  of  Thy  only-begotten  Son,  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  give  unto  us  also  the  grace 


[A  legitimate  addition,  according  to  the  primitive  laws.] 
[Which  must  here  be  given.] 


of  Thy  good  Spirit,  and  keep  us  blameless  in  the 
faith,  lead  us  unto  perfect  adoption  and  redemp- 
tion, and  to  the  coming  joys  of  eternity ;  for 
Thou  art  our  sanctification  and  light,  O  God, 
and  Thy  only-begotten  Son,  and  Thy  all-holy 
Spirit,  now  and  ever,  and  to  all  eternity.    Amen. 

The  Deacon. 
In  the  peace  of  Christ  let  us  keep  watch. 

Tlie  Priest. 

Blessed  is  God,  who  blesseth  and  sanctifieth 
through  the  communion  of  the  holy,  and  quick- 
ening, and  pure  mysteries,  now  and  ever,  and  to 
all  eternity.     Amen. 

Thc7i  the  prayer  of  propitiatio7i. 

O  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Son  of  the  living  God, 
Lamb  and  Shepherd,  who  takest  away  the  sin  of 
the  world,  who  didst  freely  forgive  their  debt  to 
the  two  debtors,  and  gavest  remission  of  her  sins 
to  the  woman  that  was  a  sinner,  who  gavest  heal- 
ing to  the  paralytic,  with  the  remission  of  his 
sins  ;  forgive,  remit,  j^ardon,  O  God,  our  offences, 
voluntary  and  involuntary,  in  knowledge  and  in 
ignorance,  by  transgression  and  by  disobedience, 
which  Thy  all-holy  Spirit  knows  better  than  Thy 
servants  do  : 

And  if  men,  carnal  and  dwelling  in  this  world, 
have  in  aught  erred  from  Thy  commandments, 
either  moved  by  the  devil,  whether  in  word  or 
in  deed,  or  if  they  have  come  under  a  curse, 
or  by  reason  of  some  special  vow,  I  entreat  and 
beseech  Thy  unspeakable  loving-kindness,  that 
they  may  be  set  free  from  their  word,  and  re- 
leased from  the  oath  and  the  special  vow,  accord- 
ing to  Thy  goodness. 

Verily,  O  Sovereign  Lord,  hear  my  supplication 
on  behalf  of  Thy  servants,  and  do  Thou  pass  by 
all  their  errors,  remembering  them  no  more ; 
forgive  them  every  transgression,  voluntary  and 
involuntary  ;  deliver  them  from  everlasting  pun- 
ishment :  for  Thou  art  He  that  hast  commanded 
us,  saying,  Whatsoever  things  ye  bind  upon 
earth,  shall  be  bound  in  heaven  ;  and  whatsoever 
things  ye  loose  upon  earth,  shall  be  loosed  in 
heaven  :  for  thou  art  our  God,  a  God  able  to 
pity,  and  to  save  and  to  forgive  sins  ;  and  glory 
is  due  unto  Thee,  with  the  eternal  Father,  and 
the  quickening  Spirit,  now  and  ever,  and  to  all 
eternity.     Amen. 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


551 


THE    DIVINE    LITURGY   OF  THE    HOLY  APOSTLE    AND   EVANGELIST   MARK/ 
THE   DISCIPLE   OF  THE   HOLY   PETER.^ 


The  Priest. 
Peace  be  to  all. 


The  People. 


And  to  thy  spirit. 


The  Deacon. 


Pray. 


The  People. 
Lord,  have  mercy  ;  Lord,  have  mercy  ;  Lord, 
have  mercy. 

The  Priest  prays  secretly.^ 
We  give  Thee  thanks,  yea,  more  than  thanks, 
O  Lord  our  God,  the  Father  of  our  Lord  and 
God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  for  all  Thy  good- 
ness at  all  times  and  in  all  places,  because  Thou 
hast  shielded,  rescued,  helped,  and  guided  us 
all  the  days  of  our  lives,  and  brought  us  untai 
this  hour,  permitting  us  again  to  stand  before 
Thee  in  Thy  holy  place,  that  we  may  implore  for- 
giveness of  our  sins  and  propitiation  to  all  Thy 
people.  We  pray  and  beseech  Thee,  merciful 
God,  to  grant  in  Thy  goodness  that  we  may  spend 
this  holy  day  •♦  and  all  the  time  of  our  lives  with- 
out sin,  in  fulness  of  joy,  health,  safety,  holiness, 
and  reverence  of  Thee.  But  all  envy,  all  fear, 
all  temptation,  all  the  influence  of  Satan,  all  the 
snares  of  wicked  men,  do  Thou,  O  Lord,  drive 
away  from  us,  and  from  Thy  Holy  Catholic  and 
Apostolic  Church.  Bestow  upon  us,  O  Lord, 
what  is  good  and  meet.  Whatever  sin  we  commit 
in  thought,  word,  or  deed,  do  Thou  in  Thy  good- 
ness and  mercy  be  pleased  to  pardon.  Leave 
us  not,  O  Lord,  while  we  hope  in  Thee ;  nor 
lead  us  into  temptation,  but  deliver  us  from  the 
evil  one  and  from  his  works,  through  the  grace, 
mercy,  and  love  of  Thine  only-begotten  Son. 

(/«  a  loud  voice.) 
Through  whom  and  with  whom  be  glory  and 
power  to  Thee,  in  Thy  most  holy,  good,  and 
life-giving  Spirit,  now,  henceforth,  and  for  ever- 
more. 

The  People. 
Amen. 


1  [The  only  authority  for  this  valuable  relic  is  a  single  codex  of 
the  twelfth  century,  i.e.,  the  Codfx  Rossanensis,  found  at  Rossano, 
in  Calabria.  It  was  deposited  in  the  Basilian  monastery  at  Rome, 
and  first  published  a.d.  1583,  at  Paris.     See  Hammond,  pp.  xlv.,  Ii.] 

2  [Elucidation  I.] 

3  [i.e.,  |u.u<tt(,kJj?  =  arcane.  —  Hederic] 

*  [This  implies  that  the  Eucharist  was  not  (origmally)  celebrated 
every  day,  as  a  rule.    See  Justin  Martyr,  vol.  i.  note  i ,  p.  186.  J 


The  Priest. 

II.  Peace  be  to  all. 

The  People. 
And  to  thy  spirit. 

The  Deacon. 
Pray  for  the  king.^ 

The  People. 

Lord,  have  mercy ;  ^  Lord,  have  mercy ;  Lord, 
have  mercy. 

The  Priest  prays. 

O  God,  Sovereign  Lord,  the  Father  of  our 
Lord  and  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  we  pray 
and  beseech  Thee  to  grant  that  our  king  may 
enjoy  peace,  and  be  just  and  brave.  Subdue 
under  him,  O  God,  all  his  adversaries  and  ene- 
mies. Gird  on  thy  shield  and  armour,  and  rise 
to  his  aid.  Give  him  the  victory,  O  God,  that 
his  heart  may  be  set  on  peace  and  the  praise  of 
Thy  holy  name,  that  we  too  ?  in  his  peaceful 
reign  ^  may  spend  a  calm  and  tranquil  life  in  all 
reverence  and  godly  fear,  through  the  grace, 
mercy,  and  love  of  'I'hine  only-begotten  Son  : 

{In  a  loud  voice.) 

Through  whom  and  with  whom  be  glory  and 
power  to  Thee,  with  Thy  most  holy,  good,  and 
life-giving  Spirit,  now,  henceforth,  and  for  ever- 
more. 

The  People. 
Amen. 

The  Priest. 

III.  Peace  be  to  all. 

The  People. 
And  to  thy  spirit. 

The  Deacon. 
Pray  for  ihcpapas^  and  the  bishop. 

The  People. 
Lord,  have  mercy ;  Lord,  have  mercy  ;  Lord, 
have  mercy. 


5  Rather  "  for  the  emperor,"  says  Rcnaudot;  and  the  word  ^a<riA- 
eus  will  stand  this  meaning. 

6  [The  (<ciipif  t'Aerjo-or)  Kyric  Elccson.] 

7  [According  to  i  Tim.  ii.  2] 

8  [Suits  the  first  years  of  Diocletian.] 

9  The  Patriarch  of  Alexandria  is  meant.  The  word  7rairn<r  was 
used  at  first  to  designate  all  bishops;  but  its  application  gradually 
became  more  restricted,  and  so  here  the  Patriarch  of  Alex.andria  is 
called  TrdTras,  as  being  superior  to  the  bishops  of  his  patriarchate. 
[See  vol.  V.  p.  154,  and  vol.  vi.,  Introd.J 


552 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


The  Fricsi. 

O  Sovereign  and  Almighty  God,  the  Father 
of  our  Lord,  God,  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  we 
pray  and  beseech  Thee  to  defend  in  Thy  good 
mercy  our  most  holy  and  blessed  high  priest  our 
Father  in  God  A,  and  our  most  reverend  Bishop 
A.  Preserve  them  for  us  through  many  years 
in  peace,  while  they  according  to  Thy  holy  and 
blessed  will  fulfil  the  sacred  priesthood  com- 
mitted to  their  care,  and  dispense  aright  the 
word  of  truth ;  with  all  the  orthodox  bishops, 
elders,  deacons,  sub-deacons,  readers,  singers, 
and  laity,  with  the  entire  body  of  the  Holy  and 
only  Catholic  Church.  Graciously  bestow  upon 
them  peace,  health,  and  salvation.  The  prayers 
they  offer  up  for  us,  and  we  for  them,  do  Thou, 
O  Lord,  receive  at  Thy  holy,  heavenly,  and  rea- 
sonable altar.  But  all  the  enemies  of  Thy  Holy 
Church  put  Thou  speedily  under  their  feet, 
through  the  grace,  mercy,  and  love  of  Thine 
only-begotten  Son : 

{Aloud.) 

Through  whom  and  with  whom  be  glory  and 
power  to  Thee,  with  Thy  all-holy,  good,  and 
life-giving  Spirit,  now,  henceforth,  aud  for  ever- 


Amen. 


The  People. 


The  Priest. 
IV.  Peace  be  to  all. 

The  People. 
And  to  thy  spirit. 

The  Deacon. 
Stand '  and  pray. 

Tlie  People. 

Lord  have  mercy  {thrice). 

The  Priest  offers  Jip  the  prayer  of  entrance,^  and 
for  incense. 

The  Priest. 
O  Sovereign  Lord  our  God,  who  hast  chosen 
the  lamp  of  the  twelve  apostles  with  its  twelve 
lights,  and  hast  sent  them  forth  to  proclaim 
throughout  the  whole  world  and  teach  the  Gos- 
pel of  Thy  kingdom,  and  to  heal  sickness  and 
every  weakness  among  the  people,  and  hast 
breathed  upon  their  faces  and  said  unto  them. 
Receive  the  Holy  Spirit  the  Comforter  :  whose- 
soever sins  ye  remit,  they  are  remitted  unto 
them  ;  and  whosesoever  sins  ye  retain,  they  are 
retained  :  Breathe  also  Thy  Holy  Spirit  upon 
us  Thy  servants,  who,  standing  around,  are  about 
to  enter  on  Thy  holy  service,^  upon  the  bishops, 


'  [See  vol.  iii.  p.  68q,  this  series  1 

This  is  the  Little  Entrance.     [The  priest  and  deacon  come  from 


the  prothesis  bearing  the  Gospels.     See  p.  538,  su^raA 

3  [Bestowing  what  is  meet.]     The  text  here  is  defective, 
suppose  that  a  sentence  has  been  lost. 


Some 


elders,  deacons,  readers,  singers,  and  laity,  with 
the  entire  body  of  the  Holy  Catholic  and  Apos- 
tolic Church. 

From  the  curse  and  execration,  from  condem- 
nation, imprisonment,  and  banishment,  and  from 
the  portion  of  the  adversary ; 

O  Lord,  deliver  us. 

Purify  our  lives  and  cleanse  our  hearts  from 
all  pollution  and  from  all  wickedness,  that  with 
pure  heart  and  conscience  we  may  offer  to  Thee 
this  incense  for  a  sweet-smelling  savour,  and  for 
the  remission  of  our  sins  and  the  sins  of  all  Thy 
people,  through  the  grace,  mercy,  and  love  of 
Thine  only-begotten  Son  : 

{Al07ld.) 

Through  whom  and  with  whom  be  the  glory 
and  the  power  to  Thee,  with  Thy  all-holy,  good, 
and  life-giving  Spirit,  now,  henceforth,  and  for 
evermore. 

The  People. 


Amen. 


V.  Stand. 


The  Deacon. 


They  sing :  — 
Only-begotten  Son  and  Word,-*  etc. 

The  Gospel  is  carried  in,  arid  the  Deacon  says  :  — 
Let  us  pray. 

TJie  Priest. 
Peace  be  to  all. 

The  People. 
And  to  thy  spirit. 

The  Deacon. 
Let  us  pray. 

The  People. 

Lord,  have  mercy. 

The  Priest  says  the  prayer  of  the  Trisagion. 

O  Sovereign  Lord  Christ  Jesus,  the  co-eternal 
Word  of  the  eternal  Father,  who  wast  made  in 
all  things  like  as  we  are,  but  without  sin,  for  the 
salvation  of  our  race  ;  who  hast  sent  forth  Thy 
holy  disciples  and  apostles  to  proclaim  and  teach 
the  Gospel  of  Thy  kingdom,  and  to  heal  all  dis- 
ease, all  sickness  among  Thy  people,  be  pleased 
now,  O  Lord,  to  send  forth  Thy  light  and  Thy 
truth.  Enlighten  the  eyes  of  our  minds,  that 
we  may  understand  Thy  divine  oracles.  Fit  us 
to  become  hearers,  and  not  only  hearers,  but 
doers  of  Thy  word,  that  we,  becoming  fruitful, 
and  yielding  good  fruit  from  thirty  to  an  hundred 
fold,  may  be  deemed  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven. 


<  Given  in  full  in  chap.  vi.  of  the  Liturgy  of  James,  p.  538,  .sw^rij. 
[It  is  so  worded  that  it  must  be  dated  later  than  the  Council  of  Ephe- 
sus,  A.D.  431.] 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


553 


{Aiot/d.) 
Let  Thy  mercy  speedily  overtake  us,  O  Lord. 
For  Thou  art  the  bringer  of  good  tidings,  the 
Saviour  and  Guardian  of  our  souls  and  bodies  ; 
and  we  offer  glory,  thanks,  and  the  Trisagion  to 
Thee,  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  now, 
henceforth,  and  for  evermore. 

The  People. 

Amen.  Holy  God,  holy  mighty,  holy  immor- 
tal.    Holy,  holy,  holy,'  etc. 

VI.  After  the  Trisagion  tJie  Priest  makes  the  sign 

of  the  cross  over  the  people,  and  says  :  — 
Peace  be  to  all. 

The  People. 
And  to  thy  spirit. 

Then  follow  the  Let  us  attend ;  ^  The  Apostle  and 
Prologue  of  the  Hallelujah.^     The  Deacons, 
after  a  prescribed  form,  say  :  — 
Lord,  bless  us.* 

The  Priest  says  :  — 

May  the  Lord  5  in  His  mercy  bless  and  help 
us,  now,  henceforth,  and  for  evermore. 

The   Priest,   before   the    Gospel  is    read,   offers 
incense^  and  says  :  — 

Accept  at  Thy  holy,  heavenly,  and  reasonable 
altar,  O  Lord,  the  incense  we  offer  in  presence 
of  Thy  sacred  glory.  Send  down  upon  us  in 
return  the  grace  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit,  for  Thou 
art  blessed,  and  let  Thy  glory  encircle  us. 

VII.  77^1?  Deaco7i,  when  he  is  about  to  read  the 

Gospel,  says :  — 
Lord,  bless  us. 

The  Priest. 
May  the  Lord,  who  is  the  blessed  God,  bless 
and  strengthen  us,  and  make  us  hearers  of  His 
holy  Gospel,  now,  henceforth,  and  for  evermore. 
Amen. 

The  Deacon. 
Stand  and  let  us  hear  the  holy  Gospel. 

The  Priest. 
Peace  be  to  all. 

The  People. 
And  to  thy  spirit. 

'  [The  Trisagion  is  found  in  all  the  liturgies,  which  proves  a 
common  source  and  original.] 

3  \The  Apostle  means  that  the  Epistle  is  read,  and  there  is  a 
prayer  said  (/xucTTticu)?),  followed  by  the  outburst  of  Hallelujah.] 

*  See  note  i,  p.  538.  ["  Sir,  bless  us"  (in  ordinary  rcndermgs) 
is  a  Western  form.] 

5  [Here,  the  deacon's  words  having  been  correctly  given,  the 
blessing  of  the  priests  shows  the  force  of  his  expression.] 

*>  [I  have  frequently  noted  the  .Vnte-Niccne  ignorance  of  this  rite 
among  Christians,  in  order  to  illustrate  these  later  usages  as  without 
apostolic  warrant.     See  Irenaius,  note  9,  p.  484.] 


VIII.    The  Deacon    reads   the    Gospel,   and  the 
Priest  says  the  prayer  of  the  Collect.'' 

Look  down  in  mercy  and  compassion,  O  Lord, 
and  heal  the  sick  among  Thy  people. 

May  all  our  brethren  who  have  gone  or  who 
are  about  to  go  abroad,  safely  reach  their  desti- 
nation in  due  season. 

Send  down  the  gracious  rain  upon  the  thirsty 
lands,  and  make  the  rivers  ^  flow  in  full  stream, 
according  to  Thy  grace. 

The  fruits  of  the  land  do  Thou,  O  Lord,  fill 
with  seed  and  make  ripe  for  the  harvest. 

In  peace,  courage,  justice,  and  tranquillity  pre- 
serve the  kingdom  of  Thy  servant,  whom  Thou 
hast  deemed  worthy  to  reign  over  this  land. 

From  evil  days,  from  famine  and  pestilence, 
from  the  assault  of  barbarians,  defend,  O  Lord, 
this  Christ-loving  city,  lowly  and  worthy  of  Thy 
compassion,  as  Thou  didst  spare  Nineveh  of  old. 

For  Thou  art  full  of  mercy  and  compassion, 
and  rememberest  not  the  iniquities  of  men 
against  them. 

Thou  hast  said  through  Thy  prophet  Isaiah, — 
I  will  defend  this  city,  to  save  it  for  mine  own 
sake,  and  for  my  servant  David's  sake. 

Wherefore  we  i^ray  and  beseech  Thee  to  de- 
fend in  Thy  good  mercy  this  city,  for  the  sake 
of  the  martyr  and  evangelist  I\Iark,  who  has 
shown  us  the  way  of  salvation  through  the  grace, 
mercy,  and  love  of  Thine  only-begotten  Son. 

{Aloud.) 

Through  whom  and  with  whom  be  glory  and 
power  to  Thee,  with  Thy  all-holy,  good,  and  life- 
giving  Spirit. 

The  Deacon. 

IX.     Begin. 

Then  they  say  the  verse. '^     The  Deacon  says  — 
The  three."" 

The  Priest. 
O  Sovereign  and  Almighty  God,  the  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we  pray  and  beseecli  Thee 
to  fill  our  hearts  with  tlie  peace  of  heaven,  and 
to  bestow  moreover  the  peace  of  this  life.  Pre- 
sence for  us  through  many  years  our  most  holy 
and  blessed  Papas  A,"  and  our  most  pious  Bishop 
A,  while  they,  according  to  Thy  holy  and  blessed 
will,  peacefully  fulfil  the  holy  priesthood  com- 
mitted to  their  care,  and  dispense  aright  the 
word  of  truth,  with  all  the  orthodox  bishops, 
elders,  deacons,  sub-deacons,'^  readers,  singers, 
witli  the  entire  body  of  the  holy  Catholic  and 
Apostolic  Church.     Bless  our  meetings,  O  Lord. 

7  Trji'  <ri'i'a»rT7)i'. 

8  [The  waters  of  Me  river,  rather,  with  reference  to  the  Nile.] 

9  [Tlie  anthem,  probably.] 

'°  Probably  by  ihf  three  are  meant  three  prayers.     [Sec  Ham- 
mond, note  I,  p.  177.] 
"   Patriarch. 
'-  [Vol.  V.  p.  417,  Elucidation  XIV.] 


554 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


Grant  that  we  may  hold  them  without  let  or 
hindrance,  according  to  Thy  holy  will.  Be 
pleased  to  give  to  us,  and  Thy  servants  after  us 
for  ever,  houses  of  praise  and  prayer.  Rise,  O 
Lord,  and  let  Thine  enemies  be  scattered.  Let 
all  who  hate  Thy  holy  name  be  put  to  flight. 
Bless  Thy  faithful  and  orthodox  people.  Multi- 
ply them  by  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands. 

Let  no  deadly  sin  prevail  against  them,  or 
against  Thy  holy  people,  through  the  grace, 
mercy,  and  love  of  Thine  only-begotten  Son. 

{Aloud. ^ 
Through  whom  and  with  whom  be  glory  and 
power  to  Thee,  with  Thy  all-holy,  good,  and  life- 
giving  Spirit. 

The  People. 
Amen. 

The  Priest. 
Peace  be  to  all. 

The  People. 
And  to  thy  spirit. 

The  Deacon. 
Take  care  that  none  of  the  catechumens '  — 

11. 

The7i  they  sing  the  Cherubic  hynm.^ 

X.  The  Priest  offers  incense  at  the  entrance,^ 
and  prays :  — 

O  Lord  our  God,  who  lackest  nothing,  accept 
this  incense  offered  by  an  unworthy  hand,  and 
deem  us  all  worthy  of  Thy  blessing,  for  Thou 
art  our  sanctification,  and  we  ascribe  glory  to 
Thee. 

The  holy  things  are  carried  to  the  altar,  and  the 
Priest  prays  thus  :  — 
O  holy,  highest,  awe-inspiring  God,  who  dwell- 
est  among  the  saints,  sanctify  us,  and  deem  us 
worthy  of  Thy  reverend  priesthood.  Bring  us 
to  Thy  precious  altar  with  a  good  conscience, 
and  cleanse  our  hearts  from  all  pollution.  Drive 
away  from  us  all  unholy  thouglits,  and  sanctify 
our  souls  and  minds.  Grant  that,  with  rever- 
ence of  Thee,  we  may  perform  the  service  of 
our  holy  fathers,  and  propitiate  Thy  presence 
through  all  time  ;  for  Thou  art  He  who  blesseth 
and  sanctifieth  all  things,  and  to  Thee  we  ascribe 
glory  and  thanks. 

The  Deacon. 

XI.  Salute  one  another. 

The  Priest  says  the  prayer  of  salutatiofi. 
O  Sovereign  and  Almighty  Lord,  look  down 
from  heaven  on  Thy  Church,  on  all  Thy  peo- 


'  Some  such  word  as  remain  is  intentionally  omitted. 
540,  supra.^ 

2  [See  p.  540,  su^ra.'\ 

3  LThe  Great  Entrance ;  p.  540,  S7if>ra.\ 


[See  p. 


pie,  and  on  all  Thy  flock.  Save  us  all.  Thy  un- 
worthy servants,  the  sheep  of  Thy  fold.  Give 
us  Thy  peace.  Thy  help,  and  Thy  love,  and  send 
to  us  the  gift  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit,  that  with  a 
pure  heart  and  a  good  conscience  we  may  salute 
one  another  with  an  holy  kiss,  without  hypocrisy, 
and  with  no  hostile  purpose,  but  guileless  and 
pure  in  one  spirit,  in  the  bond  of  peace  and 
love,  one  body  and  one  spirit,  in  one  faith,  even 
as  we  have  been  called  in  one  hope  of  our  call- 
ing, that  we  may  all  meet  in  the  divine  and 
boundless  love,  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  with 
whom  Thou  art  blessed. 

Then  the  Priest  offers  the  incense,  and  says  :  — 

The  incense  is  offered  to  Thy  name.  Let  it 
ascend,  we  implore  Thee,  from  the  hands  of 
Thy  poor  and  sinful  servants  to  Thy  heavenly 
altar  for  a  sweet-smelling  savour,  and  the  pro- 
pitiation of  all  Thy  people.  For  all  glory,  hon- 
our, adoration,  and  thanks  are  due  unto  Thee, 
the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  now,  hence- 
forth, and  for  evermore.     Amen. 

After  the  Salutation,^  the  Deacon  in  a  loud  voice 
says  :  — 

XII.  Stand  and  make  the  offering  duly.^ 

The  Priest,  making  the  sign  of  the  cross  over  the 
disks  and  chalices,  says  in  a  loud  voice  {the 
Nicene  Creed)  :  — 

I  believe  in  one  God,  etc. 


The  Deacon. 


Stand  for  prayer. 


Peace  be  to  all. 


The  Priest. 


The  Deaco7i. 
Pray  for  those  who  present  the  offering. 
The  Priest  says  the  prayer  of  the  Oblation!' 

O  Sovereign  Lord,  Christ  Jesus  the  Word,  who 
art  equal  in  power  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy 
Spirit,  the  great  high  priest ;  the  bread  that  came 
down  from  heaven,  and  saved  our  souls  from 
ruin  ;  who  gavest  'rhyself,  a  spotless  Lamb,  for 
the  life  of  the  world  .  .  . 

We  pray  and  beseech  Thee,  O  Lord,  in  Thy 
mercy,  to  let  Thy  presence  rest  upon  this  bread 
and  these  chalices  ^  on  the  all-holy  table,  while 
angels,  archangels,  and  Thy  holy  priests  stand 
round  and  minister  for  Thy  glory  and  the  re- 
newing of  our  souls,  through  the  grace,  mercy, 
and  love  of  Thine  only-begotten  Son,  through 


*  [See  p.  541,  supra^ 

5  [i.e.,  in  due  order;  in  your  turn.] 

6  T^s  wpofleereius. 

7  [eVt  Tov  apToy  tovtov  xal  cTri  Ta  noTripia  ravra. 
worthy  language  in  this  place.] 


Most  note- 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


555 


whom  and  with  whom  be  glory  and  power  to 
Thee. 

And  when  the  People  say, 
And  from  the  Holy  Spirit  was  He  made  flesh  ; 

The  Priest  makes  the  sign  of  the  cross,^   and 
says :  — 

And  was  crucified  for  us. 

The  Priest  makes  the  sign  of  the  cross  again, ^ 
and  says  :  — 
And  to  the  Holy  Spirit. 

HI. 

Xlil.^  In  like  mariner  also,  as  after  the  Creed,'^ 
he  makes  the  sig?i  of  the  cross  upon  the  People, 
and  says  aloud:  — 

The  Lord  be  with  all. 

The  People. 

And  with  thy  spirit. 

The  Priest. 

Let  us  lift  up  our  hearts. 

The  People. 
We  lift  them  up  to  the  Lord. 

The  Priest. 
Let  us  give  thanks  to  the  Lord. 

The  People. 
It  is  meet  and  right.'* 

The  Priest  begins  the  Anaphoral prayer. 

O  Lord  God,  Sovereign  and  Almighty  Father, 
truly  it  is  meet  and  right,  holy  and  becoming, 
and  good  for  our  souls,  to  praise,  bless,  and 
thank  Tliee ;  to  make  open  confession  to  Thee 
by  day  and  night  with  voice,  lips,  and  heart  witli- 
out  ceasing ; 

To  Thee  who  hast  made  the  heaven,  and  all 
that  is  therein  ;  the  earth,  and  all  that  is  tiierein  ; 

The  sea,  fountains,  rivers,  lakes,  and  all  that 
is  therein ; 

To  Thee  who,  after  Thine  own  image  and 
likeness,  hast  made  man,  upon  whom  Thou  didst 
also  bestow  the  joys  of  Paradise  ; 

And  when  he  trespassed  against  Thee,  Thou 
didst  neither  neglect  nor  forsake  him,  good  Lord, 

But  didst  recall  him  by  Thy  law,  instruct  him 
by  Thy  i)rophets,  restore  and  renew  him  by  this 
awful,  life-giving,  and  heavenly  mystery. 

'  [Two  after  the  Creed  and  one  before.] 

2  The  Anaphora.  | 

3  [I  have  supposed  the  adverh  uxnrfp  (as)  in  this  place,  for  ob- 
vious reasons.     It  is  implied  in  the  text.] 

■♦  [See  p.  543,  supra.  Here  the  Edinburgh  inserts:  "  The  Dea- 
con.    .     .     ."  ] 


And  all  this  Thou  hast  done  by  Thy  Wisdom 
and  the  Light  of  truth.  Thine  only-begotten  Son, 
our  Lord,  God,  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ, 

Through  whom,  thanking  Thee  with  Him  and 
the  Holy  Spirit, 

We  offer  this  reasonable  and  bloodless  sacrifice, 
which  all  nations,  from  the  rising  to  the  setting 
of  the  sun,  from  the  north  and  the  south,  present 
to  Thee,  O  Lord  ;  for  great  is  Thy  name  among 
all  peoples,  and  in  all  places  are  incense,  sacrifice, 
and  oblation  offered  to  Thy  holy  name. 5 

XIV.  We  pray  and  beseech  Thee,  O  lover  of 
men,  O  good  Lord,^  remember  in  Thy  good 
mercy  the  Holy  and  only  Catholic  and  A[)ostolic 
Church  throughout  the  whole  world,  and  all  Thy 
people,  and  all  the  sheep  of  this  fold.'  Vouch- 
safe to  the  hearts  of  all  of  us  the  i:)eace  of  heaven, 
but  grant  us  also  the  peace  of  this  life. 

Guide  and  direct  in  all  peace  the  king,^  army, 
magistrates,  councils,^  peoples,  and  neighbour- 
hoods, and  all  our  outgoings  and  incomings. 

O  King  of  Peace,  grant  us  Thy  peace  in  unity 
and  love.  May  we  be  Thine,  O  Lord ;  for  we 
know  no  other  God  but  Thee,  and  name  no 
other  name  but  Thine.  Give  life  unto  the  souls 
of  all  of  us,  and  let  no  deadly  sin  prevail  against 
us,  or  against  all  Thy  people. 

Look  down  in  mercy  and  compassion,  O  Lord, 
and  heal  the  sick  among  Thy  j^eople.  Deliver 
them  and  us,  O  Lord,  from  sickness  and  disease, 
and  drive  away  the  spirit  of  weakness. 

Raise  up  those  who  have  been  long  afflicted, 
and  heal  those  who  are  vexed  with  unclean  spirits. 

Have  mercy  on  all  who  are  in  prison,  or  in 
mines,  or  on  trial,  or  condemned,  or  in  exile,  or 
crushed  by  cruel  bondage  or  tribute.  Deliver 
them,  O  Lord,  for  Thou  art  our  God,  who  set- 
test  the  captives  free ;  who  raisest  up  the  down- 
trotlden  ;  who  givest  hope  to  the  hopeless,  and 
help  to  the  helpless ;  who  liftest  up  the  fallen  ; 
who  givest  refuge  to  the  shipwrecked,  and  ven- 
geance to  the  oppressed. 

Pity,  relieve,  and  restore  every  Christian  soul 
that  is  afflicted  or  wandering. 

But  do  Thou,  O  Lord,  the  physician  of  our 
souls  and  bodies,  the  guardian  of  all  llesh.  look 
down,  and  by  Thy  saving  power  heal  all  the 
diseases  of  soul  and  body. 

Guide  and  prosper  our  brethren  who  liave 
gone  or  who  are  about  to  go  abroad.  ^Vhether 
they  travel  by  land,  or  river,  or  lake,  by  public 
road,  or  in  whatever  way  journeying,  bring  them 
everywhere  to  a  safe  and  tranquil  liaven.  Be 
pleased  to  be  with  them  by  land  and  sea,  and 
restore  them  in  health  and  joy  to  joyful  and 
healthful  homes. 


5  [The  reference  to  Mai.  i.  II,  always  noteworthy.   Vol.  i.  p.  484.] 
<"     Here  1  supply  an  omission,  in  italics.] 

7  tai  Ttavruiv  ru)i'  Tioifii'iw*'  crou.     John  x.  16] 

8  ()r  emperor.     [See  p.  551,  notes  5,  7.] 

9  ^uvAaf,  senates. 


556 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


Ever  defend,  O  Lord,  our  journey  through 
this  hfe  from  trouble  and  storm. 

Send  down  rich  and  copious  showers  on  the 
dry  and  thirsty  lands. 

Gladden  and  revive  the  face  of  the  earth,  that 
it  may  spring  forth  and  rejoice  in  the  raindrops. 

Make  the  waters  of  the  river  flow  in  full  stream. 

Gladden  and  revive  the  face  of  the  earth  with 
the  swelling  waters. 

Fill  all  the  channels  of  the  streams,  and  mul- 
tiply the  fruits  of  the  earth. 

Bless,  O  Lord,  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  and 
keep  them  safe  and  unharmed.  Fill  them  with 
seed,  and  make  them  ripe  for  the  harvest. 

Bless  even  now,  O  Lord,  Thy  yearly  crown  of 
blessing  for  the  sake  of  the  poor  of  Thy  people, 
the  widow,  the  orphan,  and  the  stranger,  and  for 
the  sake  of  all  of  us  who  have  our  hope  in  Thee 
and  call  upon  Thy  holy  name  ;  for  the  eyes  of 
all  are  upon  Thee,  and  Thou  givest  them  bread 
in  due  season. 

O  Thou  who  givest  food  to  all  flesh,  fill  our 
hearts  with  joy  and  gladness,  that  at  all  times, 
having  all  sufficiency,  we  may  abound  to  every 
good  work  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. 

O  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  defend  the 
kingdom  of  Thy  servant,  our  orthodox  and  Christ- 
loving  sovereign,'  whom  Thou  hast  deemed  wor- 
thy to  reign  over  this  land  in  peace,  courage,  and 
justice. 

Subdue  under  him,  O  Lord,  every  enemy  and 
adversary,  whether  at  home  or  abroad.  Gird 
on  Thy  shield  and  armour,  and  rise  to  his  aid. 
Draw  Thy  sword,  and  help  him  to  fight  against 
them  that  persecute  him.  Shield  him  in  the 
day  of  battle,  and  grant  that  the  fruit  of  his 
loins  may  sit  upon  his  throne. 

Be  kind  to  him,  O  Lord,  for  the  sake  of  Thy 
Holy  and  Apostolic  Church,  and  all  Thy  Christ- 
loving  peoj>lc,  that  we  too  in  his  j^eaceful  reign 
may  live  a  calm  and  tranquil  life,  in  all  reverence 
and  godliness. 

O  Lord  our  God,  give  peace  to  the  souls  of 
our  fathers  and  brethren  who  have  fallen  asleep 
in  Jesus,  remembering  our  forefathers  of  old,  our 
fathers,  patriarchs,  prophets,  aposdes,  martyrs, 
confessors,  bishops,  and  the  souls  of  all  the  holy 
and  just  men  who  have  died  in  the  Lord. 

Especially  remember  those  whose  memory  we 
this  day  celebrate,  and  our  holy  father  Mark,^  the 
apostle  and  evangelist,  who  has  shown  us  the 
way  of  salvation.3 

'  [Evidently  after  Constantine.] 

^  [Elucid.  II.  Such  passages  indicate,  of  course,  how  St.  Mark's 
name  came  to  be  given  to  this  liturgy.     Here  is  interpolated:]  — 

Hail!  thou  art  highly  favoured;  the  Lord  is  with  thee;  blessed 
art  thou  among  women,  and  blessed  is  the  fruit  of  thy  womb,  because 
thou  hast  brought  forth  the  Saviour  of  our  souls. 

Aloud. 
Especially  remember  our  all-holy,  pure,  and  blessed  Lady,  Mary 
the  Virgin  ^lother  of  God. 

3  [Hammond's  note  is  important,  p.  182;  and  see  Elucid.  H.] 


The  Deacon. 
Lord,  bless  us. 

The  Priest. 
The  Lord  will  bless  thee  in  His  grace,  now, 
henceforth,  and  for  evermore. 

Tlie  Deacon  reads  the  record  of  the  dead.* 
The  Priest  bows  and  prays. 

XV.  Give  peace,  O  Sovereign  Lord  our  God, 
to  the  souls  of  all  who  dwell  in  the  tabernacles 
of  Thy  saints.  Graciously  bestow  upon  them 
in  Thy  kingdom  Thy  promised  blessing,  which 
eye  hath  not  seen,  and  ear  hath  not  heard,  nor 
has  it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  what  Thou, 
O  God,  hast  prepared  for  those  who  love  Thy 
holy  name.  Give  peace  to  their  souls,  and  deem 
them  worthy  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 5 

Grant  that  we  may  end  our  lives  as  Christians, 
acceptable  unto  Thee  and  without  sin,  and  be 
pleased  to  give  us  part  and  lot  with  all  Thy 
saints. 

Accept,  O  God,  by  Thy  ministering  archangels 
at  Thy  holy,  heavenly,  and  reasonable  altar  in 
the  spacious  heavens,  the  thank-offerings  of  those 
who  offer  sacrifice  and  oblation,  and  of  those  who 
desire  to  offer  much  or  little,  in  secret  or  openly, 
but  have  it  not  to  give. 

Accept  the  thank-offerings  of  those  who  have 
presented  them  this  day,  as  Thou  didst  accept 
the  gifts  of  Thy  righteous  Abel : 

TJie  Priest  offers  incense,  and  says  :  ^'  — 

As  Thou  didst  accept  the  sacrifice  of  our  father 
Abraham,  the  incense  of  Zacharias,  the  alms  of 
Cornelius,  and  the  widow's  two  mites,  accept 
also  the  thank-offerings  of  these,  and  give  them 
for  the  things  of  time  the  things  of  eternity,  and 
for  the  things  of  earth  the  things  of  heaven. 
Defend,  O  Lord,  our  most  holy  and  blessed 
Papas  ^  A,  whom  Thou  hast  fore-ordained  to 
rule  over  Thy  Holy  CathoHc  and  Apostolic 
Church,  and  our  most  pious  Bishop  A,  that  they 
through  many  years  of  peace  may,  according  to 
Thy  holy  and  blessed  will,  fulfil  the  sacred  priest- 
hood committed  to  their  care,  and  dispense  aright 
the  word  of  truth. 

Remember  the  orthodox  bishops  everywhere, 
the  elders,  deacons,  sub-deacons,  readers,  sing- 
ers, monks,^  virgins,  widows,  and  laity. 

Remember,  O  Lord,  the  holy  city''  of  our 
God,  Jesus  Christ ;  and  the  imperial  city  ; '°  and 
this  city  of  ours,  and  all  cities  and  all  lands,  and 
the  peace  and  safety  of  those  who  dwell  therein 
in  the  orthodox  faith  of  Christ. 


•4  Ta  SlwtvxO:     [See  the  note  of  Hammond,  Glossary,  p.  378.] 

5  [See  Burbidge,  p.  34  zxiA. passim  to  p.  253.] 

6  [Burbidge,  p.  185.] 

7  The  Patriarch. 

5   [Subsequent  to  Antony.     Vol.  vi.  p.  279.] 
9  [Jerusalem:  a  token  of  antiquity.] 
'°  [Rome,  no  doubt.] 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


557 


Be  mindful,  O  Lord,  of  the  return  of  the  back- 
sliding, and  of  every  Christian  soul  that  is  afflicted 
and  oppressed,  and  in  need  of  Thy  divine  mercy 
and  help. 

Be  mindful,  O  Lord,  of  our  brethren  in  cap- 
tivity. Grant  that  they  may  find  mercy  and 
compassion  with  those  who  have  led  them  cap- 
tive. 

Be  mindful  also  of  us,  O  Lord,  Thy  sinful  and 
unworthy  servants,  and  blot  out  our  sins  in  Thy 
goodness  and  mercy. 

Be  mindful  also  of  me,  Thy  lowly,  sinful,  and 
unworthy  servant,  and  in  Thy  mercy  blot  out  my 
sins. 

Be  with  us,  O  Lord,  who  minister  unto  Thy 
holy  name. 

Bless  our  meetings,  O  Lord. 

Utterly  uproot  idolatry  from  the  world.' 

Crush  under  our  feet  Satan,  and  all  his  wicked 
influence. 

Humble  now,  as  at  all  times,  the  enemies  of 
Thy  Church. 

Lay  bare  their  pride. 

Speedily  show  them  their  weakness. 

Bring  to  nought  the  wicked  plots  they  contrive 
against  us. 

Arise,  O  Lord,  and  let  Thine  enemies  be  scat- 
tered, and  let  all  who  hate  Thy  holy  name  be 
put  to  flight. 

Do  Thou  bless  a  thousand  times  ten  thousand 
Thy  faithful  and  orthodox  people  while  they  do 
Thy  holy  will. 

The  Deacon. 
Let  those  who  are  seated  stand. 

The  Priest  says  the  foUowijig  prayer :  — 

Deliver  the  captive ;  rescue  the  distressed ; 
feed  the  hungry ;  comfort  the  faint-hearted ; 
convert  the  erring;  enlighten  the  darkened; 
raise  the  fallen ;  confirm  the  wavering ;  heal 
the  sick ;  and  guide  them  all,  good  Lord,  into 
the  way  of  salvation,  and  into  Thy  'sacred  fold. 
Deliver  us  from  our  iniquities ;  protect  and  de- 
fend us  at  all  times. 

The  Deacon. 
Turn  to  the  east. 

The  Priest  bows  and  prays. 
For  Thou  art  far  above  all  principality,  and 
power,  and  might,  and  dominion,  and  every 
name  that  is  named,  not  only  in  this  world,  but 
in  that  which  is  to  come.  Round  Thee  stand 
ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand,  and  thousands 
of  thousands  of  holy  angels  and  hosts  of  arch- 
angels ;  and  Thy  two  most  honoured  creatures, 
the  many-eyed  cherubim  and  the  six-winged 
seraphim.     With  twain  they  cover  their  faces. 


'  [Agrees  with  the  partial  triumphs  of  a.d   325.] 


and  with  twain  they  cover  their  feet,  and  with 
twain  they  do  fly ;  and  they  cry  one  to  another 
for  ever  with  the  voice  of  praise,  and  glorify 
Thee,  O  Lord,  singing  aloud  the  triumphal  and 
thrice-holy  ^  hymn  to  Thy  great  glory  :  — 

Holy,    holy,    holy,    Lord    God    of    Sabaoth. 
Heaven  and  earth  are  full  of  Thy  glory. 

i^Aloud.) 
Thou  dost  ever  sanctify  all  men  ;  but  with  all 
who   glorify  Thee,   receive   also,    O   Sovereign 
Lord,  our  sanctification,  who  with  them  cele- 
brate Thy  praise,  and  say  :  — 

The  People. 
Holy,  holy,  holy  Lord. 

The  Priest  makes  the  sign  of  the  cross  over  the 
sacred  mysteries. 
XVI.  For  truly  heaven  and  earth  are  fiill  of 
Thy  glory,  through  the  manifestation  of  our 
Lord  and  God  and  ♦Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Fill, 
O  God,  this  sacrifice  with  Thy  blessing,  through 
the  inspiration  of  Thy  all-holy  Spirit.  For  the 
Lord  Himself,  our  God  and  universal  King, 
Christ  Jesus,  reclining  at  meat  the  same  night 
on  which  He  delivered  Himself  up  for  our  sins 
and  died  in  the  flesh  for  all,  took  bread  in  His 
holy,  pure,  and  immaculate  hands,  and  lifting 
His  eyes  to  His  Father,  our  God,  and  the  God 
of  all,  gave  thanks ;  and  when  He  had  blessed, 
hallowed,  and  broken  the  bread,  gave  it  to  His 
holy  and  blessed  disciples  and  apostles,  saying  :  — 


Take,  eat. 


{Aloud.) 
The  Deacon. 


Pray  earnestly. 

The  Priest  (aloud). 

For  this  is  my  l)ody,  whicli  is  broken  for  you, 
and  divided  for  the  remission  of  sins. 


Amen. 


The  People. 


The  Priest  prays. 

After  the  same  manner  also,  when  He  had 
supped.  He  took  the  cup  of  wine  mingled  with 
water,  and  lifting  His  eyes  to  Thee,  His  Father, 
our  God,  and  the  God  of  all,  gave  thanks  ;  and 
when  He  had  blessed  and  filled  it  with  the  Holy 
Spirit,  gave  it  to  His  holy  and  blessed  disciples 
and  apostles,  saying  :  — 

(Aloud.) 
Drink  ye  all  of  it. 

The  Deacon. 
Pray  earnestly  again. 


2  The  Trisagion. 


558 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


The  Priest  {aloud) . 
For  this  is  my  blood  of  the  new  testament, 
which  is  shed  for  you  and  for  many,  and  distrib- 
uted among  }"0u  for  the  remission  of  sins. 

The  People. 

Amen. 

The  Priest  prays  thus :  — 

This  do  ye  in  remembrance  of  me  ;  for  as 
often  as  ye  eat  this  bread  and  drink  this  cup,  ye 
do  show  forth  my  death  and  acknowledge  my 
resurrection  and  ascension  until  I  come.  O 
Sovereign  and  Almighty  Lord,  King  of  heaven, 
while  we  show  forth  '  the  death  of  Thine  only- 
begotten  Son,  our  Lord,  God,  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ,  and  acknowledge  His  blessed  resurrec- 
tion from  the  dead  on  the  third  day,  we  do  also 
openly  declare  His  ascension  into  heaven,  and 
His  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  Thee,  God  and 
Father,  and  await  His  second  terrible  and  dread- 
ful coming,  in  which  He  will  come  to  judge 
righteously  the  quick  and  the  dead,  and  to  ren- 
der to  each  man  according  to  his  works. 

XVII.  O  Lord  our  God,  we  have  placed  be- 
fore Thee  what  is  Thine  from  Thine  own  mer- 
cies. We  pray  and  beseech  Thee,  O  good  and 
merciful  God,  to  send  down  from  Thy  holy 
heaven,  from  the  mansion  Thou  hast  prepared, 
and  from  Thine  infinite  bosom,  the  Paraclete 
Himself,-  holy,  powerful,  and  life-giving,  the 
Spirit  of  truth,  who  spake  in  the  law,  the  apos- 
tles, and  prophets  ;  who  is  everywhere  present, 
and  filleth  all  things,  freely  working  sanctification 
in  whom  He  will  with  Thy  good  pleasure  ;  one 
in  His  nature  ;  manifold  in  His  working ;  the 
fountain  of  divine  blessing ;  of  like  substance  ^ 
with  Thee,  and  proceeding  from  Thee  ;  sitting 
\vith  Thee  on  the  throne  of  Thy  kingdom,  and  with 
Thine  only-begotten  Son,  our  Lord  and  God  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Send  down  upon  us  also, 
and  upon  this  bread  and  upon  these  chalices. 
Thy  Holy  Spirit,  that  by  His  all-powerful  and 
divine  influence  He  may  sanctify  and  consecrate 
them,  and  make  this  bread  the  body.^ 

The  People. 
Amen. 

The  Priest  {aloud). 
And  this  cup  the  blood  of  the  new  testament, 
of  the  very  Lord,  and  God,  and  Saviour,  and 
universal  King  Christ  Jesus. 

The  Deacon. 
Deacons,  come  down. 

The  Priest  {aloud). 
That  to  all  of  us  who  partake  thereof  they 
may  tend  unto  faith,  sobriety,  healing,  temper- 


ance, sanctification,  the  renewal  of  soul,  body, 
and  spirit,  participation  in  the  blessedness  of 
eternal  life  and  immortality,  the  glory  of  Thy 
most  holy  name,  and  the  remission  of  sins,  that 
Thy  most  holy,  precious,  and  glorious  name  may 
be  praised  and  glorified  in  this  as  in  all  things. 

The  People. 


As  it  was  and  is. 

The  Priest. 
XVIII.  Peace  be  to  all. 


Pray. 


The  Deacon. 


The  Priest  prays  in  secret. 


The  Oblation,  Karr'  i^oxi\v.'\ 

The  Invocation.] 

]0u  all  this,  see  Hammond,  notes  i  and  2,  p.  187.] 


O  God  of  light,  Father  of  life.  Author  of  grace, 
Creator  of  worlds.  Founder  of  knowledge.  Giver 
of  wisdom.  Treasure  of  hoHness,  Teacher  of  pure 
prayers.  Benefactor  of  our  souls,  who  givest  to 
the  faint-hearted  who  put  their  trust  in  Thee 
those  things  into  which  the  angels  desire  to  look  : 
O  Sovereign  Lord,  who  hast  brought  us  up  from 
the  depths  of  darkness  to  light,  who  hast  given 
us  life  from  death,  who  hast  graciously  bestowed 
upon  us  freedom  from  slavery,  who  hast  scat- 
tered the  darkness  of  sin  within  us,  through  the 
presence  of  Thine  only-begotten  Son,  do  Thou 
now  also,  through  the  visitation  of  Thy  all-holy 
Spirit,  enlighten  the  eyes  of  our  understanding, 
that  we  may  partake  without  fear  of  condemna- 
tion of  this  heavenly  and  immortal  food,  and 
sanctify  us  wholly  in  soul,  body,  and  spirit,  that 
with  Thy  holy  disciples  and  apostles  we  may 
say  this  prayer  to  Thee  :  Our  Father  who  art  in 
heaven,  etc. 

{Aloud.) 

And  grant,  O  Sovereign  Lord,  in  Thy  mercy, 
that  we  with  freedom  of  speech,  without  fear  of 
condemnation,  with  pure  heart  and  enlightened 
soul,  with  fece  that  is  not  ashamed,  and  with 
hallowed  lips,  may  venture  to  call  upon  Thee, 
the  holy  God  who  art  in  heaven,  as  our  Father, 
and  say  :  — 

The  People. 

Our  Father  who  art  in  heaven,  etc. 

The  Priest  prays :  '*  — 

Verily,  Lord,  Lord,  lead  us  not  into  tempta- 
tion, but  deliver  us  from  evil ;  for  Thy  abundant 
mercy  showeth  that  we  through  our  great  infirm- 
ity are  unable  to  resist  it. 

Grant  that  we  may  find  a  way  whereby  we 
may  be  able  to  withstand  temptation  ;  for  Thou 
hast  given  us  power  to  tread  upon  serpents,  and 
scorpions,  and  all  the  power  of  the  enemy. 


*  [The  Embolisms  =  ejaculations.] 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


559 


{Aloud.) 
For  Thine  is  tlie  kingdom  and  power. 

The  People. 
Amen. 

The  Priest. 
XIX.  Peace  be  to  all. 

The  Deacon. 
Bow  your  heads  to  Jesus.' 

The  People. 
Thou,  Lord. 

The  Priest  prays. 
O  Sovereign  and  Ahnighty  Lord,^  who  sittest 
upon  the  cherubim,  and  art  glorified  by  the 
seraphim;  who  hast  made  the  heaven  out  of 
waters,  and  adorned  it  with  choirs  of  stars  ;  who 
hast  placed  an  unbodied  host  of  angels  in  the 
highest  heavens  to  sing  Thy  praise  for  ever; 
before  Thee  have  we  bowed  our  souls  and  bodies 
in  token  of  our  bondage.  We  beseech  Thee  to 
repel  the  dark  assaults  of  sin  from  our  under- 
standing, and  to  gladden  our  minds  with  the 
divine  radiance  of  Thy  Holy  Spirit,  that,  filled 
with  the  knowledge  of  Thee,  we  may  worthily 
partake  of  the  mercies  set  before  us,  the  pure 
body  and  precious  blood  of  Thine  only-begotten 
Son,  our  Lord  and  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 
Pardon  all  our  sins  in  Thy  abundant  and  un- 
searchable goodness,  through  the  grace,  mercy, 
and  love  of  Thine  only-begotten  Son  :  ^ 

{Aloud.) 
Through  whom  and  with  whom  be  glory  and 
power  to   Thee,  with   the   all-holy,  good,  and 
life-giving  Spirit. 

The  Priest. 
XX.  Peace  be  to  all. 

The  Deacon. 
With  the  fear  of  God. 

The  Priest  prays.  ■ 
O  holy,  highest,  awe-inspiring  God,  who  dwell- 
est  among  the  saints,  sanctify  us  by  the  word  of 
Thy  grace  and  by  the  inspiration  of  Thy  all-holy 
Spirit;  for  Thou  hast  said,  O  Lord  our  God, 
Be  ye  holy ;  for  I  am  holy.  O  Word  of  God, 
past  finding  out,  consubstantial  •♦  and  co-eternal 
with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  sharer 
of  their  sovereignty,  accept  the  pure  song  which 
cherubim  and  seraphim,  and  the  unworthy  lips 
of  Thy  sinful  and  unworthy  servant,  sing  aloud. 

The  People. 
Lord,  have  mercy  ;  Lord,  have  mercy  ;  Lord, 
have  mercy. 

'   [Phil.  ii.  10.     See  Hammond,  note  i,  p.  48.] 
^   [rrnyer  of  Humble  Access.] 
3  fCompire  Hammond,  p.  79. J 
^  [Post-Nicene.J 


The  Priest  {aloud) . 
Holy  things  for  the  holy.s 

The  People. 
One   Father  holy,  one  Son  holy,  one  Spirit 
holy,  m  the  unity  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     Amen.^ 

Tlie  Deacon. 
For  salvation  and  help. 

The  Priest  makes  the  sign  of  the  cross  upon  the 
people,  and  saith  in  a  loud  voice :  — 
The  Lord  be  with  all. 

The  Priest  breaks  the  bread,  and  saith  :  — 
Praise  ye  God. 

The  Priest  divides  it  among  those  present,  and 
saith  :  — 

The  Lord  will  bless  and  help  you  through  His 
great  mercy. 

The  Priest  says  :  — 
Command. 

The  Clei-gy  say  :  — 
The  Holy  Spirit  commands  and  sanctifies. 

The  Priest. 
Lo,  they  are  sanctified  and  consecrated. 

The  Clergy. 
One  holy  7  Father,  etc.  {tlirice). 

The  Priest  says  :  — 
The  Lord  be  with  all. 

Tlie  Clergy. 
And  with  thy  spirit. 

The  Priest  says :  — 
The  Lord  Himself  hath  blessed  it. 

The  Priest  partakes,  and  prays. 
According  to  Thy  loving-kindness,^  etc. 

Or, 

As  the  hart  panteth  after  the  water-brooks,^ 
etc. 

IVhen  he  gives  the  bread  to  the  clergy,  he  says :  — 
The  holy  body. 

And  when  he  gives  the  chalice,  he  says  :  — 
The  precious  blood  of  our  Lord,  and  God, 
and  Saviour. 


s  [Elucidation  HI.] 

b  [Perhaps  the  Triad  is  meant  at  note  10,  p.  553.] 

7  (See  p.  567,  tn/ra.\ 

8  [Ps.  xlii.] 

9  [Ps.  .slii.  I.] 


56o 


EARLY    LITURGIES. 


IV. 
After  the  service  is  completed,  the  Deacon  says :  — 
XXI.  Stand  for  prayer.' 


The  Priest. 


Peace  be  to  all. 


77/1?  Deacon. 


Prav. 


The  Priest  says  the  prayer  of  thanksgiving. 
O  Sovereign  Lord  our  God,  we  thank  Thee 
that  we  have  partaken  of  Thy  holy,  pure,  im- 
mortal, and  heavenly  mysteries,  which  Thou  hast 
given  for  our  good,  and  for  the  sanctification  and 
salvation  of  our  souls  and  bodies.  We  pray 
and  beseech  Thee,  O  Lord,  to  grant  in  Thy  good 
mercy,  that  by  partaking  of  the  holy  body  and 
precious  blood  of  Thine  only-begotten  Son,  we 
may  ];iave  faith  that  is  not  ashamed,  love  that  is 
unfeigned,  fulness  of  holiness,  power  to  eschew 
evil  and  keep  Thy  commandments,  provision  for 
eternal  life,  and  an  acceptable  defence  before 
the  awful  tribunal  of  Thy  Christ : 

In  a  loud  voice. 
Through  whom  and  with  whom  be  glory  and 
power   to   Thee,  with   Thy  all- holy,  good,  and 
life-giving  Spirit. 

TTie  Priest  then  turns  to  the  people,  and  says  :  — 

xxn.  O  mightiest  King,  co-eternal  with  the 
Father,  who  by  Thy  might  hast  vanquished  hell 
and  trodden  death  under  foot,  who  hast  bound 
the  strong  man,  and  by  Thy  miraculous  power 
and  the  enlightening  radiance  of  Thy  unspeak- 
able Godhead  hast  raised  Adam  from  the  tomb, 
send  forth  Thy  invisible  right  hand,  which  is  full 
of  blessing,  and  bless  us  all. 

Pity  us,  O  Lord,  and  strengthen  us  by  Thy 
divine  power. 

Take  away  from  us  the  sinful  and  wicked  in- 
fluence of  carnal  desire. 

Let  the  light  shine  into  our  souls,  and  dispel 
the  surrounding  darkness  of  sin. 

'  [Post-Communion.] 


Unite  us  to  the  all-blessed  assembly  that  is 
well-pleasing  unto  Thee  ;  for  through  Thee  and 
with  Thee,  all  praise,  honour,  power,  adoration, 
and  thanksgiving  are  due  unto  the  Father  and 
the  Holy  Spirit,  now,  henceforth,  and  for  ever- 
more. 

The  Deacon. 

Depart  in  peace : 

The  People. 
In  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

TJie  Priest  {aloud) . 
XXIII.  The  love  of  God  the  Father ;  the  grace 
of  the  Son,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  the  commun- 
ion and  gift  of  the  All-holy  Spirit,  be  with  us  all, 
now,  henceforth,  and  for  evermore. 


Amen. 


The  People. 
Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord. 


The  Priest  prays  in  the  sacristy,  and  says  :  — 

O  Lord,  Thou  hast  given  us  sanctification  by 
partaking  of  the  all-holy  body  and  precious 
blood  of  Thine  only-begotten  Son  ;  give  us  the 
grace  and  gift  of  the  All-holy  Spirit.  Enable  us 
to  lead  blameless  lives ;  and  guide  us  unto  the 
perfect  redemption,  and  adoption,  and  the  ever- 
lasting joys  of  the  world  to  come.  For  Thou  art 
our  sanctification,  and  we  ascribe  glory  unto 
Thee,  the  Father,  and  the  Son,  and  the  All-holy 
Spirit,  now,  henceforth,  and  for  evermore. 


Amen. 

Peace  be  to  all. 


The  People. 
The  Priest. 


The  People. 
And  to  thy  spirit. 

The  Priest  dismisses  them,  and  says  :  — 

May  God  bless,  who  blesseth  and  sanctifieth, 
who  defendeth  and  preserveth  us  all  through  the 
partaking  of  His  holy  mysteries ;  and  who  is 
blessed  for  ever.     Amen. 


EARLY    LITURGIES. 


561 


THE   LITURGY  OF   THE   BLESSED   APOSTLES. 

COMPOSED    BY   ST.    AD.^US    AND   ST.    MARIS,    TEACHERS    OF    THE   EASTERNS.' 


1.2  First:  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest,  etc. 
Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven. 

Praye7\ 

Strengthen,  O  our  Lord  and  God,  our  weak- 
ness through  Thy  mercy,  that  we  may  administer 
the  holy  mystery  which  has  been  given  for  the 
renovation  and  salvation  of  our  degraded  nature, 
through  the  mercies  of  Thy  beloved  Son  the 
Lord  of  all. 

On  comtnon  days. 

Adored,  glorified,  lauded,  celebrated,  exalted, 
and  blessed  in  heaven  and  on  earth,  be  the 
adorable  and  glorious  name  of  Thine  ever-glo- 
rious Trinity,  O  Lord  of  all. 

On  common  days  they  sing  the  Psalm  (xv.), 
Lord,  who  shall  dwell  in  Thy  tabernacle?  en- 
tire with  its  canon,^  of  the  mystery  of  the  sac- 
ramejits. 

{Aloud.) 

Who  shall  shout  with  joy?  etc. 

Prayer. 

II.  Before  the  resplendent  throne  of  Thy  ma- 
jesty, O  Lord,  and  the  exalted  and  sublime  throne 
of  Thy  glory,  and  on  the  awful  seat  of  the 
strength  of  Thy  love  and  the  propiatoiy  altar 
which  Thy  will  hath  established,  in  the  region  of 
Thy  pasture,-*  with  thousands  of  cherubim  prais- 
ing Thee,  and  ten  thousands  of  seraphim  sancti- 
fying Thee,  we  draw  near,  adore,  thank,  and 
glorify  Thee  always,  O  Lord  of  all. 

On  commemorations  and  Fridays. 

Thy  name,  great  and  holy,  illustrious  and 
blessed,  the  blessed  and  incomprehensible  name 
of  Thy  glorious  Trinity,  andThy  kindness  to  our 
race,  we  ought  at  all  times  to  bless,  adore,  and 
glorify,  O  Lord  of  all. 


'  [Here  the  Edinburgh  editors  give  the  following  title  from  their 
copy,  without  stating  whence  it  is:  "  The  Liturgy  of  the  Holy  Apos- 
tles, or  Order  of  the  Sacraments."] 

-  [I  have  made  slight  corrections,  after  Rcnaudot,  as  given  in 
Hammond,  from  Litt    Orie?it.  Coll.,  tom.  li   pp.  578-592.] 

3  Suiccr  says  that  a  canon  is  a  psalm  or  hymn  {canticutii)  wont 
to  be  sung  on  certain  days,  ordinarily  and  as  if  by  rule.  He  quotes 
Zonaras,  who  says  that  a  canon  is  metrical,  and  is  composed  of  nine 
odes.  See  Sophocles,  Glossary  of  Byzantine  Greek,  Introduction, 
§  43.  The  canon  of  the  Nestorian  Church  is  somewhat  different. 
See  Neale,  General  hitrodttction  to  the  History  0/  the  Eastern 
Church,  p   979. 

*  [Rev.  V.  6.     The  Apocalypse  saturates  these  liturgies.] 


Rcsponsory  s  at  the  chancel,  as  above. 

Who  commanded,  etc. 
To  the  priest,  etc. 

Prayer. 

How  breathes  in  us,  O  our  Lord  and  God, 
the  sweet  fragrance  of  the  sweetness  of  Thy 
love;  illumined  are  our  souls,  through  the 
knowledge  of  Thy  truth :  may  we  be  rendered 
worthy  of  receiving  the  manifestation  of  Thy 
beloved  from  Thy  holy  heavens  :  there  shall  we 
render  thanks  unto  Thee,  and,  in  the  meantime, 
glorify  Thee  without  ceasing  in  Thy  Church, 
crowned  and  filled  with  every  aid  and  blessing, 
because  Thou  art  Lord  and  Father,  Creator  of 
all. 

in.  Prayer  of  Incense. 

We  shall  repeat  the  hymn  to  Thy  glorious 
Trinity,  O  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost, 

On  fast-days. 
And  on  account,  etc. 

At  the  commemoration  of  saints. 

Thou,  O  Lord,  art  truly  the  raiser  up  of  our 
bodies  :  Thou  art  the  good  Saviour  of  our  souls, 
and  the  secure  preserver  of  our  life  ;  and  we 
ought  to  thank  Thee  continually,  to  adore  and 
glorify  Thee,  O  Lord  of  all. 

At  the  lessons.^' 

Holy  art  Thou,  worthy  of  praise,  mighty,  im- 
mortal, who  dwellest  in  the  holies,  and  Thy  will 
resteth  in  them  :  have  regard  unto  us,  O  Lord ; 
be  merciful  unto  us,  and  pity  us,  as  Thou  art  our 
helper  in  all  circumstances,  O  Lord  of  all. 

IV.  At  the  aJ>ost/e.^ 

Enlighten,  O  our  Lord  and  God,  the  move- 
ments of  our  meditations  to  hear  and  understand 
the  sweet  listenings  to  Thy  life-giving  and  divine 


S  "  The  ps.alm,  or  verses  of  a  psalm,  sung  after  the  Epistle,  was 
always  entitled  i>/-n</««/,  from  being  chanted  on  the  steps  (i'r-rtr/wi) 
of  the  pulpit.  When  sung  by  one  person  without  interruption,  it  w.is 
called  tract  us  ;  when  chanted  alternately  by  several  singers,  it  was 
termed  responsory."  —  Palmer,  Ori^incs  Liturgicir,  vol.  ii.  p  .46, 

note.  .  rn         L 

<"  I.e.,  while  the  lesson  from  the  Old  Testament  is  read.  [But  the 
Malabar  Liturgy  and  Dr.  Badger's  translation  insert  before  this,  ac- 
cording to  Hammond,  the  Sattctiis  Dcus,  Sanctus /ortis,  etc.] 

1  i.e.,  while  the  lesson  from  the  Apostolical  Epistles  is  read. 


562 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


commands  ;  and  grant  unto  us  through  Thy  grace 
and  mercy  to  gather  from  them  the  assurance  of 
love,  and  hope,  and  salvation  suitable  to  soul  and 
body,  and  we  shall  sing  to  Thee  everlasting  glory 
without  ceasing  and  always,  O  Lord  of  all. 

On  fast-days. 
To  Thee,  the  wise  governor,  etc. 

V.  Descending,  he  shall  salute  the  Gospel,  saymg 
this  prayer  before  the  altar. 

Thee,  the  renowned  seed  of  Thy  Father,  and 
the  image  of  the  person  of  Thy  Father,  who  wast 
revealed  in  the  body  of  our  humanity,  and  didst 
arise  to  us  in  the  light  of  Thy  annunciation,  Thee 
we  thank,  adore,  etc. 

And  after  the  proclat?iation  : '  — 

Thee,  O  Lord  God  Almighty,  we  beseech  and 
entreat,  perfect  with  us  Thy  grace,  and  pour  out 
through  our  hands  Thy  gift,  the  pity  and  com- 
passion of  Thy  divinity.  May  they  be  to  us  for 
the  propitiation  of  the  offences  of  Thy  people, 
and  for  the  forgiveness  of  the  sins  of  the  entire 
flock  of  Thy  pasture,  through  Thy  grace  and 
tender  mercies,  O  good  friend  of  men,  O  Lord 
of  all. 

VI.   The  Deacons  say :  — 

Bow  your  heads. 

Tlie  Priest  says  this  secret  prayer  in  the  sanctu- 
ary :^  — 

O  Lord  God  Omnipotent,  Thine  is  the  Holy 
Catholic  Church,  inasmuch  as  Thou,  through 
the  great  passion  of  Thy  Christ,  didst  buy  the 
sheep  of  Thy  pasture ;  and  from  the  grace  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  indeed  of  one  nature 
with  Thy  glorious  divinity,  are  granted  the  de- 
grees of  the  true  priestly  ordination  ;  and  through 
Thy  clemency  Thou  didst  vouchsafe,  O  Lord,  to 
make  our  weakness  spiritual  members  in  the 
great  body  of  Thy  Holy  Church,  that  we  might 
administer  spiritual  aid  to  faithful  souls.  Now, 
O  Lord,  perfect  Thy  grace  with  us,  and  pour 
out  Thy  gift  through  our  hands  :  and  may  Thy 
tender  mercies  and  the  clemency  of  Thy  divinity 
be  upon  us,  and  upon  the  people  whom  Thou 
hast  chosen  for  Thyself. 

{Aloud.) 

And  grant  unto  us,  O  Lord,  through  Thy 
clemency,  that  we  may  all  together,  and  equally 
every  day  of  our  life,  please  Thy  divinity,  and 
be  rendered  worthy  of  the  aid  of  Thy  grace  to 
offer  Thee  praise,  honour,  thanksgiving,  and 
adoration  at  all  times,  O  Lord. 


*  Renaudot  understands  by  the  proclamation  the  reading  aloud 
of  the  Gospel.  [According  to  Hammond,  the  deacon's  bidding  prayer, 
during  which,  in  Dr.  Badger's  translation   the  Offertory  is  said  also.] 

^  Bema. 


VII.  And  the  Deacons  ascend  to  the  altar,  and 

say :  — 
He  who  has  not  received  baptism,  etc.^ 

And  the  Priest  begins  the  responsorv  of  the  7?iys- 
teries,''  and  the  Sacristan  and  Deacon  place  the 
disk  and  the  chalice  upon  the  altar.  The  Priest 
crosses  his  hands,  and  says  .-5  — 

We  offer  praise  to  Thy  glorious  Trinity  at  all 
times  and  for  ever. 

And  proceeds :  — 
May  Christ,  who  was  offered  for  our  salvation, 
and  commanded  us  to  commemorate  His  death 
and  His  resurrection.  Himself  receive  this  sacri- 
fice from  the  hands  of  our  weakness,  through 
His  grace  and  mercies  for  ever.     Amen. 

And  proceeds :  — 

Laid  are  the  renowned  holy  and  life-giving 
mysteries  upon  the  altar  of  the  mighty  Lord, 
even  until  His  advent,  for  ever.     Amen. 

Praise,  etc. 

Thy  memory,  etc. 

Our  Father,  etc. 

The  apostles  of  the  Father,  etc. 

Upon  the  holy  altar,  etc. 

They  who  have  slept,  etc. 

Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  etc.^ 

THE    CREED. 7 

VIII.  The  Priest  draws  near  to  celebrate,  and 
thrice  bows  before  the  altar,  the  middle  of 
which  he  kisses,  then  the  right  and  the  left  horn 
of  the  altar ;  and  bows  to  the  Gospel  side,  and 
says  :  — 

Bless,  O  Lord,  etc. 

Pray  for  me,  my  fathers,  brethren,  and  mas- 
ters, that  God  may  grant  unto  me  the  capability 
and  power  to  perform  this  service  to  which  I 
have  drawn  near,  and  that  this  oblation  may  be 
accepted  from  the  hands  of  my  weakness,  for 
myself,  for  you,  and  for  the  whole  body  of  the 
Holy  Catholic  Church,  through  His  grace  and 
mercies  for  ever.     Amen. 

And  they  respond  :  — 
May  Christ  listen  to  thy  prayers,  and  be 
pleased  with  thy  sacrifice,  receive  thy  oblation, 
and  honour  thy  priesthood,  and  grant  unto  us, 
through  thy  mediation,^  the  pardon  of  our  of- 
fences, and  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins,  through 
His  grace  and  mercies  for  ever. 


3  The  Malabar  Liturgy  fills  up,  "  let  him  depart." 
"Here  begins  the  Liturgy  of  the  Faithful.] 
The  Offertory.] 

Here  the  Edinburgh  editors  insert  the  title  of  this  liturgy  given 
on  p.  561,  supra,  and  add:  "  In  the  Syriac  copy,  70,  Bihlioth.  Reg., 
this  title  does  not  occur,  the  service  going  forward  without  interruption. 
—  Etheridge."     See  Elucidation  IV.] 
7  [.According  to  Badger.] 
^  [2  Cor.  V.  19,  20.] 


EARLY    LITURGIES. 


56: 


Presently  he  bows  at  the  other  side,  uttering  the 
same  words ;  and  they  respond  in  the  same 
manner:  then  he  daws  to  the  altar,  and 
says  :  — 

God,  Lord  of  all,  be  with  us  through  His  grace 
and  mercies  for  ever.     Amen. 

And  bowing  towards  the  Deacon,  who  is  on  the 
left  {^Epistle  side) ,  he  says  :  — 

God,  the  Lord  of  all,  confirm  thy  words,  and 
secure  to  thee  peace,  and  accept  this  oblation 
from  my  hands  for  me,  for  thee,  for  the  whole 
body  of  the  Holy  Catholic  Church,  and  for  the 
entire  world,  through  His  grace  and  mercies 
for  ever. 

He  kneels  at  the  altar,  and  says  in  secret : — 

IX.  O  our  Lord  and  God,  look  not  on  the 
multitude  of  our  sins,  and  let  not  Thy  dignity 
be  turned  away  on  account  of  the  heinousness 
of  our  iniquities ;  but  through  Thine  unspeak- 
able grace  sanctify  this  sacrifice  of  Thine,  and 
grant  through  it  power  and  capability,  so  that 
Thou  mayest  forget  our  many  sins,  and  be  mer- 
ciful when  Thou  shalt  appear  at  the  end  of  time, 
in  the  man  whom  Thou  hast  assumed  from 
among  us,  and  we  may  find  before  Thee  grace 
and  mercy,  and  be  rendered  worthy  to  praise 
Thee  with  spiritual '  assemblies. 

He  rises,  and  says  this  prayer  in  secret:  — 

We  thank  Thee,  O  our  Lord  and  God,  for  the 
abundant  riches  of  Thy  grace  to  us : 

And  he  proceeds  :  — 

Us  who  were  sinful  and  degraded,  on  account 
of  the  multitude  of  Thy  clemency.  Thou  hast 
made  worthy  to  celebrate  the  holy  mysteries  of 
the  body  and  blood  of  Thy  Christ,  We  beg 
aid  from  Thee  for  the  strengthening  of  our  souls, 
that  in  perfect  love  and  true  faith  we  may  ad- 
minister Thy  gift  to  us. 

Catio7t. 
And  we  shall  ascribe  to  Thee  praise,  glory, 
thanksgiving,  and  adoration,  now,  always,  and 
for  ever  and  ever. 

JJe  signs  himself  with  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and 
they  respond:  — 
Amen. 

X.  And  he  proceeds  :  — 
Peace  be  with  you  : 

TJiey  respond :  — 
With  thee  and  with  thy  spirit. 


'  Intellectualibus.     [This  prayer  not  well  rendered.] 


And  they  give  the  {kiss  of)  peace  to  each  other, 
and  say  :  — 
For  all :  ^ 

The  Deacon  says  :  — 

Let  us  thank,  entreat,  and  beseech. 

The  Priest  says  this  prayer  in  secret :  — 

O  Lord,  mighty  God,  help  my  weakness 
through  Thy  clemency  and  the  aid  of  Thy 
grace  ;  and  make  me  worthy  of  offering  before 
Thee  this  oblation,  as  for  the  common  aid  of 
all,  and  to  the  praise  of  Thy  Trinity,  O  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost. 

Anoth  er  prayer.^ 

O  our  Lord  and  God,  restrain  our  thoughts, 
that  they  wander  not  amid  the  vanities  of  this 
world.  O  Lord  our  God,  grant  that  I  may  be 
united  to  the  affection  of  Thy  love,  unworthy 
though  I  be.     Glory  be  to  Thee,  O  Christ. 

Ascend  into  the  chamber  of  Thy  renowned 
light,  O  Lord ;  sow  in  me  the  good  seed  of 
humility ;  and  under  the  wings  of  Thy  grace 
hide  me  through  Thy  mercy.  If  Thou  wert  to 
mark  iniquities,  O  Lord,  who  shall  stand?  Be- 
cause there  is  mercy  with  Thee. 

[  The  Priest  says  the  following  prayer  in 
secret:^ — 

O  mother  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  beseech 
for  me  the  only-begotten  Son,  who  was  born  of 
thee,  to  forgive'  me  my  offences  and  my  sins, 
and  to  accept  from  my  feeble  and  sinful  hands 
this  sacrifice  which  my  weakness  offers  upon  this 
altar,  through  thy  intercession  for  me,  O  holy 
mother.] 

XI.  When  the  Deacon  shall  say.  With  watchful- 
ness and  care,  etc.,  immediately  the  Priest 
j-ises  Zip  and  uncovers  the  sacraments,  taking 
a'uay  the  veil  with  which  they  were  covered : 
he  blesses  the  incense,  and  says  a  canon  with 
a  loud  voice :  — 

The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the 
love  of  God  the  Father,  and  the  communion  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  be  with  us  all,  now,  etc.5 

//(•  signs  the  sacraments,  and  they  respond :  — 
Amen. 

The  Priest  proceeds  :  — 
Lift  up  your  minds  : 

They  respond:  — 
They  are  towards  Thee,  O  God  of  Abraham, 
Isaac,  and  Ism-  '   ^^    '  ^rious  King. 


2  i  e.   Catholics.     I.m  ur  «  .ul  Catholics  is  omitted  in  most  MSS. 

3  Wii'ich  is  said  also  in  the  Liturgy  of  Nestoriiis. 

■«  In  another  MS.     (Kvidently  corrupt  and  mediaevaLJ 
5  [Here  begins  the  Anaphora. J 


5^4 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


The  Priest. 

The  oblation  is  offered  to  God,  the  Lord  of 
all. 

They  respond :  — 

It  is  meet  and  right. 

The  Deacon. 
Peace  be  with  you. 

The  Priest  puts  oti  the  i?uefise,  and  says  this 
prayer :  — 
O  Lord,  Lord,  grant  me  an  open  countenance 
before  Thee,  that  with  the  confidence  which  is 
from  Thee  we  may  fulfil  this  awful  and  divine 
sacrifice  with  consciences  free  from  all  iniquity 
and  bitterness.  Sow  in  us,  O  Lord,  affection, 
peace,  and  concord  towards  each  other,  and 
toward  every  one. 

And  standing,  he  says  in  secret: '  — 

Worthy  of  glory  from  every  mouth,  and  of 
thanksgiving  from  all  tongues,  and  of  adoration 
and  exaltation  from  all  creatures,  is  the  adorable 
and  glorious  name  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost,  who  created  the  world  through  His  grace, 
and  its  inhabitants  through  His  clemency,  who 
saved  men  through  His  mercy,  and  showed  great 
favour  towards  mortals.  Thy  majesty,  O  Lord, 
thousands  of  thousands  of  heavenly  spirits,  and 
ten  thousand  myriads  of  holy  angels,  hosts  of 
spirits,  ministers  of  fire  and  spirit,  bless  and 
adore  ;  with  the  holy  -cherubim  and  the  spiritual 
seraphim  they  sanctify  and  celebrate  Thy  name, 
crying  and  praising,  without  ceasing  crying  unto 
each  other. 

Thty  say  with  a  loud  voice  :  — 

Holy,  holy,  holy.  Lord  God  Almighty;  full 
are  the  heavens  and  the  earth  of  His  glory. 

The  Priest  in  secret :  — 
Holy,  holy,  holy  art  Thou,  O  Lord  God  Al- 
mighty ;  the  heavens  and  the  earth  are  full  of 
His  glory  and  the  nature  of  His  essence,  as  they 
are  glorious  with  the  honour  of  His  splendour ; 
as  it  is  written,  The  heaven  and  the  earth  are 
full  of  me,  saith  the  mighty  Lord. 

Holy  art  Thou,  O  God  our  Father,  truly  the 
only  one,  of  whom  the  whole  family  in  heaven 
and  earth  is  named.  Holy  art  Thou,  Eternal 
Son,  through  whom  all  things  were  made.  Holy 
art  Thou,  Holy,  Eternal  Spirit,  through  whom 
all  things  are  sanctified. 

Woe  to  me,  woe  to  me,  who  have  been  as- 
tonied,  because  I  am  a  man  of  polluted  hps,  and 
dwell  among  a  people  of  polluted  lips,  and  my 
eyes  have  seen  the  King,  the  mighty  Lord. 
How  terrible  to-day  is  this  place  !     For  this  is 


'  [The  Preface.] 


none  other  than  the  house  of  God  and  the  gate 
of  heaven  ;  because  Thou  hast  been  seen  eye  to 
eye,  O  Lord. 

Now,  I  pray,  may  Thy  grace  be  with  us,  O 
Lord ;  purge  away  our  impurities,  and  sanctify 
our  lips ;  unite  the  voices  of  our  insignificance 
with  the  sanctification  of  seraphim  and  arch- 
angels. Glory  be  to  Thy  tender  mercies,  be- 
cause Thou  hast  associated  the  earthly  with  the 
heavenly.^ 

And  he  proceeds,  saying  in  secret  this  prayer,  in 
a  bowing  posture :  — 

XII.  And  with  those  heavenly  powers  we  give 
Thee  thanks,  even  we.  Thine  insignificant,  pith- 
less, and  feeble  servants ;  because  Thou  hast 
granted  unto  us  Thy  great  grace  which  cannot 
be  repaid.  For  indeed  Thou  didst  take  upon 
Thee  our  human  nature,  that  Thou  mightest  be- 
stow life  on  us  through  Thy  divinity  ;  Thou  didsr 
exalt  our  low  condition ;  Thou  didst  raise  our 
ruined  state  ;  Thou  didst  rouse  up  our  mortal- 
ity ;  Thou  didst  wash  away  our  sins ;  Thou  didst 
blot  out  the  guilt  of  our  sins ;  Thou  didst  en- 
lighten our  intelligence,  and  Thou  didst  con- 
demn our  enemy,  O  Lord  our  God ;  and  Thou 
didst  cause  the  insignificance  of  our  pithless  na- 
ture to  triumph. 

Here  follow  the  words  of  institution,'^  after 
which  :  — 
Through  the  tender  mercies  of  Thy  grace 
poured  out,  O  clement  One,  pardon  our  offences 
and  sins ;  blot  out  my  offences  in  the  judgment. 
And  on  account  of  all  Thy  aids  and  Thy  favours 
to  us,  we  shall  ascribe  unto  Thee  praise,*  hon- 
our, thanksgiving,  and  adoration,  now,  always, 
and  for  ever  and  ever. 

The  Priest  signs  the  sacraineiits.     The  respojise 
is  fnade. 
Amen. 

The  Deacon, 
In  your  minds.     Pray  for  peace  with  us. 

The  Priest  says  this  prayer'^  bowing,  and  in  a  low 
voice :  — 
O  Lord  God  Almighty,  accept  this  oblation 
for  the  whole  Holy  Catholic  Church,  and  for  all 

2  Spiritualibus.     [Note  3,  p.  545,  siipra.^ 

3  [See  Hammond,  p.  274  ] 

4  Hymnum. 

5  In  another  MS.  that  prayer  begins  thus  :  — 

O  Lord  God  Almighty,  hear  the  voice  of  my  cry  before  Thee  at 
this  time.  Give  ear,  O  Lord,  and  hear  my  groanings  before  Thy 
majesty,  and  accept  the  entreaty  of  me,  a  sinner,  with  which  I  call 
upon  Thy  grace,  at  this  hour  at  which  the  sacrifice  is  offered  to  Thy 
F'ather.  Have  mercy  on  all  creatures;  spare  the  guilty;  convert  the 
erring;  restore  the  oppressed;  on  the  disquieted  bestow  rest;  heal  the 
weak;  console  the  afflicted;  and  perfect  tlie  alms  of  those  who  work 
righteousness  on  account  of  Thy  holy  name.  Have  mercy  on  me 
also,  a  sinner,  through  Thy  grace.  O  Lord  God  Almighty,  may  this 
oblation  be  accepted  for  the  entire  Holy  Catholic  Church ;  and  for 
priests,  kings,  princes,  and  the  rest  as  above. 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


565 


the  pious  and  righteous  fathers  who  have  been 
pleasing  to  Thee,  and  for  all  the  prophets  and 
apostles,  and  for  all  the  martyrs  and  confessors, 
and  for  all  that  mourn,  that  are  in  straits,  and 
are  sick,  and  for  all  that  are  under  difficulties 
and  trials,  and  for  all  the  weak  and  the  op- 
pressed, and  for  all  the  dead  that  have  gone 
from  amongst  us  ;  then  for  all  that  ask  a  prayer 
from  our  weakness,  and  for  me,  a  degraded  and 
feeble  sinner.  O  Lord  our  God,  according  to 
Thy  mercies  and  the  multitude  of  Thy  favours, 
look  upon  Thy  people,  and  on  me,  a  feeble  man, 
not  according  to  my  sins  and  my  follies,  but 
that  they  may  become  worthy  of  the  forgiveness 
of  their  sins  through  this  holy  body,  which  they 
receive  with  faith,  through  the  grace  of  Thy 
mercy  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 

The  Priest  says  this  prayer  of  iticlination  in 
secret :  — 
XIII.  Do  Thou,  O  Lord,  through  Thy  many 
and  ineffable  mercies,  make  the  memorial  good 
and  acceptable  with  that  of^  all  the  pious  and 
righteous  fathers  who  have  been  pleading  before 
Thee  in  the  commemoration  of  the  body  and 
blood  of  Thy  Christ,  which  we  offer  to  Thee 
upon  Thy  pure  and  holy  altar,  as  Thou  hast 
taught  us ;  and  grant  unto  us  Thy  rest  all  the 
days  of  this  life. 

He  proceeds  with  the  Great  Obhition  :  — 

O  Lord  our  God,  bestow  on  us  Thy  rest  and 
peace  all  the  days  of  this  life,  that  all  the  inhab- 
itants of  the  earth  may  know  Thee,  that  Thou 
art  the  only  true  God  the  Father,  and  Thou 
didst  send  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Thy  Son  and 
Thy  beloved ;  and  He  Himself  our  Lord  and 
God  came  and  taught  us  all  purity  and  holiness. 
Make  remembrance  of  prophets,  apostles,  mar- 
tyrs, confessors,  bishops,  doctors,  priests,  dea- 
cons, and  all  the  sons  of  the  Holy  Catholic 
Church  who  have  been  signed  with  the  sign  of 
life,  of  holy  baptism.     We  also,  O  Lord  : 

He  proceeds :  — 

We,  Thy  degraded,  weak,  and  feeble  servants 
who  are  congregated  in  Thy  name,  and  now 
stand  before  Thee,  and  have  received  with  joy 
the  form  which  is  from  Thee,  praising,  glorifying, 
and  exalting,  commemorate  and  celebrate  this 
great,  awful,  holy,  and  divine  mystery  of  tlie 
passion,  death,  burial,  and  resurrection  of  our 
Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 

And  may  Thy  Holy  Spirit  come,  O  Lord,^  and 
rest  upon  this  oblation  of  Thy  servants  which 
they  offer,  and  bless  and  sanctify  it ;  and  may 
it  be  unto  us,  O  Lord,  for  the  propitiation  of  our 


'  [Ttalics  mine,  conjecturally.] 
2  [The  Invocation.] 


offences  and  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins,  and  for 
a  grand  hope  of  resurrection  from  the  dead,  and 
for  a  new  life  in  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens, 
with  all  who  have  been  pleasing  before  Him. 
And  on  account  of  the  whole  of  Thy  wonderful 
dispensation  towards  us,  we  shall  render  thanks 
unto  Thee,  and  glorify  Thee  without  ceasing  in 
Thy  Church,  redeemed  by  the  precious  blood 
of  Thy  Christ,  with  open  mouths  and  joyful 
countenances : 

Canon. 
Ascribing  praise,^   honour,  thanksgiving,  and 
adoration   to  Thy  holy,   loving,  and  life-giving 
name,  now,  always,  and  for  ever. 

The  Priest  signs  the  mysteries  with   the  cross, 
and  they  respond:  — 
Amen. 

The  Priest  bows  himself  and  kisses  the  altar, 

first  in  the  middle,  then  at  the  tcno  sides  right 

and  left,  and  says  this  prayer  :^  — 

Have  mercy  upon  me,  O  God,  down  to  the 

tvords,  and  sinners  shall  be  converted  unto  Thee  : 

and  unto  Thee  lift   I  up  mine  eyes,s  dozon  to 

have  mercy  upon  us,  O  I.ord,  have  mercy  upon 

us.     Also  stretch  forth  l"hy  hand,  and  let  Thy 

right  hand  save  me,  O  Lord ;  may  Thy  mercies 

remain  upon  me,  O  Lord,  for  ever,  and  despise 

not  the  works  of  Thy  liands.^ 

Then  he  says  this  prayer :  — 
XTV.  O  Christ,  peace  of  those  in  heaven  and 
great  rest  of  those  below, ^  grant  that  Thy  rest 
and  peace  may  dwell  in  the  four  parts  of  the 
world,'"^  but  especially  in  Thy  Holy  Catholic 
Church ;  grant  that  the  priesthood  with  the 
government  may  have  peace ;  cause  wars  to 
cease  from  the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  scatter 
the  nations  that  delight  in  wars,^  that  we  may 
enjoy  the  blessing  of  living  in  tranquillity  and 
peace,  in  all  temperance  and  fear  of  Cod.  Spare 
the  offences  and  sins  of  the  dead,  through  Thy 
grace  and  mercies  for  ever. 

And  to  those  who  are  around  the  altar  he  says  :  — 
Bless,  O  Lord.     Bless,  O  Lord. 

And  he  puts  on  the  incense  with  which  he  fumes 
himself  and  says  :  — 
Sweeten,   O    Lord   our  God,   the  unplcasing 
savour '°  of  our  souls  through  the  sweetness  of  Thy 


3  Hymniim. 

*  In  another  MS.,  says  the  Psalm  li. 

5  Ps.  cxxiii. 

6  [From  Ps.  c.vxxviii.  7,  8.] 
'  I.e.,  the  dead. 

8  fThc  first  words  of  Pr.  Hutlcr's  Ancient  Ceo^afhy  teaches 
that  the  ancients  knew  but  three;  but  sec  p.  555,  Hues  7,  8. J 

9  Lit.  "  wish  for  wars." 

'f*  1  So  the  true  rcadinR  (Radger),  though  Edinburgh  cdUots  follow 
the  illogical  emendation  {jncundum)  of  Kenaudot.] 


566 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


love,  and  through  it  cleanse  me  from  the  stains 
of  mv  sin,  and  forgive  me  my  offences  and  sins, 
whether  known  or  unknown  to  me. 

A  second  time  he  takes  the  incense  with  botli 
hands,  and  censes  the  mysteries;  presently  he 
says :  — 

The  clemency  of  Thy  grace,  O  our  Lord  and 
God,  gives  us  access  to  these  renowned,  holy,  life- 
giving,  and  divine  mysteries,  unworthy  though 
we  be. 

The  Priest  repeats  these  words  once  and  again, 
and  at  each  interval  unites  his  hands  over  his 
breast  in  the  form  of  a  cross.  He  kisses  the 
altar  in  the  middle,  afid  receives  with  both 
hands  the  upper  oblation  ;  and  looking  up, 
says :  — 

Praise  be  to  Thy  holy  name,  O  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  adoration  to  Thy  majesty,  always 
and  for  ever.     Amen. 

For  He  is  the  living  and  life-giving  bread 
which  cometh  down  from  heaven,  and  giveth 
life  to  the  whole  world,  of  which  they  who  eat 
die  not ;  and  they  who  receive  it  are  saved  by  it, 
and  do  not  see  corruption,  and  live  through  it  for 
ever ;  and  Thou  art  the  antidote  of  our  mortahty,' 
and  the  resurrection  of  our  entire  frame.^ 

XVI.  Praise  to  Thy  holy  name,  O  Lord.  (As 
above.) 

The  Priest  kisses  the  hosf^  in   the  form  of  a 
cross ;  in  such  a  way,  however,  that  his  lips 
do  not  touch  it,  but  appear  to  kiss  it;  and  he 
says : — 
Glory  to  Thee,  O  Lord ;  glory  to  Thee,  O 

Lord,  on  account  of  Thine  unspeakable  gift  to 

us,  for  ever. 

Then  he  draws  nigh  to  the  fraction  of  the  host,"- 
which  he  accomplishes  with  both  his  hands, 
saying :  — 

We  draw  nigh,  O  Lord,  with  true  faith,  and 
break  with  thanksgiving  and  sign  through  Thy 
mercy  the  body  and  blood  of  our  Life-giver, 
Jesus  Christ,  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  Son, 
and  Holy  Ghost. 

'  [The  reference  to  John  vi.  32-40  is  clear.] 

2  In  another  Ms.  there  is  a  different  reading:  — 

"  Glory  to  Thee,  O  God  the  Father,  who  didst  send  Thine  only- 
begotten  Son  for  our  salvation,  and  He  Himself  before  He  suffered," 
etc. 

3  In  the  MS.  of  Elias,  which  we  have  followed,  there  is  a  defect, 
seeing  that  the  whole  recitation  of  the  words  of  Christ  is  omitted 
through  the  fault  of  the  transcriber,  or  because  these  ought  to  have 
been  taken  from  another  source,  namely,  from  the  Liturgy  of  The- 
odorus  or  N'estorius.  In  that  which  the  Patriarch  Joseph  wrote  at 
Rome,  1697,  that  entire  passage  is  remodelled  according  to  the 
Chaldean  missal  published  at  Rome,  as  in  the  mass,  a  translation  of 
which  was  edited  by  Alexius  Menesius.  Since  there  were  no  other 
codices  at  hand,  in  this  place  it  seemed  good  to  place  asterisks  to 
indicate  the  defects. 

*  [Renaudot  supplies  the  Latin  word  hostiaiii.  It  is  not  the 
early  patristic  word,  much  less  is  it  scriptural  for  Bvai.a.'\ 


And,  naming  the  Tnnity,  he  breaks  the  host,* 
which  he  holds  in  his  hands,  into  two  parts  : 
and  the  one  which  is  iti  his  left  hand  he  lays 
down  on  the  disk;  with  the  other,  which  he 
holds  in  his  right  hand,  he  signs  the  chalice, 
saying :  — 

The  precious  blood  is  signed  with  the  holy 
body  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  In  the  name  of 
the  Father,  and  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost 
for  ever. 


And  they  respond:  — 


Amen. 


Then  he  dips  it  even  to  the  middle  in  the  chalice, 
and  signs  with  it  the  body  which  is  in  the  paten, 
saying :  — 

The  holy  body  is  signed  with  the  propitiatory 
blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  In  the  name 
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  for  ever. 


And  they  respond: 


Amen, 


Afid  he  unites  the  two  parts,  the  one  with  the 
other,  saying :  — 

Divided,  sanctified,  completed,  perfected, 
united,  and  commingled  have  been  these  re- 
nowned, holy,  life-giving,  and  divine  mysteries, 
the  one  with  the  other,  in  the  adorable  and  glo- 
rious name  of  Thy  glorious  Trinity,  O  Father, 
Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  that  they  may  be  to  us,  O 
Lord,  for  the  propitiation  of  our  offences  and 
the  forgiveness  of  our  sins  ;  also  for  the  grand 
hope  of  a  resurrection  from  the  dead,  and  of  a 
new  life  in  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens,  for  us 
and  for  the  Holy  Church  of  Christ  our  Lord, 
here  and  in  every  place  whatsoever,  now  and 
always,  and  for  ever, 

XVII,  In  the  meantime  lie  signs  the  host''  with  his 

right  thumb  in  the  form  of  a  cross  from  the 

lower  part  to  the  upper,  and  from  the  right  to 

the  left,  and  thus  forms  a  slight  fissure  in  it 

where  it  has  been  dipped  in  the  blood.     He 

puts  a  part  of  it  into  the  chalice  in  the  form 

of  a  cross :  the  lower  part  is  placed  toivards 

the  priest,  the  upper  towards   the  chalice,  so 

that  the  place  of  the  fissure  looks  to  the  chalice. 

He  bows,  and  rising,  says :  — 

Glory  be  to  Thee,  O  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 

hast  made  me,  unworthy  though  I  be,  through 

Thy  grace,  a  minister  and  mediator  of  Thy  re- 

nowed,  holy,  life-giving,  and  divine  mysteries  : 

through    the   grace   of  Thy   mercy,    make    me 

worthy  of  the  pardon  of  my  offences  and  the 

forgiveness  of  my  sins. 


5  \Ut  supra,  note  4,  this  page;  also  Burbidge,  p.  95,  note  2.] 


EARLY   LITURGIES. 


567 


He  signs  himself  with  the  sign  of  the  cross  on 
his  forehead,  and  does  the  same  to  those  stand- 
ing round  him .^ 

The  Deacons  approach,  atid  he  signs  each  one  of 
them  on  the  forehead,  sayiftg :  — 

Christ  accept  thy  ministry :  Christ  cause  thy 
face  to  shine  :  Christ  save  thy  life  :  Christ  make 
thy  youth  to  grow. 

And  they  7-espond :  — 
Christ  accept  thy  oblation. 

xviii.  All  return  to  their  02i.n1  place ;  and  the 
Priest,  after  bowing,  rises  and  says,  in  the  tone 
of  the  Gospel:  — 

The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the 
love  of  God  the  Father,  and  the  communion  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  be  with  us  all. 

The  Priest  signs  himself,  and  lifts  up  his  hand 
over  his  head,  so  that  it  should  be  in  the  air, 
and  the  people  be  partakers  in  the  singing :  — 

The  Deacon  says :  — 
We  all  with  fear,  etc. 

And  at  these  words  :  — 
He  hath  given  to  us  His  mysteries  : 

The  Priest  begins  to  break  ^  the  body,  and  says :  — 

Be  merciful,  O  Lord,  through  Thy  clemency 
to  the  sins  and  follies  of  Thy  servants,  and  sanc- 
tify our  lips  through  Thy  grace,  that  they  may 
give  the  fruits  of  glory  and  praise  to  Thy  divin- 
ity, with  all  Thy  saints  in  Thy  kingdom. 

And,  raising  his  voice,  he  says :  — 

And  make  us  worthy,  O  Lord  our  God,  to 
stand  before  Thee  continually  without  stain,  with 
pure  heart,  with  open  countenance,  and  with  the 
coni^dence  which  is  from  Thee,  mercifully  granted 
to  us  :  and  let  us  all  with  one  accord  invoke 
Thee,  and  say  thus  :  Our  Father,  etc. 

The  People  say  :  — 
Our  Father,  etc. 

The  Priests 
O  Lord  God  Almighty,  O  Lord  and  our  good 
God,  who  art  full  of  mercy,  we  beg  Thee,  O 
Lord  our  God,  and  beseech  the    clemency  of 


'  In  another  MS.:  — 
He  signs  his  forehead  with  the  sign  of  the  cross,  and 
says :  — 

Glory  to  Thee,  O  Lord,  who  didst  create  ine  by  Thy^  grace. 
Glory  to  Thee,  O  Lord,  who  did.st  call  me  by  Thy  mercy.  Glory  to 
Thee,  O  Lord,  who  didst  appoint  me  the  mediator  of  Thy  gift;  and 
on  account  of  all  the  benefits  to  my  weakness,  ascribed  unto  Thee  be 
praise,  honour,  thanksgiving,  and  adoration,  now,  etc. 

2  [Not  K-Aar,  but  ufAit'eir.  The  second /ra<://<?«  for  communi- 
cating the  faithful  with  the  Humble  Access.\ 

■5  LAdds  the  Embolisms.] 


Thy  goodness  ;  lead  us  not  into  temptation,  but 
deliver  and  save  us  from  the  evil  one  and  liis 
hosts  ;  because  Thine  is  the  kingdom,  the  power, 
the  strength,  the  might,  and  the  dominion  in 
heaven  and  on  earth,  now  and  always. 

He  signs  himself,  and  they  respond :  — 
Amen. 

XIX.  And  he  proceeds :  — 
Peace  be  with  you. 

They  respond  :  — 
With  thee  and  with  thy  spirit. 

He  proceeds :  — 
It  is  becoming  that  the  holy  things  should  be 
to  the  holy  in  perfection. 

And  they  say :  — 

One  holy  Father :  one  holy  Son  :  one  Holy 
Ghost.  Glory  be  to  the  Father,  and  to  the  Son, 
and  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  ever  and  ever. 
Amen. 

The  Deacon. 

Praise  ye. 

Aiid  they  say  the  responsory.     And  when  the 
Deacon  comes  to  carry  the  chalice,  he  says :  — 
Let  us  pray  for  peace  with  us. 

The  Priest  says  :  — 
The  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghost  be  with  thee, 
with  us,  and  with  those  who  receive  Him. 

And  he  gives  the  chalice  to  the  Deacon.     The 
Deacon  says :  — 
Bless,  O  Lord. 

The  Priest. 
The  gift  of  the  grace  of  our  Life-giver  and 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  completed,  in  mercies,  with 
all. 

And  he  signs  the  people  with  the  cross.     In  the 
fneantifne  the  responsories  are  said. 

Brethren,  receive  the  body  of  the  Son,  cries 
the  Church,  and  drink  ye  His  chalice  with  faith 
in  the  house  of  His  kingdom. 

On  feast-days. 
Strengthen,  O  Lord,  etc. 

On  the  Lord's  day. 
O  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  etc. 

Daily. 
The  mysteries  which  we  have  received,  etc. 

The  responsories  being  ended,  the  Deacon  says :  — 
All  therefore,  etc. 


568 


ELUCIDATIONS. 


And  they  respond :  — 
Glory  be  to  Himself  on  account  of  His  ineffa- 
ble gift. 

The  Deacon. 
Let  us  pray  for  peace  with  us. 

The  Priest  at  the  middle  of  the  altar  says  this 
prayer : '  — 

XX.  It  is  meet,  O  Lord,  just  and  right  in  all 
days,  times,  and  hours,  to  thank,  adore,  and 
praise  the  awful  name  of  Thy  majesty,  because 
Thou  hast  through  Thy  grace,  O  Lord,  made  us, 
mortal  men  possessing  a  frail  nature,  worthy  to 
sanctify  Thy  name  with  the  heavenly  ^  beings, 
and  to  become  partakers  of  the  mysteries  of 
Thy  gift,  and  to  be  delighted  with  the  sweetness 
of  Thy  oracles.  And  voices  of  glory  and  thanks- 
giving we  ever  offer  up  to  Thy  sublime  divinity, 
O  Lord. 

Another. 

Christ,  our  God,  Lord,  King,  Saviour,  and 
Life-giver,  through  His  grace  has  made  us  wor- 
thy to  receive  His  body  and  His  precious  and 
all-sanctifying  blood.  May  He  grant  unto  us 
that  we  may  be  pleasing  unto  Him  in  our  words, 
works,  thoughts,  and  deeds,  so  that  that  pledge 
which  we  have  received  may  be  to  us  for  the 
pardon  of  our  offences,  the  forgiveness  of  our 
sins,  and  the  grand  hope  of  a  resurrection  from 
the  dead,  and  a  new  and  true  life  in  the  kingdom 
of  the  heavens,  with  all  who  have  been  pleasing 
before  Him,  through  His  grace  and  His  mercies 
for  ever. 

On  ordinary  days. 

Praise,  O  Lord,  honour,  blessing,  and  thanks- 
giving we  ought  to  ascribe  to  Thy  glorious  Trinity 
for  the  gift  of  Thy  holy  mysteries,  which  Thou 
hast  given  to  us  for  the  propitiation  of  our 
offences,  O  Lord  of  all. 


'  [Beginning  the  Post-Communion.] 
2  Spiritualibus. 


Another. 
Blessed  be  Thy  adorable  honour,  from  Thy 
glorious  place,  O  Christ,  the  propitiator  of  our 
offences  and  our  sins,  and  who  takest  away  our 
follies  through  Thy  renowned,  holy,  life-giving, 
and  divine  mysteries.  Christ  the  hope  of  our 
nature  always  and  for  ever.     Amen. 

Obsignation  or  final  benediction. 

May  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  whom  we  have 
ministered,  and  whom  we  have  seen  and  hon- 
oured in  His  renowned,  holy,  life-giving,  and 
divine  mysteries.  Himself  render  us  worthy  of 
the  splendid  glory  of  His  kingdom,  and  of  glad- 
ness with  His  holy  angels,  and  for  confidence 
before  Him,  that  we  may  stand  at  His  right 
hand. 

And  on  our  entire  congregation  may  His  mer- 
cies and  compassion  be  continually  poured  out, 
now  and  always,  and  ever. 

On  the  Lord's  day  and  on  feast-days. 

May  He  Himself  who  blessed  us  with  all  spirit- 
ual blessings  in  the  heavens,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord,  and  prepared  us  for  His  kingdom,  and 
called  us  to  the  desirable  good  things  which 
neither  cease  nor  perish,  as  He  promised  to  us 
in  His  life-giving  Gospel,  and  said  to  the  blessed 
congregation  of  His  disciples  —  Verily,  verily  I 
say  unto  you,  that  every  one  who  eateth  my 
body  and  drinketh  my  blood,  abideth  in  me, 
and  I  in  him,  and  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last 
day ;  and  he  cometh  not  to  judgment,  but  I  will 
make  him  pass  from  death  to  eternal  life  : 

May  He  Himself  now  bless  this  congregation, 
and  maintain  our  position,  and  render  glorious 
our  people  who  have  come  and  rejoiced  in  re- 
ceiving His  renowned,  holy,  life-giving,  and  divine 
mysteries  ;  and  may  ye  be  sealed  and  guarded  by 
the  holy  sign  of  the  Lord's  cross  from  all  evils, 
secret  and  open,  now  and  always. 


ELUCIDATIONS. 


(Disciple  of  the  holy  Peter,  p.  551.) 
The  early  use  of  the  originals  of  this  liturgy  in  the  Alexandrian  patriarchate  accounts  for  its 
bearing  the  name  of  St.  Mark, —  "  sister's  son  to  Barnabas,"  as  St.  Paul  calls  him.'  That  he  was 
St.  Peter's  pupil  may  be  inferred  from  that  Aposde's  language,^  — "  Marcus,  my  son."  See  Clem- 
ent's testimony  concerning  him  (with  Eusebius)  in  vol.  ii.  pp.  579,  580,  this  series.  That  he 
founded  the  "  Evangelical  See,"  though  resting  on  great  historic  authority,^  seems  to  be  doubted 
in  our  times  by  some. 


'  Col.  iv.  10. 


2  Compare  Acts  xii.  12.     St.  Peter  m.iy  h.ive  baptized  him  then. 
S  Lardner's  quotations  from  Jerome,  Credib.,  vol.  iv.  p.  442  et  alibi. 


ELUCIDATIONS.  569 


II. 

(Our  holy  father  Mark,  p.  556.) 

While  St.  Mark  could  not  have  written  this,  it  may,  of  course,  have  been  added  at  a  very 
early  date.'  This  most  touching  prayer  bears  marks  of  great  antiquity,  the  reference  to  our 
"  Christ-loving  sovereign  "  comporting  better  with  the  early  enthusiasm  inspired  by  Constantine's 
conversion  than  with  the  disappointments  incurred  under  his  Arianizing  or  apostate  successors. 
Now,  this  commemoration  of  St.  Mark  would  of  itself  attach  his  name  to  the  liturg>-. 

But  here  is  the  place  to  note  the  principles  of  these  primitive  prayers  for  saints  departed.  ( i ) 
They  could  only  be  offered  in  behalf  of  the  holy  dead  who  had  fallen  asleep  in  full  communion 
with  Christ  and  His  Church;  (2)  They  were  not  prayers  for  their  deliverance  out  of  one  place 
into  another;  (3)  They  recognised  the  repose  (not  yet  the  triumph)  of  the  faithful  departed  as 
incomplete,  and  hence  (4)  invoked  for  them  a  blessed  consummation  of  peace  and  joy  in  the 
resurrection. 

Now,  all  this  is  fatal  to  the  Roman  dogmas  and  usages,  because  (i)  they  thus  include  St. 
Mark  and  the  Blessed  Virgin  in  these  commemorations ;  while  Rome  teaches,  not  only  that  these 
great  saints  went  immediately  to  the  excellent  glory,  and  there  have  reigned  with  Christ  ever 
since  they  died,  but  (2)  that  on  this  very  ground,  and  that  of  their  supererogatory  merits,  the 
Pontiff  holds  a  purse  ^  of  their  excessive  righteousness  to  dispense  to  meaner  Christians. 

St.  Augustine  speaks  of  his  dear  Nebridius  as  in  Abraham's  bosom,^  but  finds  comfort  in 
commemorating  him  and  Monica  his  mother,  "■  because  it  is  so  comfortable."  This  is  his  idea,  in 
a  word  :  "  Et  credo  jam  feceris  quod  te  rogo,  sed  (Ps.  cxix.  108)  voluniaria  oris  mei,  approba, 
Domine." 

III. 

(Holy  things  for  the  holy,  p.  559.) 

Bingham  "•  has  so  fully  elucidated  this  by  (juotations  from  Chrysostom  (Horn,  vii.)  and  others, 
that  one  might  think  it  useless  to  attach  to  it  any  other  meaning  than  that  which  Chrysostom 
understands  in  it ;  viz.,  "  Holy  things  for  holy  persons."  It  occurs  just  before  the  communicat- 
ing of  the  faithful,  and  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  "elevation  of  the  host,"  —  a  Western 
ceremony  of  the  fourteenth  century.5  Yet,  in  an  otherwise  (generally)  useful  manual  of  liturgies, 
an  attempt  is  made  to  give  it  this  meaning ;  and  the  preceding  prayer  of  "  Intense  Adoration," 
addressed  to  the  Great  High  Priest  in  the  heavens,  is  debased  to  eke  out  the  weak  idea.  Nothing 
could  be  more  averse  to  the  primitive  principle  of  worship;^  but  it  is  sufficient  to  note  the  fact 
that  the  "  elevation  of  the  host "  revolutionized  the  eucharistic  worship  of  the  West  as  soon  as  it 
was  established,  (t)  It  abolished  the  Eucharist  practically  as  the  synaxis,  or  communion  of  the 
faithful,  and  made  it  only  a  sacrifice  for  them  in  their  behalf;  (2)  not  to  be  eaten  and  received, 
but  to  be  gazed  at;  (3)  not  for  all  the  faithful  at  all  times,  excluding  even  catcchunions  from 
beholding  it,  but  to  be  displayed  to  all  eyes  in  pompous  ceremonials,  carried  through  the  streets, 
and  dispensed  only  in  half-communion,  once  a  year,  to  the  individual  communicant.  All  these 
ancient  liturgies,  corrupted  as  they  are  in  all  the  mss.  we  possess,  are  yet  liturgies  for  communicating 
the  faithful,  in  their  turns,^  one  and  all ;  and,  so  far,  they  are  true  to  the  Scriptures  and  the  pre- 
cepts of  Christ  and  His  Apostles.     But  well  does  the  pious  Hirscher  exclaim,  with  reference  to 


'  As  with  Moses,  Exod.  xxxiv.  5. 

2  Bellarmine,  De  Indulg.,  i.  2. 

3  Confessions,  ix.  3,  12,  et  alibi. 

*  Aniigit.,  book  i.  cap.  iv.  sec.  5;  book  xiii.  cap.  vi.  sec.  7;  book  xv.  cap.  iii.  sec.  31. 

5  See  Roman  Mass,  Hammond,  p.  334. 

6  As  illustrated  in  Freeman's  important  work.     See  p.  536,  note  a. 
'  See  Apostolic  Constitutions,  pp.  490,  54S,  supra. 


570  ELUCIDATIONS. 


the  Mass,  as  he  was  obliged  to  celebrate  it  in  his  own  gorgeous  cathedral  at  Freiburg  in  the 
Breisgau  :  "What  would  an  Apostle  think  we  were  doing,  should  he  enter  during  our  ceremonies?" 
Also,  "  I  know  all  that  can  be  said  in  their  favour.  I  know  just  as  well  that  by  them  the  spirit  is 
turned  apart  from  internal  godliness,  and  borne  away;  and  that,  with  such  appeals  to  sense,  with- 
drawal from  things  of  sense  becomes  impossible.  .  .  .  God  is  a  Spirit :  He  looks  to  be  adored  in 
spirit  and  in  truth,  and  all  ceremonial  which  dulls  the  adoration  '  of  the  spirit  is  odious  to  God. 
To  glorify  self,  as  His  minister,  before  the  King  of  kings,  before  the  majesty  of  the  Creator, 
before  His  Christ,  naked  and  crucified,  —  is  it  not  an  absurdity,  a  ceremony  of  contradictions? 
The  people  no  longer  comprehend  the  ceremonial  ...  to  see  them  satisfied  by  mere  corporal 
attendance,  is  it  not  deplorable  ?  They  do  not  understand  Latin.  Is  it  not  melancholy  that  they 
take  no  real  part  in  the  touching  offices  of  the  Holy  Week?  Is  not  a  deplorable  indifference  the 
result;  in  France,  for  example?     Nay,  at  Rome  also?"^ 

His  remonstrances  were  vain ;  he  was  cruelly  censured,  yet  he  died  in  the  Papal  communion. 
Dear  Hirscher  !  The  venerable  man  kissed  me  when  I  parted  from  him  in  185 1,^  and  gave  me 
his  blessing  with  a  primitive  spirit  of  Christian  charity.     I  gratefully  quote  him  here. 

In  Germany  a  passing  stranger  often  sees  the  pious  peasantry  at  Mass,  singing  with  all  their 
hearts  their  beautiful  German  hymns.  It  misleads,  however.  They  are  not  attending  to  the 
Mass,  but  consoling  themselves  by  spiritual  songs,  while  it  goes  on  without  their  assistance.  The 
bell  rings  :  they  adore  the  host,  but  that  is  all  their  relation  to  the  worship  of  the  Christian  litur- 
gies. Hirscher  loved  their  hymns,  but  bewailed  the  utter  loss  of  their  hturgic  communion,  once 
common  to  the  faithful.-* 

IV. 

(Teachers  of  the  Easterns,  etc.,  p.  561.) 

The  apostle  Thaddeus  is  called  Addai  in  Syriac.  Maris  is  said  to  have  been  one  of  the  seventy 
disciples,  but  his  name  is  not  on  the  list  ascribed  to  Hippolytus.  He  was  the  first  bishop  of  the 
people  now  called  "  Nestorians,"  but  whom  Dr.  Badger  5  prefers  to  call  "  the  Christians  of  As- 
syria." 

We  have  this  liturgy  in  another  form  in  Dr.  Badger's  important  work,  Nestorians  and  their 
Rituals.  He  selects  that  called  "the  Liturgy  of  Nestorius"  from  three  which  are  in  use  among 
the  Assyrians,  but  criticises  the  translation  of  Renaudot  as  not  entirely  faultless.  It  is  selected 
by  Dr.  Badger  because  of  its  reputed  Nestorianism ;  while  Hammond  gives  us  what  is  here  trans- 
lated, in  Renaudot's  Latin.^  We  must  bear  in  mind,  that,  since  the  Ephesine  Council  (a.d.  431), 
these  Christians  have  been  separated  from  the  communion  of  Eastern  orthodoxy. 

The  Malabar  Liturgy  should  be  carefully  compared  with  this  by  the  student.  A  convenient 
translation  of  it  is  to  be  found  in  Neale  and  Littledale.  A  most  important  fact,  by  the  way,  is 
noted  in  their  translation ;  ^  viz.,  that  in  this  Malabar  "  the  invocation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  contrary 
to  the  use  of  every  other  Oriental  liturgy,  preceded  the  words  of  institution ;  "  that  is  to  say,  in 
the  work  of  the  Portuguese  revisers,  a  work  from  wliich  Dr.  Neale  and  his  colleague  feel  justified 
in  making  "  a  considerable  alteration  "  as  to  the  order  of  the  prayers. 

The  words  of  institution  are  found  in  the  Malabar,  and  suggest  that  they  belong  not  less  to 
this  Liturgy  of  the  Assyrians,  though,  ex  suinma  verecundia^  they  are  omitted  from  the  transcript, 
as  the  Lord's  Prayer  is  omitted  in  the  Clementine. 

'  The  "  Intense  Adoration  "  of  the  liturgies. 

2  Die  Christlicheti  Zustdnde  dcr  Gcgen-wart,  Freiburg,  1850.  My  translation  appeared  in  Oxford  in  1852,  and  is  often  advertised  in 
old  book  catalogues  as  Syinpathies  of  the  Cotttinent  ;  or.  Proposals /or  a  New  Reformation. 

3  On  St.  Bartholomew's  Day. 

*  See  his  Stitdy  of  the  Eucharist.    He  tried  to  revive  primitive  views  of  the  Eucharist  in  this  excellent  work  on  the  subject. 

5  See  his  contribution  to  the  Liverpool  Church  Congress  of  1869.     Bartlett  &  Co.,  London. 

*>  P.  267. 

1  P.  165,  ed.  of  1869. 

8  Hammond,  p.  Ix.,  Introduction. 


ELUCIDATIONS. 


571 


The  normal  form  of  this  corrupted  liturgy  is  credited  with  extreme  antiquity  by  Dr.  Neale. 
To  his  learned  and  cogent  reasoning  on  the  subject  the  student  should  by  all  means  refer.' 

V. 

(For  all  the  prophets  and  confessors,  p.  565.) 

These  commemorations  of  the  dead,  it  will  be  noted,  are  in  behalf  of  the  most  glorious 
apostles  and  saints,  and  for  martyrs  who  go  straight  to  glory.  Obviously,  as  Usher  has  said,^  for 
whatever  purpose,  then,  the  departed  were  commemorated,  it  was  not  to  change  their  estate  before 
the  resurrection,  much  less  to  relieve  them  from  purgatorial  penalties.  This  comes  out  in  the 
"  Liturgy  of  St.  Chrysostom  "  (so  called),  where  it  is  said  :  "  We  offer  to  Thee  this  reasonable 
service  for  those  who  have  fallen  asleep  in  faith,  .  .  .  patriarchs,  apostles,  evangelists,  niart>TS, 
...  and  every  just  one  made  perfect  in  the  faith  :  especially  our  all-holy,  undefiled,  most  blessed 
Lady,  Theotokos  and  ever-virgin  Mary,"  etc.  But  she,  they  tell  us,  was  assumed  into  glory,  like 
Christ  Himself,  and  reigns  with  Him  as  "  Queen  of  Angels,"  etc.     See  Elucidation  II.  p.  569. 


VL 
(The  propitiatory  blood,  etc.,  p.  566.) 

The  peril  of  confounding  the  early  use  of  this  idea  of  propitiation  with  the  mediceval  theor}', 
which  is  quite  another,  is  well  pointed  out  and  enforced  by  Burbidge.^  llie  primiti\'e  writers 
and  the  ancient  liturgies  "do  not  regard  the  Eucharist  as  being  itself  vn  propitiatory  offering,"  but 
it  is  the  perpetual  pleading  of  the  blood  of  propitiation  once  offered.  Thus  St.  Chrysostom : 
"  We  do  not  offer  another  sacrifice,  but  always  the  same."  So  far,  his  words  might  be  quoted  to 
favour  the  Middle- Age  doctrine ;  but  he  guards  himself,  and  adds  :  ■♦  "  or,  rather,  7ve  make  a 
victnorial  of  the  sacrifice." 

The  rhetoric  of  the  liturgies  and  of  the  Fathers  was  unhappily  made  into  the  logic  of  the 
Schoolmen,  and  hence  the  stupendous  system  of  propitiatory  IMasses,  with  Masses  for  the  dead, 
and  that  traffic  in  Masses  which  so  fearfully  defiles  the  priesthood  of  Western  Europe  and  the 
Spanish  and  Portuguese  colonies  in  America.  In  vain  does  the  pious  Hirscher  complain  :  s  <'  q'he 
rich,  then,  are  the  happy  sinners  in  this  respect :  they  can  buy  innumerable  Masses,  and  estab- 
lish them  in  perpetuity ;  their  privileges  have  no  limit,  and  their  advantages  over  the  poor  extend 
through  all  eternity."  His  book  was  put  into  the  Index  (Acts  xvi.  19,  xix.  27),  but  it  was  never 
answered. 

VII. 

Let  me  now  recur  to  Elucidation  III.  on  p.  507,  to  which  I  would  here  add  the  following 
from  Bishop  Williams,  as  there  (juoted  :  — 

"  In  both  the  Mozarabic  and  the  Galiican  Liturgies  there  was  an  invocation  as  well  as  an  oblation.  Ticnxus* 
says  (and  he,  writing  at  Lyons,  must  have  in  mind  the  Galiican  Liturgy),  'The  bread  which  is  of  the  earth,  having 
received  the  invocation  of  God,  is  no  longer  common  bread,  but  the  Eucharist.'  The  word  translated  '  invoca- 
tion' is  imKknaw  ;  and  it  is  worthy  of  notice  that  Basil  and  Cyril  of  Jerusalem  use  the  same  word  in  evidently 
the  same  technical  sense  (Harvey's  Irt'iiaiis,  vol.  ii.  pp.  205-207  and  notes).  In  another  passage  Ircna;us ' 
speaks  even  more  distinctly :  '  We  offer  to  God  the  bread  and  the  cup  of  blessing,  giving  thanks  to  Him  for  that 
He  hath  commanded  the  earth  to  bring  forth  these  fruits  for  our  nourishment ;  and,  having  finished  the  offering, 


>  General  Introduction,  etc.,  vol.  i.  p.  319,  etc.,  ed.  1S50.  «  Of>p.,  torn.  xii.  p.  131,  cd.  Mignc. 

2  See  vol.  vi.  Elucidation  IV.  p.  541,  this  series.  '  Christliche  Zuifdncic,  etc.,  p.  74. 

3  Liturgies,  etc.,  p.  11.    See  also  pp.  96,  no.  <>  Sec  vol.  i.  p.  4S6,  note  6,  this  series. 

1  Fragment  x.\.\vii.  vol.  i.  p.  574,  this  series. 


572  ELUCIDATIONS. 


we  invoke  the  Holy  Spirit  that  He  may  exhibit  (or  declare,  anodijvy)  this  sacrifice  and  bread  the  body  of  Christ, 
and  the  cup  the  blood  of  Christ,  that  they  who  shall  receive  these  antitypes  may  obtain  remission  of  sins  and 
everlasting  life'  (Harvey's  Irejiaics,  vol.  ii.  p.  502).  This  passage  is  a  remarkable  one.  It  proves  beyond  ques- 
tion, that,  in  the  time  of  Iren^eus  {,d.  a.d.  202  or  20S),  the  Liturgy  of  Gaul  contained  an  invocation  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  following  the  oblation  of  the  bread  and  cup.  Moreover,  when  we  compare  the  words  of  Irenaeus  with 
those  of  the  Clementine  Liturgy,  their  agreement  is  too  clear  and  precise  to  be  explained  as  a  mere  chance- 
matter.  The  liturgy  reads,  'Send  down  Thy  Holy  Spirit  on  this  sacrifice,  the  witness  of  the  sufferings  of  the 
Lord  Jesus,  that  He  may  exhibit  {avioi^fivrj)  this  bread,  the  body  of  Thy  Christ,  and  this  cup,  the  blood  of  Thy 
Christ,  that  they  who  shall  receive,' '  etc.  Irenaeus  says  as  above,  using  the  same  word  (utto^^i't?),  a  word  which 
is  found,  it  is  believed,  in  no  liturgy  but  the  Clementine." 

Now  I  humbly  suggest  that  Justin  Martyr  and  Irenjsus  concur  in  giving  us  evidence  that  the 
Clementine  Liturgy  is  substantially  that  which  was  used  in  Rome  and  Gaul  in  their  times.  The 
latter  may  have  received  it  from  Polycarp.  The  use  of  the  Roman  and  the  Greek  churches  was 
uniform  in  his  day,  as  may  be  inferred  from  the  intercourse  of  Polycarp  and  Victor.^ 

'  See  p,  489,  supra.  ^  Fragment  iii.  vol.  i.  p.  568,  this  series. 


INDEXES. 


LACTANTIUS. 


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS. 


Academics,  15. 

Accius  Naevius  and  Tarquinius  Pris- 
cus,  51. 

Adam,  creation  and  fall  of,  62. 

Advent  of  Christ,  215. 

.iEsculapius,  19,  51,  226. 

Affections,  Stoics'  opinion  on,  179; 
Peripatetics',  179, 180;  right  use 
of,  181;  of  the  soul,  29S;  sum- 
mary of  above,  323. 

Africanus,  31. 

Almsgiving,  duty  of,  178. 

Amalthea,  goat  of,  36. 

Anaxagoras,  testifies  to  the  existence 
of  God,  14. 

Anaximenes,  his  theory  of  God,  14. 

Ancestors,  authority  of,  50. 

Angels,  how  corrupted,  64,  231. 

Anger,  defined,  274 ;  necessary  to 
punishment,  274 ;  of  God,  against 
sin,  273,  unlike  man's,  277  ;  wit- 
nessed to  by  the  Sibyls,  278,  and 
by  the  oracle  of  Apollo,  279. 

Animals,  creation  of,  282  ;  noxious, 
199;  figure  of,  2S6;  theories  of 
Epicurus,  87. 

Anthropos^  meaning  of  the  term,  41. 

Antichrist,  215. 

Antipodes,  theory  of,  incredible,  94. 

Antisthenes,  testifies  to  the  unity  of 
God,  14. 

Apollo,  on  the  unity  of  God,  17;  on 
His  anger  aganist  sin,  279;  on 
immortality,  210;  his  disgrace- 
ful conduct,  19,  226;  his  utter- 
ance respecting  Jesus,  U2. 

Apollonius  of  Tyana,  138, 139  (notes). 

Apologists,  early  Christian,  136,  140. 

Apostles,  mission  of,  301. 

Apuleius,  138  and  note. 

Aratus,  24. 

Arcesilas,  his  philosophy,  72 ;  docs 
not  distinguish  the  knowable  and 
unknowalile,  72. 

Archimedes,  his  orrery,  48. 

Aristippus  and  Lais,  84. 

Aristotle,  on  the  unity  of  God,  14. 

Aristoxcncs,  denies  the  mind,  297. 

Ascension  of  Christ,  122,  241. 

Ass,  sacrificed  to  Priapus,  36. 

Astrology,  invented  by  demons,  65, 
232. 

Atoms,  theory  of,  87. 

Aurelian,  persecutor,  303. 


Bacchus,  character  of,  226. 

Bald  Venus,  the,  33. 

Barbarians,   their   rites   of  worship, 

229. 
Bellona,  38. 

Body,  parts  of,  2SS-295. 
Body  and  soul,  conflict  between,  79; 

separated  but  not  destroyed  by 

death,  208. 
Bounty,  or  liberality,  175. 
Burial  of  the  dead,  duty  of,  177. 

Candidianus,  321. 

Carneades,  disputes  for  and  against 
justice,  150;  refuted,  153. 

Castor  and  Pollux,  19,  51,  226. 

Cato,  suicide  of,  89. 

Ceres,  52. 

Chanaanites,  63. 

Christ,  meaning  of  His  name,  106; 
reason  of  His  incarnation,  106; 
prophecies  of,  109,  239;  philo- 
sophical objections  answered, 
124;  His  incarnation  necessary, 
125;  the  lie  of  Hierocles  re- 
specting, 138;  not  a  magician, 
139;  why  believed  to  be  God, 
III,  139;  acknowledged  by  the 
oracle  of  AnoUo,  112;  His  sec- 
ond advent,  215;  His  name 
known  to  the  Father  and  Him- 
self, 239;  His  twofold  nativity, 
109;  His  priesthood  foretold, 
113;  His  power  and  works,  115, 
127,  240;  His  death  foretold, 
116,  120,  121,  240;  His  resurrec- 
tion, ascension,  and  kingdom 
foretold,  122,  123,  241 ;  meaning 
and  power  of  His  cross,  128, 
243;  poem  on  His  i)assion,  327. 

Christians,  hated  without  cause,  144, 
243 ;  glory  \\\  persecution,  148  ; 
increase  under  ])ersecution,  148, 
160;  their  fortitude,  148,  and 
patience,  158  ;  their  equality  and 
brotherhood,  151  ;  folly  and  cru- 
elty of  persecuting  them,  147; 
tiieir  submission  to  injuries,  159; 
why  subject  to  evil,  160;  why 
poor  and  oppressed,  165;  God's 
vengeance  on  their  persecutors, 
161;  exhortation  to,  222  ;  their 
true  hope,  243,  255;  accused  by 
Galcrius,  306. 


Chronos,  25. 

Chrysippus,  on  the  unity  of  God,  14. 

Church,  the  Catholic,  133. 

Cicero,  on  the  unity  of  God,  14 ; 
Jupiter,  22  ;  De  Natura  Deoruvi, 
27  ;  the  gods  mere  men,  28,  29 ; 
fears  to  testify  against  idolatry, 
43;  on  the  authority  of  ances- 
tors, 50;  on  creation,  53;  on 
philosophy,  81  ;  on  wisdom,  81, 
83 ;  on  the  character  of  philoso- 
phers, 84 ;  why  men  were  born, 
89;  on  the  immortality  of  the 
soul,  90  ;  on  future  rewards  and 
punishments,  90;  on  life  and 
death,  90;  on  philosophy  as  ad- 
verse to  the  multitude,  95;  on 
fortune,  98 ;  on  the  divine  law, 
170;  on  justice,  184;  why  God 
made  noxious  animals,  199;  on 
the  origin  of  souls,  267. 

Circensian  games,  evil  of,  188. 

Circumcision,  118. 

Claudia,  alleged  miracle  of,  51. 

Cleanthes,  on  the  unity  of  God,  14. 

Cloacina,  32. 

Coelus,  24. 

Comedies,  metres  of,  323. 

Constantine,  address  to,  10,  22 1 ;  sent 
for  by  his  father  Constantius,  es- 
capes from  Galerius,  acknowl- 
edged as  emperor,  marries 
Fausta,  j^Iotted  against  by  Max- 
imian,  31 1  ;  i)lot  of  Daia  against, 
318;  his  vision  of  the  heavenly 
sign,  31S;  defeats  Maxentius, 
31S ;  restores  Christian  churches, 
320. 

Constantius,  306,  311. 

Continence,  190. 

Cornelius  Ncjios,  on  philosophers, 84. 

Creation,  what  it  is,  58;  of  man,  58, 
211,  231,  283;  of  the  world  for 
man,  251 ;  of  animals,  282;  days 

of,  211. 

Cross  of  Jesus,  meaning  of,  12S; 
power  of,  128,  129,  130,  243; 
symbols  of,  129;  sign  of,  129; 
Constantinc's  vision  of,  y%. 

Cupid,  as  represented  by  poets,  26. 

Curetes,  nurses  of  Jupiter,  23. 

Cynics,  the,  84,  237. 

Cyprian,  St.,  apologist  for  Christian- 
ity, 136,  140  (note). 

575 


576 


LACTANTIUS  :    INDEX    OF    SUBJECTS. 


Daia,  made  Csesar,  30S  ;  persecutes 
Christians,  315;  his  superstition, 
oppression,  and  licentiousness, 
315;  solicits  Valeria  in  marriage, 
and,  refused,  banishes  her,  316; 
cruelties  to  ladies  of  rank,  317; 
unites  with  Maxcntius  against 
Licinius  and  Ccnstantine,  318; 
defeat  and  flight,  320;  miserable 
death,  321. 

Damon  and  Pythias,  153. 

Danae,  22. 

Death,  not  to  be  feared,  87. 

Death  and  life,  87,  88,  207 ;  Cicero 
quoted  respecting,  90 ;  the  first 
and  second  death,  61,  62. 

Decius,  persecutor,  302. 

Demetrianus,  140. 

Democritus,  1 1 ;  his  theory  of  prop- 
erty, 93- .        .  . 

Demons,  their  origin,  two  kinds  of, 
recognised  by  Plato  and  Soc- 
rates, meaning  of  the  name,  in- 
fluence of,  64 ;  inventors  of 
astrology  and  divination,  65,  66, 
232,  and  oracles,  66 ;  exorcised 
by  Christians,  65,  159;  identified 
with  heathen  gods,  232 ;  their 
rage  against  Christians,  64. 

Devil.     See  Satan. 

Diagoras,  denies  the  gods,  11. 

Diocletian,  persecutor,  his  avarice, 
303 ;  searcher  into  futurity,  304 ; 
stirred  up  against  the  Christians, 
305  ;  his  illness,  307  ;  forced  to 
resign,  309;  his  death,  317. 

Dionysius  of  Sicily,  despoils  the 
images  of  the  gods,  45. 

Divination,  invented  by  demons,  65, 
66,  232. 

Domitian,  persecutor,  302. 

Donatus,  confessor,  heroism  of,  307. 

Dreams  illustrating  philosophical 
contradictions,  73. 

Ears,  pleasures  derived  from,  188. 
Earth,   not    a    creative    power,   87 ; 

spherical    form    of,    arguments 

against,  94.     See  World. 
Egyptians,  the  first  astronomers  and 

inventors  of  idolatry,  63. 
Eloquence  and  truth  compared,  9. 
Empedocles,  on  the  elements  of  man, 

61. 
Emperors  of  Rome,  six  at  one  time, 

.3^3- 

Ennius,  on  Jupiter  and  the  gods,  22, 
24,  26,  228;  on  Romulus,  28; 
on  Africanus,  31. 

Epicurus,  denies  providence,  11,  236, 
287;  against  the  Stoics,  197, 
261 ;  on  the  creation  of  the 
world,  87,  197,  236  ;  errors  of 
his  philosophy,  86,  261,  263,  first 
taught  by  Leucippus,  87. 

Euclid,  on  immortality,  80. 

Euhemerus,  on  Jupiter  and  the  gods, 
22,  26,  228. 

Europa,  fable  of,  21. 

Evil,  origin  of,  52;  necessary,  142. 

Eyes  of  man,  188. 

Faith,  duty  of,  250. 
Faunus  and  Fauna,  38,  229. 
Fire,  principle  of  life,  58. 
Flood,  tradition  of,  59. 


Fortitude,  religious  duty  of,  250. 
Fortune,  no  goddess,  97  ;  not  man's 

adversary,  99. 
Fulvius,  censor,  story  of,  52. 
Furies,  the  three,  1S5. 

Galerius,  persecutor,  stirred  up  by 
his  mother  against  the  Chris- 
tians, 305 ;  edict  against  them, 
306;  his  cruelty  and  oppression, 
309,  314;  recognises  Constantine 
as  emperor,  311;  invasion  of 
Italy  and  retreat,  312;  stricken 
with  incurable  disease,  314;  edict 
in  favour  of  Christians,  and 
death,  315. 

Ganymede,  21. 

Gauls,  why  called  Galatians,  323. 

Generation  not  spontaneous,  60. 

Gibbon,  his  criticism  on  Lactantius, 
300  (note). 

Goat  of  Amalthea,  36. 

God,   one  only.    Creator  of   all,   11, 

224,  268  ;  foretold  by  the  proph- 
ets, 13,  224  ;  testified  to  by  poets 
and  philosophers,  13,  225,  by 
Hermes,   15,  by  the   Sibyls,   16, 

225,  278,  by  Apollo,  17,  279; 
without  body  or  sex,  17,  226; 
cannot  be  worshipped  with  false 
gods,  32;  men  forget  Him,  but 
recognise  Him  in  adversity,  40; 
alone  to  be  worshipped,  47,  171 ; 
the  Creator  of  matter,  53,  of  the 
world,  53,  265,  of  animals,  58; 
Governor  of  the  world,  104;  His 
patience,  109,  232,  bounty  to  all, 
260,  providence,  232,  264;  be- 
gets the  Son,  one  with  Himself, 
105,  109,  132;  His  worship 
man's  highest  duty,  171,  263, 
contrasted  with  worship  of  false 
gods,  246,  280;  not  to  be  con- 
founded with  the  world,  265 ; 
anger  of,  263,  273,  277,  278, 
279;  error  of  Epicureans  and 
Cicero,  263,  264  ;  why  incarnate, 
242. 

Gods,  heathen,  men,  as  shown  by  En- 
nius and  Euhemerus,  26;  possess 
sex,  28 ;  vices  of,  and  patrons  of 
vice,  30,  146,  227 ;  how  conse- 
crated, instances  of  Ceres  and 
Liber,  30;  those  of  Rome  and 
their  rites,  32  ;  origin  of  their 
worship,  32,  63 ;  stars  regarded 
as,  32 ;  their  rites  vain,  33,  203, 
and  depraving,  64 ;  kinds  of  sac- 
rifice offered  to  them,  32;  de- 
mons, 64,  130;  vainly  wor- 
shipped by  images,  67  ;  religion 
of,  203. 

Golden  age  fabled  under  Saturn,  142, 
230 ;  exists  in  obedience  to  God, 

143- 

Good,  the  chief,  opinions  of  philoso- 
phers respecting,  74,  76,  234«; 
nature  of,  77  ;  in  immortality 
alone,  80,  235  ;  not  in  bodily  life. 
74,  80;  not  without  evil,  75. 

Gravitation,  theory  of,  95. 

Greece,  seven  wise  men  of,  loi. 

Heathen,  folly  of  their  worship,  157, 

158. 
Hebrews,  history  of,  63,  108. 


Hercules,  life  and  death,  18,  31 ; 
vices,  226;    rites  in  honour  of, 

36. 
Heresies,  origin  of,  133  and  notes. 
Hermes  Trismegistus,  on  the  unity 

of  God,  15 ;  on  immortality,  210; 

on  the  last  days,  215. 
Hesiod,   on   the   generation   of    the 

gods,  14. 
Hierocles    against    Christiaiiity,   137 

and  note. 
Homer,  12,  14,  19. 
Horace,  45. 
Hospitality,  true  principle  of,  176. 

Idolatry,  originated  in  Egypt,  63. 

Images,  folly  of  making  and  worship- 
ping, 42,  46,  67. 

Immortality,  the  reward  of  virtue, 
155;  chief  good  found  in,  80 ; 
belongs  to  the  soul,  81,  88,  205, 
253;  taught  by  Pythagoras  and 
the  Stoics,  88,  205,  by  Cicero,  90; 
hope  of,  despises  death,  154; 
proofs  of,  206;  testimony  of 
Homer,  Apollo,  and  the  Sibyls, 
210. 

Incarnation  of  Christ,  reason  and 
mystery  of,  106;  prophesied,  109, 
no;  arguments  of  unbelievers 
against,  1 24  ;  necessary  to  true 
religion,  125,  to  His  mediation 
and  restoration  of  man,  126. 

Infanticide,  practised  by  heathen,  187. 

lo,  21. 

Isis,  sacred  rites  of,  35. 

Jesus,  birth  of,  106,  109,  no;  Son  of 
God  and  Son  of  man,  no,  112; 
His  priesthood,  n3,  life  and 
miracles,  114,  passion  foretold, 
116,  119,  deat^,  burial,  and  resur- 
rection, 122,  ascension,  1 23 ;  hated 
by  the  Jews,  n6, 117;  coming  as 
a  Mediator,  126;  His  resurrection 
denied  by  unbelievers,  1 24 ;  mean- 
ing of  His  miracles,  cross,  and 
passion,  127,  128;  typified  by  the 
paschal  lamb,  129. 

Jews,  history  of,  108,  rites,  118,  dis- 
persion, 123. 

Judgment,  the  last,  216,  221,  254. 

Jupiter,  his  origin,  life,  name,  and 
death,  20;  tomb,  23;  three  of 
the  name,  23;  his  father,  23;  the 
Cretan,  23;  nursed  by  the  Curetes, 
23 ;  temples  to,  23 ;  his  actions 
as  related  by  Euhemerus,  24;  his 
licentious  life,  227. 

Just  man,  character  of,  183;  Cicero's 
error,  184. 

Justice,  banished  by  Jupiter  and  re- 
stored by  Christ,  142;  made 
known  to  all,  but  embraced  by 
few,  143;  argument  of  Carneades 
for  and  against,  158;  nature  of, 
150,  154;  source  in  piety  and 
equity,  150;  answers  to  objec- 
tions, 153;  of  the  Christians, 
151  ;  violated  by  persecution, 
145,  147;  duties  of,  151,  247; 
man's  birthright,  225 ;  the  wor- 
ship of  God,  and  true  wisdom, 
245- 

Knowledge  and  supposition,  233. 


( 


LACTANTIUS:    INDEX    OF    SUBJECTS. 


577 


Lamb,  the  paschal,  a  type  of  Christ, 

129. 
Larentina,  32. 
Last  times,  the,  253. 
Law,    divine,   described    by    Cicero, 

170. 
Leucippus,  first  teacher  of  Epicurean 

philosophy,  87. 
Liberality,  not  in  shows,  public  works, 

or  patronage,  175. 
Licinius,  Emperor,  treaty  with  Daia, 

315;   attacked  by  him,  319;  his 

dream,  319;  defeats  Daia,  320; 

puts  to  death  Valeria  and  others. 

Lights,  offering  of,  in  worship,  need- 
less, 163. 

Lindus  of  Rhodes,  honours  to  Her- 
cules at,  36. 

Logos,  meaning  of  the  name,  107. 

Lucilius,  defines  virtue,  167. 

Lucretius,  28, 44 ;  on  origin  of  wisdom, 
82. 

Lust,  the  source  of  all  evils,  141. 

Magician,  Christ  none,  139. 

Man,  creation  of,  by  and  for  God, 
56,  58,  199,  203,  252,  271;  testi- 
monies of  Ovid  and  Sallust,  58, 
62 ;  fable  of  his  creation  by  Pro- 
metheus, 59;  his  body  and  its 
various  parts,  28S-295;  ^'^  mind 
and  brain,  296;  his  upright  form, 
41,  201,  etc.;  his  life  shortened, 
62  ;  why  subject  to  sin,  272  ;  why 
weak  and  mortal,  2S4 ;  his  earthly 
and  spiritual  life,  200;  God's  care 
for,  273;  the  world  made  for,  269. 

Mars,  19,  226. 

Matter,  created  by  God,  53. 

Maxentius,  Emperor,  311,  with  Max- 
imian,  and  degraded,  312;  his 
defeat  and  death,  31S. 

Maximian,  Herculius,  character  of, 
303 ;  emperor  with  Maxentius, 
312,  degraded,  and  plots  against 
Constantine,  313;  his  death,  313. 

Melisseus,  king  of  the  Cretans,  38. 

Mercury,  character  of,  19,  226. 

Mercy,  man's  chief  duty  to  man,  173, 
250. 

Millenium,  the,  218,  254. 

Minucius  Felix,  on  Saturn,  23;  his 
Octavius  eulogized,  136. 

Miracles,  meaning  of,  127. 

Nature,  use  of  the  word  by  the  hea- 
then, 97;  nothing  apart  from 
God,  97  ;  error  of  Stoics  respect- 
ing, 196. 

Neptune,  dominion  of,  22. 

Nero,  the  first  persecutor,  death  of, 
312. 

Newton,  Sir  Isaac,  his  orrery,  48 
(note). 

Nicomedia,  church  of,  destroyed,  305 ; 
restored,  320. 

Noah,  history  of,  63. 

Numa  Pompilius,  introduces  the  wor- 
ship of  new  gods,  37,  229;  his 
books  found  and  burned,  37. 

Olympus,  Mount,  22. 
Ops,  25. 

Oracle  of  Apollo,  acknowledges 
Christ,  112. 


Oracles,   testify   to    Christian    truth, 

257  (note). 
Orpheus,  on   the   unity  of  God,   13; 

introduced  the  rites  of  Bacchus 

into  Greece,  38. 
Osiris,  38. 
Ovid,  on  the  unity  of  God,  14;  on 

Vesta,   24 ;   on   Saturn,   25 ;    on 

creation,  41,  56,  58. 

Parc3e,  the  three,  59. 

Passion  of  Christ,  poem  on,  327,  32S 
(note). 

Passions,  the  three  furies,  247  ;  to  be 
subdued,  249. 

Patience,  duty  oi,  1S4. 

Persecution,  its  cruelty  and  irration- 
ality, 147,  243. 

Persius,  on  the  vanity  of  idols,  45. 

Peter  and  Paul,  SS.,  martyred  at 
Rome,  302. 

Philo,  on  sacrifice,  255  (note). 

Philosophers,  testify  to  the  unity  of 
God,  13;  refute  falsehood,  but 
do  not  know  the  truth,  44;  their 
lives  at  variance  with  their  pre- 
cepts, 83;  seekers  after  wisdom 
in  name,  but  not  in  fact,  70  ;  con- 
fess absolute  truth  to  be  unat- 
tainable, 98 ;  resemble  disin- 
herited sons  or  runaway  slaves, 
104;  their  precepts  not  obeyed, 
124;  their  variations  and  contra- 
dictions, 10,  204,  234,  23S. 

Philosophy,  vain  because  conjecture, 
not  knowledge,  71  ;  not  the 
parent  of  life  and  truth,  82 ; 
should  be  for  all  men,  but  as 
taught  is  for  the  learned  only, 
95;  not  taught  to  women,  slaves, 
or  barbarians,  95 ;  does  not  find 
the  chief  good,  divine  wisdom, 
96,  102 ;  not  the  mistress  of  life, 

97- 

Phlegon,  257  (note). 

Phoenix,  poem  on  the,  324. 

Piety,  succours  widows,  orphans,  and 
'the  sick,  177. 

Plato,  on  the  unity  of  God,  14;  con- 
sequences of  his  theory  of  a 
community  of  goods  and  wives, 
92;  approaches  nearer  the  truth 
than  other  jihilosophers,  197, 
236;  on  creation,  197. 

Pluto,  dominion  of,  22. 

Poets  testify  to  the  unity  of  God,  13. 

Polytheism  contrary  to  nature,  as 
denying  the  Fatherhood  of  God, 
103. 

Poverty,  tends  to  virtue,  195. 

Priapus,  sacrifice  of  an  ass  to,  36. 

Prisca  put  to  death  by  Licinius,  321. 

Prometheus  fabled  to  have  made 
man,  59. 

Prophets,  true  and  false,  214;  of  the 
Old  Testament,  antiquity  of,  13, 
104. 

Protagoras,  doubts  the  existence  of 
God,  II. 

Providence,  divine,  11,  224. 

Punishment,  future,  217. 

Pyrrhus,  shi])wreck  of,  52. 

Pythagoras,  on  the  unity  of  God,  14; 
gave  name  to  ])hil()Sophy,  70; 
pretended  to  have  been  Kiijihor- 
bus,  89;    on  the   immortality  of 


the  soul,  SS;  on  the  transmigra- 
tion of  souls,  89,  236. 
Pythagoreans,    persuade    to   suicide, 
89. 

Quirites,  the  fathers  of  Rome,  50. 

Religion,  meaning  of  the  term,  131, 
172;  reason  in,  131  ;  cannot  be 
separated  from  wisdom,  11,  51, 
100,  103 ;  distinguished  from 
superstition,  131  ;  teaches  mercy 
towards  men,  172,  173. 

Repentance,  duty  of,  178;  value  of, 
190,  251. 

Resurrection,  of  Christ,  122  ;  of  men, 
218,  221. 

Rewards  and  punishments,  future, 
90,  217. 

Rites,  of  the  Roman  gods,  228,  229. 

Rome,  ages  of,  213. 

Romulus,  establishes  the  Quirites,  50. 

Sacrifice,  spiritual  and  material,  192. 

Sacrifices,  in  heathen  worship,  162. 

.Sallust,  on  the  creation  of  man,  62. 

Satan,  origin  of,  52 ;  he,  not  fortune, 
the  adversary  of  man,  99;  loosed 
after  the  Millenium,  220. 

Saturn,  father  of  Jupiter,  23,  24,  26; 
happy  state  of  things  under  his 
reign',  143,  22S. 

Scripture,  despised  by  the  learned 
for  its  simplicity,  136. 

Seneca,  on  the  unity  of  God,  15;  on 
the  vanity  of  idols,  45;  error  in 
philosophy,  S3;  on  the  character 
of  philosophers,  S4. 

Senses,  pleasures  of,  to  be  restrained, 
iS6,  248. 

Seven  Wise  Men  of  Greece,  loi. 

Sex,  does  not  belong  to  God,  28. 

Shows,  public,  cruel  and  unjust,  186; 
corrupting,  248. 

Sibylline  books,  the,  15,  16;  their 
value  to  Christianity,  256  (note). 

Sibyls,  number  and  character,  15, 
16 ;  testimony  rcsjiccting  God, 
16,  27,  61  ;  the  Erythrx-an,  16,  18, 
26,  ])roclaims  the  Son  of  Ciod, 
105;  on  immortality,  210;  on  the 
lasted  ays,  215. 

Snakcs,'why  ni.ide  by  God,  199. 

Socrates,  denies  human  knowledge, 
237  ;  his  wisdom,  91  ;  his  incon- 
sistency, 91,  237. 

Soul,  the  true  man,  43;  office  of,  62; 
immortality  of,  taught  by  philos- 
ophers, 205,  proofs  of,  206,  253; 
its  affections,  29S  ;  the  scat  of,  as 
held  by  philosophers,  297  ;  dis- 
tinguished from  the  mind,  29S; 
the  gift  of  God,  298. 

Stars,  worshipped  as  gods,  47,  231  ; 
ordered  bv  (lod,  48. 

Stoics,  their  physical  interpretation 
of  mythology,  24;  called  the  ele- 
ment's godsV24,  29;  make  all  the 
world  to  be  God,  196  ;  take  away 
human  affections,  237  ;  errors  re- 
sjiecting  God  and  nature,  196; 
their  further  views  of  God,  197, 
261. 

Suicide,  taught  by  Pythagoreans  and 
Stoics,  89. 

Superstition,  not  reasonable,  157. 


578 


LACTANTIUS:    INDEX   OF   SUBJECTS. 


Temples,  heathen,  useless,  41. 

Terminus,  34. 

Tertulliaii,  apologist,  136,  140. 

Testaments,  Old  and  New,  122. 

Thales,  on  the  unity  of  God,  14. 

Theatres,  corrupting,  1S7. 

Thoth,  15. 

Tiberius  Atinius,  52. 

Titan,  26. 

Transmigration   of  souls  taught   by 

Pythagoras,  89,  236. 
Truth,'  knowledge   of,  9;   compared 

with  eloquence,  69,  70;  steps  to, 

259- 
Tuditanus,  folly  of,  93. 
Turullius,  lieutenant  of  Mark  Antony, 

52- 

Unity  of  God,  11 ;  witnessed  by  poets 
and  philosophers,  13,  by  Hermes 
Trismegistus,  15,  by  the  Sibyls, 
16,  by  Apollo,  17 ;  consistent 
with  the  divinity  of  the  Son, 
132. 


Uranus,  228. 

Utero,  et  Conceptione,  atque  sexibus, 
293- 

Valeria,  Empress,  refuses  Daia  and 
is  banished,  316;  put  to  death 
by  Licinius,  321. 

Varro,  on  the  Sibyls,  15. 

Venus,  lewdness    of,  30 ;    the    Bald, 

2,3- 

\  erres,  plunders  the  Sicilian  gods, 
46. 

Vesta,  chastity  of,  24. 

Virgil,  on  the  unity  of  God,  14 ;  on 
Saturn,  25;  on  the  piety  of 
^neas,  27  ;  on  human  sacrifices 
offered  by  /Eneas,  145. 

Virtue,  reward  of,  155;  defined  by 
Lucilius,  167;  consists  in  self- 
conquest,  180;  false  and  true, 
167  ;  never  without  evil,  206. 

Virtues,  the,  and  the  vices,  207. 

Ways,  of  life  and  death,  164,  246. 


Wisdom,  cannot  be  separated  from 
religion,  10,  11,  51,  100,  103,  238; 
divine,  its  power  over  life,  96; 
freely  given  to  all,  96;  errors  of 
Lucretius  and  Cicero  respecting 
its  origin,  85 ;  where  to  be  found, 
100;  false,  233. 

Wise  Men  of  Greece,  the  Seven,  loi. 

IVord,  the,  called  the  Logos,  107. 

World,  made  by  God,  53,  57 ;  the 
parts  of,  58 ;  distinguished  from 
God,  49;  made  for  man,  198, 
203,  252,  269;  Epicurus'  view 
of  its  production,  197 ;  age  of, 
211  ;  changes  of  empire  in,  212; 
fortunes  of,  at  the  last  day,  213; 
its  origin,  211;  why  containing 
evil  things,  199. 

Worship  of  God,  must  be  free,  244. 

Xenophanes,  theory  of  the  moon,  94. 

Zeno,  on  the  unity  of  God,  14;  repu- 
diates conjecture,  71  ;  suicide  of, 
88 ;  calls  pity  a  vice,  93. 


LACTANTIUS,    VENANTIUS. 


INDEX  OF  TEXTS. 


PACE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PACK 

Gen.  i. .     . 

204 

Ps.  xvi.  10     ....     122 

Isa.  xlv.  8     ....     n  I 

Hos.  vi.  2      ....     241 

ii.     . 

62 

xvi.  10     . 

241 

xlv.  14    . 

•        132 

xiii.  13      . 

.         241 

iii.  17 

62 

xviii.  43  . 

109 

xlv.  14-16 

.       112 

xiii.  13-14 

.       122 

iii.  24    . 

62 

xxii.  16-18 

121 

xlv.  14-16 

•       239 

xiii.  14 

•       132 

vi.  3 

P 

xxii.  16-18 

241 

xlv.  15   . 

.       102 

Joel  ii.  28      .     . 

.       2^ 

VI.   II 

187 

xxviii.  4-5 

"3 

1-5    .    • 

.       240 

Amos  viii.  9-10 

.       122 

ix.  6 

187 

xxxiii. 

204 

1.5-6     . 

.       120 

viii.  9,  10 

.       241 

ix.  23 

P 

xxxiii.  6  . 

107 

Iii.  7  .    . 

•       257 

Mic.  iv.  2-3  .     . 

nS 

ix.  25 

63 

XXXV.  15-16 

120 

Iii.  14      . 

•       257 

Hag.  ii.  7       . 

169 

X.  32 

173 

XXXV.  15,  16 

240 

liii.  1-6  . 

•       117 

Zech.  iii.  i-S 

i'3 

XIV.  13 

loS 

xlv.  I        .     . 

107 

liii.  7 

.       120 

iv.  10  . 

296 

xxxii.  29    .     . 

iiS 

xlv.  6-7  . 

112 

liii.  7       . 

.       240 

xii.  10 

121 

xlix.  29-31     . 

177 

1.23    .     . 

193 

liii.  8      . 

.       106 

xii.  10  . 

241 

Ex.  iii 

118 

Ixviii.  13 

115 

liii.  8-10,  I 

2 

.       121 

xiii.  I  . 

96 

xii. 

129 

Ixix.  21    . 

120 

liii.  9 

.       129 

Mai.  i.  5   .     . 

214 

xix.     . 

118 

Ixix.  21    . 

240 

Iv.  4  .     . 

.       102 

i.  6   .     . 

104 

xxiii.  20 

loS 

Ixxii.  I     . 

114 

Iviii.  6,  7 

173 

i.  10,  n 

109 

xxv.  2 

192 

Ixxii.  I,  2 

25« 

Ixiii.  10  . 

no 

i.  10,  II 

242 

Num.  xi.  31 

loS 

Ixxii.  6-7 

117 

Ixvi.  18  . 

242 

Matt.  i.  23     . 

239 

xiii.  8       .     . 

118 

Ixxviii.  24 

108 

Ixvi.  18-19 

109 

iii.  . 

90 

xiii.  16     .     . 

118 

Ixxxv.  12 

no 

Jer.  i.  5     .     . 

106 

iii.  15 

ni; 

xxiii.  19  .     . 

241 

xc.  2   .     . 

III 

11.13.     • 

133 

iii.  17 

"5 

xxiv.  16-19. 

257 

xc.  4  .     . 

211 

IV.  3-4    . 

118 

V.  44 

i83 

xxiv.  17  .     . 

112 

xciv.  21-22 

121 

viii.  7-9. 

no 

VI.  9 

•31 

x.xiv.  17   .     . 

239 

civ.  4  .     . 

107 

xi.  1S-19 

121 

vii.  6 

•34 

Deut.  iv.  17  .     .     . 

326 

cix.  6  .     . 

114 

xi.  19 

121 

vii.  6 

221 

xviii.  17-19  . 

118 

ex.  I    .     . 

II  i 

xii.  7-8  . 

123 

vii.  15 

139 

xxviii.  66 

121 

ex.  I    .     . 

241 

xii.  7,  8  . 

242 

viii. 

116 

xxviii.  66 

241 

ex.  3-4    . 

H3 

XV.  9  .      . 

122 

i-^-  .)3 

127 

XXX.  6      .     . 

iiS 

exv.  5 

45 

XV.  9  .     . 

241 

X.  16 

321 

Josh.  V.  2      ... 

iiS 

cxxvii.  I  . 

113 

xvii.  9    . 

112 

xiii.  25 

90 

I  Sam.  ii.  35      .     . 

113 

exlviii.  6 

47 

xxii.  19  . 

302 

xiv. 

ns; 

xvi.  7     .     . 

119 

Prov.  viii.  22-3 

105 

xxv.  4-6 

109 

xiv.  24 

lib 

2  Sam.  vii.  4-5  .     . 

113 

XXX.  4 . 

330 

xxxi.  31,  32 

J23 

xviii.  7 

133 

vii.  12-14, 16 

113 

Eccles.  iii.  18-2 

I 

62 

XXX vi.  30 

302 

xviii.  21-; 

5 

17S 

I  Kings  ix.  6-9 

121 

xii.  7 

62 

xxxix.     . 

•05 

xxi. 

102 

ix.  7-9      . 

241 

xii.  10 

69 

Hi.      .     . 

los 

XXV.  35 

;;il 

xix.  10 

109 

Ecclus.  xxiv.  5- 

7 

107 

Ezek.  xviii.   7 

173 

Mark  iv.  .     . 

xix.  16 

106 

Isa.  i.  2-3      . 

no 

xii.      . 

no 

iv.  33  ■ 

'34 

2  Kings  xxv.      .     . 

105 

i.  18  .     . 

129 

Dan.  ii.  47     . 

255 

vi.  .     . 

>'S 

I  Chron.  vii.  19-22 

121 

vii.  14     . 

no 

iii.  29    . 

255 

vii.  37 . 

127 

2  Chion.  xvi.  9  .     . 

296 

vii.  14     . 

239 

iv.    .     . 

255 

xiv.  8,  9 

177 

Ezra  i.  2    .     .     .     . 

255 

ix.  6  .     . 

n  I 

vi.  25    . 

25s 

Luke  vi.  28   . 

'«3 

Neh.  ix.  26    .     .     . 

109 

xi.  1-2    . 

i'3 

vii.   .     . 

214 

vi.  32-34 

'75 

Job  xxxi.  6    .     .     . 

216 

xi.  10 

113 

vii.  7     . 

147 

viii. 

116 

Ps.  i.  I      .... 

117 

xix.  20    . 

112 

vii.  13  . 

i^3 

ix.  .     . 

'  '5 

i-5      .     .     .     • 
11.  7     ...     . 

216 

xix.  20    . 

239 

vii.  13  . 

241 

X.  3      . 

32' 

'•5 

xxxv.  3-6 

"5 

vii.  13-14 

in 

xiv.  n 

'5' 

iii.  5    .     .     .     . 
IV.  4    .      .     .      . 

122 

xiii.  6-7 

123 

vii.  23 

17' 

xvii.  I 

^33 

277 

xiii.  6,  7 

242 

xii.   .     . 

90 

xi.\.  42,  4.^ 

• 

122 

vii.  II       ... 

262 

xliv.  6     . 

132 

xii.  2     .     . 

216 

xxii.  15 

109 

viii.     . 

204 

xlv.  1-3. 

III 

IIos.  vi.  2      .     . 

122 

xxii.  25 

142 

58o 


LACTANTIUS,   VENANTIUS :    INDEX    OF   TEXTS. 


PAGE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

Luke  xxiii.  15    .     .     .     120 

Acts  xxiv.  15     .     .     .       61 

Gal.  vi.  14     .     .     .     .     130 

Heb.  V II-? 

John  i.  1-3    . 

.     107 

xxiv.  15 

216 

Eph.  i.  9-10  . 

102 

V.  14    . 

221 

i.  9  .     . 

.       96 

xxvi.  6 

144 

ii.  5       . 

113 

vii.  3     . 

1X2 

i.  12 

123 

xxviii.  22 

.     281 

ii.  12     . 

109 

viii.  2   . 

.      126 

ii.  19-20 

119 

Rom.  i.  19-21 

44 

iv.  24    , 

58 

viii.  13 

123 

iii.  29    . 

109 

i.  21-23 

lOI 

iv.  26    . 

185 

X.  30     . 

183 

V.  22     . 

114 

i.  22      . 

44 

iv.  26    . 

277 

xi.  27    • 

IIO 

V.  23     . 

242 

i.  22     . 

169 

Phil.  iii.  20    . 

28 1 

Jas.  i.  9,  10   . 

151 

V.  28,  29 

216 

ii.  14,  15 

171 

iii.  21    . 

299 

ii.  1-8     . 

151 

V.  29     . 

61 

V.  9-10 

no 

iv.  8      . 

76 

ii.  10 

216 

vi.    .     . 

H5 

vi.  r6-i7 

67 

xii.  2     . 

81 

iii.  2  .     . 

178 

viii.  34      . 

67 

vii.  15  . 

125 

Col.  i.  18 

109 

I  Pet.  i.  19    . 

129 

ix.  9     . 

115 

vii.  21  . 

125 

i.  26-27 

102 

ii.  5     . 

260 

xi.  51,  52 

257 

viii.  3  . 

'p 

ii.  8  .     . 

85 

iii.  20. 

63 

xii.  .     . 

90 

xii.  14  . 

'^^ 

iii.  2  .     , 

97 

2  Pet.  i.  18-21 

257 

xiv.  6,  13  . 

242 

xii.  19  . 

183 

iii.  5.     . 

185 

ii.  I     . 

133 

xvii.  3  . 

131 

xvi.  25 

107 

HI.  10     . 

58 

ii.  4     . 

65 

xvii.  3  .     . 

172 

I  Cor.  I.  20-22 

102 

I  Thess.  iv.  14 

61 

ii.  16  . 

257 

xvii.  3  .     . 

259 

i.  21    . 

238 

2  Thess.  ii.    . 

214 

ii.  22  . 

75 

xix.  36 

129 

ii.  7    . 

44 

ii.  7 

212 

ii.  22  . 

119 

Acts  i.  9   .     . 

III 

ii.  9    . 

lOI 

I  Tim.  ii.  5    . 

126 

iii.  8    . 

211 

xii.  23  . 

314 

11.  14  . 

44 

vi.  8-10 

178 

iii.  16. 

44 

xiii.  10  . 

137 

iii.  11-15 

171 

vi.  II 

201 

I  John  i.  22,  23 

242 

XV.  10   . 

108 

iii.  13-15 

216 

2  Tim.  ii. 

201 

iii.  1-8 

164 

xvi.  18  . 

65 

IV.  4    .     .     . 

193 

Tit.  ii.  12       . 

161 

iv.  8. 

17 

xvi.  37-38 

120 

xi.  1-2 

131 

Phil.  ii.  9-10 

IlS 

iv.  15 

242 

xvii.  18 

262 

xi.  19 

133 

iii.  II    . 

219 

Rev.  i.  10 

329 

xvii.  28 

140 

vii.  2-7  . 

143 

Heb.  i.  2  .     . 

102 

ii.     .     . 

214 

xvii.  28 

257 

XV.  19 

172 

i.  3  .     . 

132 

xiii.  .     . 

214 

xix.  13  .     . 

65 

2  Cor.  iv.  4  .     . 

62 

I.  7  .     . 

107 

xix.  12  . 

238 

xix.  15,  16     . 

65 

iv.  4  .     . 

64 

ii.     .     . 

204 

xxi.  7    . 

223 

xi.x.  15-16 

65 

iv.  6  .     . 

58 

iv.  8      . 

114 

xxii.  17 

223 

xxii.  24-25 

120 

Gal.  iii.  20    .     . 

126 

VENANTIUS,    ASTERIUS    URBANUS,    VICTORINUS, 
DIONYSIUS    OF    ROME. 


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS. 


Alcibiades,  Christian  writer,  337  and 

note. 
Altars,  symbols  of  heaven  and  earth, 

35I-' 

Antichrist,  354. 

Apocalypse,  purpose  of,  360  (note). 

Ardaba,  home  of  Montanus,  335. 

Asterius  Urbanus,  date  and  charac- 
ter of,  334  (note). 

Athanasian  Confession,  its  date  and 
authority,  366  and  notes. 

Babylon,  symbol  of  the  Roman  state, 

^      352- 

Beast  of  the  Apocalypse,  number  of, 

356- 

Caius  and  Alexander,  martyrs,  re- 
fuse communion  with  Montanus, 
337- 

City,  the  holy,  of  the  Apocalypse, 
symbolical  meaning  of,  359. 

Dionysius,  bishop  of  Rome,  a  Greek 
Father,  363  (note)  ;  not  a  contro- 
versialist nor  anathematizer,  367 
(note). 

Easter  poem,  329. 

Four,  number,  mvstical  meaning  of, 

34'- 

Four  living  creatures  of  the  Apoca- 
lyjjse,  symbols  of  the  four  Evan- 
gelists and  of  the  life  and  works 
of  our  Lord,  348. 

Fourth  day  of  the  week,  kept  as  a 
fast,  or  "  stationary  day,"  341. 


Genealogies  of  St.  Matthew  and  St. 
Luke,  both  of  Joseph,  360  (note). 

Hades,  souls  in,  351  ;  identified  with 
Paradise,  360  (note). 

Horses  of  the  A])ocalypse,  symboli- 
cal meaning  of,  350,  351. 

John,  St.,  symbol  of,  as  evangelist, 
348;  receives  the  Apocalypse  in 
Patmos,  and  delivers  it  on  his 
release,  353 ;  his  testimony  against 
the  early  heresies,  353. 

Julian  of  Apamea,  336. 

Luke,  St.,  evangelistic  symbol  of,  348. 

Marcion,  heresy  of,  365. 

Mark,  St.,  evangelistic  symbol  of,  348. 

Matthew,  St.,  evangelist,  symbol  of, 
348. 

Maximilla,  Montanist,  reported  to 
have  committed  suicide,  336. 

Millenii-.m,  the,  359. 

Miltiades,  Montanist  heretic,  335. 

Montanists,  heretics,  their  ))rophecies 
not  fulfilled,  337  ;  leave  no  mar- 
tyrs, no  examples  in  Scripture, 
and  no  gift  of  ]-)ro]ihecy,  237- 

Montanus,  a  recent  convert  of  Ar- 
daba, frenzied,  335;  reported  to 
have  committed  suicide,  336. 

Number  of  the  Beast,  356. 

Parasccz'e,  origin  of    its    observance, 

34'- 
Phrygians,  the  first  Montanists,  336. 


QuicunqueVidt,  the  hymn,  366  (note). 

Roman  state,  signified  by  Babylon, 
352. 

Rome,  church  of,  how  an  ecclesiasti- 
cal centre,  363  (note). 

Sabbath,  symbol  of  the  life  and  works 
of  our  Lord,  343;  the  Jewish, 
abolished,  342. 

Sabellius,  heresy  of,  365. 

Seven,  number,  mystical  meaning  of, 
342;  heavens,  342;  stars,  34:;; 
churches  of  Asia,  represent  seven 
classes  of  Christians,  345-347. 

Sixth  day  of  the  week,  or  Parasine, 
how  observed,  341. 

Son  of  God,  eternal,  one  with  the 
Father,  365. 

Song,  the  new,  symbolizes  the  confes- 
sion of  the  Faith,  350. 

Themison,  Montanist  leader,  337  and 

note. 
Trinity,  Catholic  doctrine  of,  against 

the  SabelJians,  365. 
Twelve,  number,  symbolism  of,  343. 

Venantius  Honorius,  poem  on  Easter, 

3=9- 
Victorinus,  bishop  of  Petau,  date  and 
office  of,  341  (note);  writings  of, 
state  of  the  text,  360  (note). 

Word,  the,  has  the  names  of  the 
seven  spirits  in  Isaiah,  342. 

Zoticus,  bishop  of  Comana,  T^id. 


581 


ASTERIUS    URBANUS,    VICTORINUS,    DIONYSIUS 

OF    ROME. 


INDEX  OF  TEXTS. 


Gen.  i.  i6,  17 
ii.  10 
iv.  15     . 
vi.  14,  LXX. 
vii.  2 
ix.     .     . 
xlix.  8,  9 
xlix.  16 
xlix.  16 
Ex.  xxii.  9,  12 
xxiv.  7,  8 
Lev.  xxiii.  18 
Num.  xvi.  41 
xxiii.  . 
Deut.  XV.  I    . 
xxxii.  6 
xxxii.  8 
Josh.  VI.    . 
vi.  4 
I  Chron.  xv. 
Ps.  vi.  I    . 
xii. 

xxxiii.  6 
xlv.  I  . 
Ixii.  II 
xc.  4  . 
cv.  8  . 
ex.  3,  LXX 


341 
341 
343 
359 
343 
348 
350 
349 
360 
342 
350 
342 
336 
346 
343 
365 
352 
342 
342 
342 
342 
342 
342 
342 
345 
342 
358 
365 


PAGE  ] 

Ps.  cxxxii.  7 .  .  .  .  345 

Prov.  viii.  20 

344 

viii.  22 

365 

viii.  25 

365 

xi.  I  . 

343 

Isa.  i.  13,  14 

342 

iv.  I  . 

342 

iv.  I  . 

345 

xi.  2  . 

344 

xi.  2,  3 

342 

xi.  4  . 

345 

xl.  3  . 

348 

lix.  9 . 

354 

Jer.  i.  5  . 

354 

XV.  16 

360 

Ezek.  XXXV.  ( 

357 

Dan.  ix.  . 

342 

ix.  25 

342 

)x.  27 

357 

xi.  37 

358 

xi.  45 

357 

Mic.  V.  5,  6 

352 

Zech.  iv.  2 

343 

iv.  10 

342 

iv.  14 

354 

Mai.  iv.  5,  6 

352 

I  Mace.  ii.  31-41 

342 

Matt.  i.  I  . 

348 

Matt.  v.  23,  24   . 

X.  34  •  • 
xii.  5  .  . 
xiii.  27-30 
xiii.  51,  52 
xvii.  27  . 
xix.  27,  28 
xxiv.  14 
xxiv.  15 
xxviii.  19 

Mark  i.  3  .     . 
iv.  38  . 
xiii.  18-20 
xiii.  27 

Luke  i.  5  . 

xxi.  10,  II 
xxi.  21 

John  i.  I  .  . 
i-  I,  2,  3 
ii.  19,  20, 

iii;  34,  35 
vii.  22 
X.  30 
xii.  48 
xiv.  10 
xiv.  II 
Aets  ii.  33 
vi.  3. 


351 
345 
342 
352 
345 
345 
349 
351 
357 
345 
348 
343 
352 
352 
348 

356 
348 
342 
355 
345 
342 
366 

lU 

365 

345 
342 


Rom.  vi.  9  .  .  . 

344 

I  Cor.  xi.  3  .  .  . 

344 

4.  5  •  •  • 

353 

xii.  28  .  . 

353 

xiv.  29  .  . 

353 

XV.  45-47  . 

342 

XV.  53   .  . 

346 

2  Cor.  iii.  17,  iS  . 

360 

Gal.  i.  8,  9  .  .  . 

368 

Col.  i.  15.  .  .  . 

365 

iii.  I  .  .  .  . 

359 

2  Thess.  ii.  3,  4 .  . 

356 

ii.  7,  8,  9  • 

354 

ii.  8  .  . 

345 

ii.  10  .  . 

354 

ii.  II  .  . 

354 

I  Tim.  iii.  15  .  . 

345 

I  Pet.  ii.  9  .  .  . 

344 

Rev.  i.  3  .  .  .  . 

353 

i.  13   ... 

342 

IV.  4   ... 

343 

iv.  5  ... 

342 

iv.  6   ... 

341 

V.  6.  .  .  . 

342 

vii.  5-8   .  . 

360 

viii 

342 

xxii.  10   .  . 

353 

582 


APOSTOLICAL  TEACHING,   CONSTITUTIONS,   AND   CANONS, 
AND   THE   CLEMENTINE   HOMILY. 


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS. 


Accusers,  false,  to  be  punished,  416, 
418. 

Adornment,  personal,  392. 

Adultery  and  fornication,  463. 

Agapa:,  rule  of  offerings  at,  411. 

Almsgiving,  duty  of,  468,  470;  to 
whom  due,  397 ;  ordered  by  the 
bishop,  411;  proportion  to  cler- 
gy and  others,  411,  427;  not  to 
be  boasted  of,  430. 

Altar,  oblation  at,  486  ;  place  of  bish- 
op at,  486 ;  separate  or  schis- 
matic, forbidden,  502. 

Anointing  in  baptism,  431,  469,  476; 
thanksgiving  at,  476. 

Apocryphal  books  condemned,  457. 

Apostles,  how  to  be  received,  3S0; 
note  on,  383;  preaching  of,  ex- 
pounded, 454-456;  first  council 
of,  454-455;  list  of  bishops  or- 
dained by  them,  477  ;  their  days 
to  be  honoured,  495. 

Aquila,  companion  of  the  apostles, 

453-  .       , 

Ascension  of  our  Lord,  feast  of,  to  be 

kept,  448,  495. 
Ascription  to  Christ,  464. 

Baptism,  directions  regarding,  379; 
sin  after,  398;  requisite  to  com- 
munion, 414  ;  not  to  be  adminis- 
tered by  laymen  or  women,  429; 
chrism  in,  431,  469,  476;  rites  of, 
interpreted,  431 ;  Lord's  Prayer 
at,  431 ;  not  to  be  refused,  456; 
heretical,  not  to  be  admitted,  456; 
repetition  of,  forbidden,  456;  of- 
fice of,  469;  renunciation  in,  476; 
consecration  of  water  for,  477  ; 
fruits  of,  477  ;  candidates  for,  to 
be  examined,  494,  495 ;  trine  im- 
mersion in,  502. 

Baptized,  the,  eucharistic  prayer  for, 
484. 

Barnabas,  St.,  apostle,  453. 

Basil  ides,  heretic,  453. 

Basmotheans,  heretics,  deny  divine 
providence,  452. 

Bathing,  promiscuous,  to  be  shunned, 

395- 
Biddmg  prayer  in  the  Eucharist,  485. 
Birth  of  Christ,  feast  of,  to  be  kept, 

443.  495- 


Bishops,  how  appointed,  381,  481, 
482 ;  character  of,  396,  398 ;  ex- 
amination of,  397  ;  to  give  reproof, 
398 ;  not  to  receive  bribes  nor 
spare  offenders,  399,  415,  but  to 
be  merciful  to  the  penitent,  400, 
408,  415;  to  govern,  not  be  gov- 
erned, 401  ;  patterns  of  right  liv- 
ing, 403 ;  to  seek  out  and  save 
the  erring  and  sinful,  404,  405 ; 
not  to  be  hasty  in  excommuni- 
cating, 405,  413;  content  with  lit- 
tle, 408  ;  distributing  offerings  to 
those  in  need,  408 ;  stand  between 
God  and  the  people,  409;  to  be 
maintained  by  the  Church,  409; 
stand  in  place  of  the  high  priest, 
410;  govern  by  the  authority  of 
God,  410;  the  office  of,  not  to  be 
taken  bvanv  one  to  himself,  410; 
offerings  to  be  brought  to,  410; 
to  be  honoured  as  fathers,  before 
rulers  and  kings,  412;  not  to  be 
respecters  of  persons,  415;  judges 
of  causes,  but  with  the  assistance 
of  presbyters  and  deacons,  418; 
to  give  sentence  in  due  propor- 
tion to  the  sin,  418 ;  to  hear  both 
sides,  41S;  to  give  ])ublic  warning 
against  contentions,  420;  throne 
of,  in  the  church,  421  ;  no  others 
to  ordain,  430;  whom  to  ordain 
and  to  refuse,  431  ;  to  be  ordained 
by  three  bishops,  432,  493,  500 ; 
to  provide  for  or])hans  and  others 
in  need,  433;  list  of  those  or- 
damcd  by  the  Apostles,  477  ;  how 
chosen  and  ordained,  481-4S2; 
prayer  at  their  ordination,  482, 
483 ;  not  to  leave  their  charge, 
501  ;  to  submit  to  the  chief  bish- 
op, 502;  sundry  regulations  con- 
cerning, 502 ;  synods  to  be  held 
by,  502. 

Blessing  of  water  and  oil,  494. 

Books,  heathen,  to  be  shunned,  393; 
of  Scripture  to  be  studied,  393. 

Burial  of  the  dead,  rites  of,  464. 

Canonical  books  of  Holy  Scripture, 

SOS- 
Canons,  Apostolical,  date  and  author- 
ity of,  388,  390  (notes). 


Catechumens,  instruction  of,  475, 476; 
eucharistic  prayer  for,  483. 

Cemeteries  ("  dormitories  ").  Chris- 
tian service  of  burial  in,  464. 

Cerinthus,  heretic,  453. 

Children,  duty  of,  436;  to  be  correct- 
ed, 468 ;  their  place  in  church, 
486. 

Chrism  in  baptism,  431,  469,  476. 

Christ,  prophecies  of  His  coming  and 
rejection,  446-448  ;  ascription  to, 
464. 

Christmas  Day  to  be  honoured,  443, 

49S- 

Christians,  how  to  be  received,  3S1. 

Church,  the  Catholic,  of  whom  com- 
posed, 391. 

Church,  a,  not  to  be  forsaken,  413, 
501  ;  shape,  direction,  and  various 
parts  of,  420;  like  a  ship,  420. 

Clementine  homily,  editions  of,  512 
(note) ;    date    and    authority   of, 

513  (note) ;  contents  and  version, 

514  (note). 
Cleobius,  heretic,  453. 

Clergy,  orders  and  duties  of,  493,  494, 
501,  502;  subordination  of  orders 
of,  499,  500. 

Coming  of  Christ  to  be  watched  for, 
3S2. 

Commandments,  the  Ten,  to  be  kept 
by  Christians,  413,  but  as  the  law 
of  nature,  not  of  Moses,  459. 

Communion,  Holy,  prayers  after,  380; 
not  to  be  given  to  the  unbaptized, 
414;  service  of,  4S3-491  ;  to  be 
received  by  all  the  clergy,  500. 
See  Lucharist  and  Liturgy. 

Confessors,  to  be  helped  by  gifts  and 
sacrifice,  437  ;  not  to  be  ordained, 

493- 

Consecration,  prayer  of,  in  the  Eu- 
charist, 489. 

Constitutions,  Apostolical,  their  date, 
character,  and  purpose,  3S7,  3S8, 
3S9  (notes) ;  editions  of,  390 
(note). 

Contention,  warning  against,  395, 419, 
to  be  given  publicly  by  the  bish- 
op, 420. 

Covetousness,  warning  against,  391. 

Cross,  sign  of,  in  the  !-",ucharist,  4S6. 

Cursing,  contrary  to  Christianity,  430. 

5S3 


584       APOSTOLICAL   TEACHING,    ETC.:    INDEX    OF    SUBJECTS. 


Daily  service  to  be  held,  422;  psalms 
at,  423 ;  prayers,  496-498. 

Deacons,  how  appointed,  381 ;  to  be 
helpers  to  the  bishop,  410,432; 
to  be  obeyed,  and  to  do  nothing 
without  the  bishoj),  411,  but  to 
be  his  eye,  ear,  and  mouth,  416; 
place  and  duty  of,  in  church,  421 ; 
ministry  of,  in  the  Eucharist,  421, 
486;  to  visit  the  people,  432 ;  or- 
dination of,  492. 

Deaconesses,  to  be  honoured,  but  not 
to  act  without  the  deacon,  410; 
their  place  in  church,  and  duties, 
421 ;  to  assist  in  the  baptism 
of  women,  431 ;  ordination  of, 
492. 

Dead,  the,  care  for  and  burial  of, 
464;  prayer  for,  at  the  Eucharist, 
489,  490;  daily  prayer  for,  497, 
498,  not  profitable  to  the  ungod- 
ly, 498. 

Death,  the  way  of,  379,  468. 

Denying  Christ,  peril  of,  438. 

Divination  and  soothsaying  to  be 
shunned,  424,  467. 

Dositheus,  heretic,  453. 

Drunkards,  warned,  49S. 

East,  head  of  a  church  towards,  421 ; 

prayer  towards,  reason  of,  421. 
Easter,  feast  of,  to  be  honoured,  443 ; 

computation    of,    446,    447,    500; 

eve  of  (the  "Great   Sabbath"), 

447  ;  octave  of,  447  ;   forty  days 

following  to  be  kept,  44S ;    rest 

from  labour  on,  495. 
Ebionites,  Jewish  heretics,  452. 
Elements   in  the  Holy  Communion, 

care  of,  491  and  note. 
Energumens,  eucharistic  prayers  for, 

4S4. 
Epiphany,  feast  of,  to  be  honoured, 

443-  495-. 

Essenes,  Jewish  heretics,  452. 

Eucharist,  the,  379;  ])rayers  after, 
380;  deacon's  ministry  at,  421; 
kiss  of  peace  in,  422;  prayers, 
sacrifice,  communion,  and  bless- 
ing in,  422;  unbaptized  not  ad- 
mitted to,  422 ;  not  to  be  offered 
by  laymen,  429;  at  the  burial 
of  the  dead,  464;  prayers  and 
thanksgivings  of,  471-475,  483- 
491  ;  canon  of,  486-491  ;  oblation 
in,  4S6.  See  Communion  and 
Liturgy. 

Eunuchs  to  be  ordained  in  certain 
cases,  501. 

Excommunicate,  the,  not  to  be  prayed 
with,  501. 

Exorcists,  not  ordained,  493. 

Faithful,  the,  eucharistic  prayer  for, 
486. 

False  brethren  to  be  avoided,  438. 

Fan,  used  by  the  deacon  in  the  Eu- 
charist, 486. 

Fasting,  before  baptism,  379;  to  ob- 
tam  help  for  martyrs,  437 ;  on 
the  stationary  days  (Wednesday 
and  Friday),  379,  445,  469;  for 
penance,  402 ;  on  the  Sabbath, 
445, 469;  through  the  Holy  Week, 
447 ;  not  on  the  Lord's  Day  or 
other  feasts,  449. 


Feasts  and  fasts  to  be  kept,  443-447, 

495- 
First-fruits,    how  to  be  offered  and 

used,  494,  500. 
Food,  all  kinds  to  be  received  with 

thanksgiving,  469. 
Forgiveness  of  injuries,  duty  of,  417. 
Funerals,  Christian  rites  at,  464. 

Gifts,  miraculous  and  prophetic,  ob- 
ject of,  4S0,  481. 

Gloria  in  Excelsis,  in  the  Eucharist, 
490. 

Heathen,  the,  examples  of  prayer  to 
Christians,  423;  their  hymns  and 
songs  to  be  shunned,  442,  443. 

Plemerobaptists,  Jewish  heretics,  452. 

Heresies  and  heretics,  to  be  avoided, 
450.  451.  457,  45S.  461  ;  forbid- 
ding  marriage,  meat,  and  wine, 

453- 

Holydays  to  be  observed  by  rest  from 
labour,  495. 

Hymns,  primitive,  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, 507  (note). 

Hypocrisy,  sin  of,  468. 

Idolatry,  fruit  of,  442,  443. 

Idols,  offerings  to,  not  to  be  par- 
taken, 469. 

Imitation  of  Christ,  duty  of,  438,  439. 

Injuries,  forgiveness  of,  392. 

Intercession  in  the  Eucharist  for  the 
livmg  and  the  departed,  489, 
490;  in  daily  prayer,  497,  498. 

Invocation,  prayer  of,  in  the  Eucha- 
rist, 489. 

James,  St.,  bishop  and  martyr,  to  be 
honoured,  442. 

Jews,  examples  of  prayer  to  Chris- 
tians, 423 ;  prophecies  of  their 
rejection,  451,  452;  heresies  of, 
452;  why  taken  captive,  461; 
their  customs  and  ceremonies 
not  binding  on  Christians,  462. 

Judgment  of  quarrels  and  controver- 
sies to  be  held  on  the  second  day 
of  the  week,  417  ;  by  the  bishop, 
in  presence  of  presbyters  and 
deacons,  417  ;  sentences  to  be  in 
proportion  to  sin,  41S;  instances 
from  the  story  of  Susanna  and 
from  heathen  tribunals,  419. 

Judgment,  the  last,  472. 

Justin  Martyr,  St.,  order  of  the  Di- 
vine Liturgy  given  by  him,  507 
(note). 

Kiss  of  peace  at  the  Eucharist,  422, 
486. 

Laity  to  bring  oblations  and  tithes, 
409;  how  placed  in  church,  421  ; 
not  to  baptize  or  execute  priestly 
offices,  429. 

Last  days,  the,  472. 

Last  judgment,  the,  472. 

Law,  of  Moses,  not  binding  on  Chris- 
tians, 393,  459;  of  nature,  in  the 
Decalogue,  why  imposed,  458, 
459;  of  sacrifice,  taken  away, 
460;  how  fulfilled  by  Christ,  461. 

Lent,  w^hen  to  be  kept,  443. 

Lessons  read  in  church,  421. 


Letters  commendatory,  to  be  given 
and  received,  422 ;  to  be  re- 
quired, 501. 

Levites,  office  of,  executed  in  the 
Christian  Church  by  the  deacons, 
409,  410. 

Life,  the  way  of,  377,  378. 

Liturgy,  the  Divine,  prayers  in,  483- 
491  ;  canon  of,  486-491  ;  Pauline 
norm  of,  506  (note)  ;  order  of,  by 
St.  Justin  Martyr,  507  (note)  ; 
comparison  of  the  Clementine 
and  .St.  Irenasus,  507  (note).  See 
Communion  and  Eucharist. 

Lord's  Day,  the  service  of,  381,  421, 
423,  47 1 ;  to  be  kept  as  a  feast, 

449.  469- 
Lord's  Prayer,  the,  379 ;  in  baptism, 

431- 
Love-feasts,  offerings  at,  411. 

Marcus,  heretic,  453. 

Marriage,  forbidden  by  certain  here- 
tics, 453, 454 ;  lawful  use  of,  462, 
463 ;  second,  forbidden  to  the 
clergy,  457,  501  ;  second  and  third, 
how  far  allowed,  426. 

Martyrs,  to  be  helped  by  gifts  and 
self-sacrifice,  437,  and  by  per- 
sonal risk,  438 ;  SS.  James  and 
Stephen  to  be  honoured  as,  442  ; 
false  martyrs,  442  ;  their  days  to 
be  ke])t,  495. 

Masters,  their  duty  to  servants,  436. 

Men,  commandments  to,  392. 

Menander,  heretic,  453. 

Miracles,  power  of,  to  whom  given, 
and  with  what  object,  479. 

Money,  love  of,  to  be  shunned,  433. 

Moses,  virtues  of,  and  rebellion 
against,  450,  451. 

Nicene  Creed,  the,  524;  ratification 
of,  524  ;  addenda  to,  524;  decree 
of  the  Council  of  Ephesus  on 
additions  to,  525. 

Nicetas,  companion  of  St.  Peter,  453. 

Obedience  to  rulers,  duty  of.  436,  468. 

Oblation,  eucharistic,  the  First,  486; 
the  Second,  489. 

Offerings,  made  under  the  Gospel  as 
well  as  the  Law,  413;  made  by 
the  people,  but  distributed  by 
the  bishop,  413;  to  be  received 
with  reverence,  and  not  from  the 
unworthy  and  evil  livers,  434, 
435  ;  of  the  impenitent,  provoke 
God,  435 ;  how  those  forced  upon 
the  Church  are  to  be  used,  435; 
for  martyrs  and  confessors,  437  ; 
kinds  and  proportion  of,  471; 
distribution  of,  to  the  priesthood 
and  the  poor  respectively,  471 ; 
given  at  the  Eucharist,  4S6  ,  cer- 
tain kinds  of,  forbidden,  500. 

Oil,  use  of,  in  baptism,  431,  469; 
thanksgiving  for,  476;  blessing 
of,  494. 

Ointment  in  baptism,  thanksgiving 
for,  469,  477. 

Orders,  greater  and  minor,  431. 

Ordination,  by  bishops  only,  430 ;  on 
whom  conferred,  431,  471;  prayer 
at,  4S2  ;  rites  of,  483,491-493,  500. 

Orphans,  provision  for,  433. 


APOSTOLICAL   TEACHING,    ETC.:    INDEX    OF    SUBJECTS.       58- 


Parents,  duty  of,  436 ;  duty  to,  46S. 

Passion  of  our  Lord,  events  of,  442- 
445;  week  (jf,  to  be  kejJt,  447. 

Paul,  St.,  his  norm  of  the  Divine  Lit- 
urgy, 506  (note). 

Penance  for  sin,  degrees  of,  402  ;  re- 
quired in  order  to   communion, 

414- 

Penitents,  to  be  mercifully  received, 
400;  admitted  to  pravers  but  not 
to  communion  till  after  penance, 
414;  eucharistic  prayer  for,  485. 

Pentecost,  feast  of,  to  be  honoured, 
449. 

Persecution,  duty  in,  439;  those  flee- 
ing from,  to  be  received,  49S. 

Pharisees,  fatalists,  452. 

Phoeni.x,  fable  of,  illustrating  the  res- 
urrection of  the  body,  441. 

Poor,  the,  to  be  honoured  in  church, 
422  ;  to  be  provided  for,  433. 

Prayer,  directions  for,  379;  the  Lord's, 
379  ;  to  be  made  daily  in  church, 
413,  423;  to  be  made  not  doubt- 
fully, but  with  faith,  4O7,  and  with 
repentance,  468. 

Prayers,  eucharistic,  for  providence 
and  creation,  472  ;  for  God's 
care,  473;  for  the  incarnation 
and  providence,  474  ;  for  Chris- 
tians, 475;  for  catechumens,  4S3; 
for  energumens  and  the  baptized, 
484  ,  for  penitents  and  for  the 
faithful,  48 5,  4S6;  of  oblation, 
consecration,  and  invocation,  488, 
489;  of  intercession  for  the  liv- 
ing and  the  departed,  488-490; 
final    prayers    and    benediction, 

49'- 

Prayers,  daily,  478 ;  hours  of,  496 ; 
to  be  said  in  church  or  at  home, 
496;  not  with  heretics,  496;  for 
the  evening,  496;  for  the  morn- 
ing, 497 ;  for  the  first-fruits  and 
for  the  departed,  497. 

Prayers  at  the  ordination  of  a  bishop, 
482;   at  other  ordinations,  491- 

493- 
Presbyters,  are  m   place  of  parents, 
410;  represent  the  Apostles,  410; 


their  seats  in  church,  421  ;  one 
from  another  parish  to  be  re- 
ceived, 422;  ordination  of,  432; 
not  to  ordain,  432  ;  prayer  at  the 
ordination  of,  491-492  ;'  to  be  or- 
dained by  bishops,  500. 

Priesthood,  the,  to  be  honoured,  450, 
467. 

Priestly  offices  not  to  be  undertaken 
by  laymen,  429. 

Prophecies  of  Christ,  446. 

Prophets,  how  to  be  received  and 
supported,  380,  381 ;  false,  4S0, 
481. 

Reader,  in  church,  place  and  duty  of, 
421  ;  ordination  of,  493. 

Relics  of  Christians  to  be  honoured, 
464. 

Repentance,  examples  of,  in  Holy 
Scripture,  406 ;  danger  of  delay- 
ing, e.xamples  of,  40S;  of  St. 
Matthew  and  Zaccha^us,  414; 
God  calls  all  to,  420. 

Resurrection  of  the  body,  promise  of, 
in  Holy  Scripture,  439-442;  tes- 
timony of  the  .Sibylline  books  to, 
440;  illustrated  by  the  fable  of 
the  phosni.x,  441. 

Rulers  to  be  obeyed,  46S,  505. 

Sabbath,  the  Great  (Easter  Eve),  fast 
of,  447. 

Sadducees,  heresy  of,  482. 

SaiuOes  in  the  Holy  Communion, 
458. 

Saturnilus,  heretic,  453. 

Schism,  guilt  of,  450. 

.Scripture,  canonical  books  of,  505. 

Servants,  duty  of,  436;  kindness  to, 
468. 

Sibyl,  testifies  to  the  resurrection  of 
the  body,  440. 

Simon  Magiis,  heresy  of,  452 ;  punish- 
ment of,  453. 

Simony  forbidden,  501. 

Smging  at  burials,  464. 

Slaves,  purchased  to  save  souls,  424; 
their  condition  ameliorated  by 
the   Church,  425    (note);    to  be 


given  rest  from  labour  on  holv- 
days,  495;  may  be  ordained  bv 
consent  of  their  masters,  505. 

Stationary  days,  445. 

Stephen,  St.,  deacon  and  martvr, 
feast  of,  to  be  honoured,  442. 

Strangers  to  be  received  in  church 
with  honour,  422. 

Sub-deacons,  490;  ordination  of,  492. 

Siasum  Corda,  in  the  Holy  Com- 
munion, 4S6. 

Susanna,  story  of,  warning  against 
false  judgment,  419. 

Teachers,  how  to  be  received,  380. 

Tcr  Sanctits  in  the  Eucharist,  488. 

Thanksgiving,  the  (Eucharist),  379; 
thanksgivings  at  and  after  the 
Eucharist,  and  at  anointing,  470, 
471-475;  in  baptism,  476,  477. 

Theatres  and  shows,  to  be  shunned, 
424. 

Tithes,  duty  of,  471. 

Twelve  Apostles,  Teaching  of,  dis- 
covery and  publication  of,  372 
(note)  ;  contents,  and  relation  to 
other  works,  and  authenticity, 
373  (note);  date  and  place,  374 
(note). 

Two  ways,  of  life  and  death,  377- 
379- 

Unanimity  among  Christians,  420. 

Vestments  at  the  Eucharist,  4S6. 
Vestries  of  a  church  at  the  east  end, 

421. 
Virgins,  vows  and  character  of,  436; 

not  ordained,  493. 

Water,  in  the  Eucharist,  4S6;  bless- 
ing of,  494. 

Wavs,  two,  of  life  and  death,  465. 

Wives  of  clergy,  not  to  be  cast  off, 
500. 

Worldly  cares  forbidden  to  the  clergy, 
500,  505. 

Zacchxus,  publican,  companion  of  St. 
Peter,  453. 


APOSTOLICAL  TEACHING,   CONSTITUTIONS,   AND   CANONS, 
AND   THE   CLEMENTINE   HOMILY. 


INDEX  OF  TEXTS. 


PAGE 

Gen.  i 487 

i.  I    .     .     . 

441 

i.  26.     .     . 

473 

i.26.     .     . 

487 

i.26.     .     . 

503 

i.  26,  27     . 

441 

i.  27 .     .     . 

521 

i.  28.     .     . 

462 

i.28.    .     . 

463 

i.31.     .     . 

454 

i.31.     .     . 

503 

11.  7  .     .     . 

440 

ii.  8.     .    . 

487 

ii.  24     .     . 

426 

ii.  24     .    . 

466 

iii.  16    .     . 

429 

iii.  19    . 

440 

iv.     .     . 

466 

iv.     .     .     . 

474 

iv.     .     . 

488 

iv.  7,  LXX 

402 

iv.  10    . 

406 

iv.,  V.     . 

488 

vi.,  vii. . 

488 

viii.  .     .     . 

474 

ix.     .     .     . 

504 

ix.  3      .     . 

469 

ix.  6      .    . 

416 

xii.    .     . 

474 

xii.,  etc. 

488 

xiii.  16  . 

472 

xvii.  7   . 

472 

xviii.  25,  2 

448 

xix.  .     . 

466 

xix.  .     . 

488 

xix.  24  . 

448 

xxii.  17 

472 

xxvi. 

474 

xxvi.  3 . 

472 

xxvii.  29 

430 

xxviii.  15 

•     472 

xxxii.  30 

448 

xxxv.     . 

•     474 

xxxix.  . 

414 

xlvi.  27,  L 

X} 

C. 

.     488 

xlviii.  4 

.     472 

xlix.  9  . 

•     454 

xlix.  10 

•     454 

xlix.  10 

.    461 

1.  I    .     . 

•     464 

Ex.  i.,  etc.     . 

.     488 

ii.  13  .     . 

•     467 

li.  14  .     . 

•     450 

Ex. 


PAGE 

iii 

474 

iii.  2   

448 

iii.  6  

464 

iii.  14,  15     ,     .     . 

472 

iv.,  etc 

459 

iv.,  vii 

479 

vii.,  etc 

451 

vii.  I 

411 

vii.  I 

480 

X-  25 

506 

xiii.  19    ...     . 

464 

xiii.  21     .     .     . 

451 

xiv.  28     .     .     . 

45« 

XV.  20      .     .     . 

481 

XV.  20      .     .     . 

492 

XV.  26      .      .      . 

398 

xvi 

451 

xvi.  8      .     .     . 

412 

xvii.  6     .     .     . 

451 

xviii 

416 

xviii.,  xxiv.,  xxviii 

492 

xix.  5,  6  .     .     . 

409 

XX 

458 

XX.  12        ... 

412 

XX.  13      ... 

466 

XX.  13,  14    .     . 

377 

XX.  14,  17    .     . 

392 

XX.  15      ... 

Zll 

XX.  16      ... 

377 

XX.  17      ... 

377 

XX.  17       ... 

391 

XX.  17       .     .     . 

429 

XX.  24      .     .     . 

459 

XX.,  xxxiv.  .     . 

497 

xxi.  17     .     .     . 

412 

Xxi.  22,  23    .       . 

377 

xxi.  23,  LXX. 

466 

xxii.  18  .     .     . 

466 

xxii.  19  .     .     . 

463 

xxii.  28   .     .     . 

410 

xxii.  28  .     •     . 

411 

xxii.  28    .     .     . 

•     503 

xxiii.  2     .     .     . 

.    418 

xxiii.  3    .     .     . 

•    397 

xxiii.  3    .     .     . 

•    415 

xxiii.  7,  LXX. 

•     399 

xxiii.  7,  8     .     . 

•    415 

xxiii.  8    .     .     . 

•    399 

xxviii.,  xxix.     . 

.     500 

xxix.36,38,39,41 

)     506 

xxxi.,  etc.    .     . 

•    45' 

xxxii.      .     .     . 

.    458 

xxxii.  I    .     .     . 

•    459 

31 


Ex.  xxxii.  4  . 
xxxii.  4   . 
xxxiii.  II 
xxxiii.  II,  I 
xxxiv.  28 

Lev.  V.  16 

XV.     . 

x-v.  31 
XV.  31 
XV.  31 
xviii.  19 
xviii.  22 
xviii.  22 
xix.  6 
xix.  II 
xix.  15 
xix.  15 
xix.  17 
xix.  17 
xix.  17 
xix.  18 
xix.  18 
xix.  18 
xix.  18 
xix.  26 
xix.  26, 
xix.  27 
XX.  10 
XX.  13 
xxi.  5 
xxi.  7,  14 
xxi.  17,  etc 
xxiii.,  XXV. 
xxvi.  27,  28 
xvii. . 
Num.  iii.  . 

vi.  24, 

xi.  31 

xii.  I 

xii.  2 

xii.  3 

xii.  3 

xii.  7,  8 

xii.  8 

xii.  14 

xiv.  5 

xiv.  10 

xvi. 

xvi. 

xvi. 

xvi. 

xvi. 

xvi. 


etc 


PAGE 

443 
459 
451 
499 
449 
504 
462 

398 
403 
415 
463 

463 
466 

435 
466 

397 
415 

378 

419 
466 

377 
409 
460 
465 
424 
467 

392 
463 
463 
392 
457 
397 
474 
416 

504 
492 
422 

459 
450 
450 
450 
467 

499 
412 
402 
451 
451 
399 
410 

430 
450 
467 
474 


Num.  xvi. 
xvi.  3 


Deut. 


XVI.  13 
xvi.  15 
xvi.  21 
xvii.  8 
xviii.    . 
xviii.  I 
xviii.  I 
xviii.  8,  etc. 
xviii.  12,  etc 
xxiii.  23  . 
xxiii.  23   . 
xxiii.,  xxiv., 
xxiv.  9 
XXV.  3. 

XXV.,  XXXI 

.  16 

•  17 

•  17 

•  17 

•  17 

•  17 

•  17 

V.  19 

v-39 
V.  31 

V.  32 
vi.  4 
vi.  4 
vi.  4 
vi.  5 

VI.  6 
vi.  7 
xii. . 
xii.  5 
xii.  32 
XV.  23. 
xvi.  18 
xvi.  19 
xvi.  19 
xvi.  20 
xvi.  20 
xvi.  20 
xvii.  7 
xvii.  7 
xviii.  10 
xviii.  10, 
xviii.  15 
xviii.  15,  etc. 
xix.  13 
xix.  14 


PAGE 

499 
450 
450 
451 
451 
442 

471 
403 
409 
409 
409 
424 
467 
480 
392 

443 
481 

413 

397 
399 
400 

415 

466 
467 
443 
473 
421 
469 
398 
459 
460 

377 
465 
461 

393 
461 

458 

469 
413 
399 
415 
397 
399 
417 
399 
415 
424 
467 
448 

479 
416 

39t 


586 


APOSTOLICAL   TEACHING,    ETC.:    INDEX    OF   TEXTS.         587 


Deut.  xix.  15 
xix.  15 
xix.  17 
xix.  19 
xxii.  22 
xxiii.  I 
xxiii.  7 
xxiii.  7 
xxiii.  17 
xxiii.  17, 
xxiii.  18 
xxiii.  18 

XXV.  4 , 

xxvii.  . 
xxvii.  9 
xxvii.  17 
xxvii.  25 
xxvii.  25 
xxvii.  26 
XXX.  15 
XXX.  15,  I 
XXX.  19 
xxxii.  21 
xxxiv.  8 
xxxiv.  10 
Josh.  i.  8  .     . 

iii.  10,  etc 

v.     . 

V.  14 

vi.   . 

vii.  .     . 

vii.  .     , 


Judg 


LXX 


xxiv.  32 

ii.  13  . 

iv.,  xi. . 
iv.  4  . 
iv.  4  . 
vi.,  viii. 
xiii.,  XV., 

1  Sam.  i.  .     . 

i.  15. 
ii. 

vii.    . 
viii.  . 

^ii:  3 
xiii.   . 

xiii.  13 

XV.      . 
XV.  22 

XV.  23, 
XV.  23 
xvii.,  XV 

2  Sam.  iii.,  xx 

vi. 

xii.    . 
xii.  13 
xii.  13 
XV.  3 
xviii.-: 

XX.   I 

I  Kings  iii.,  vii 
xi.  5 
XI.  7 
xii.,  LXX 
xii. 
xiii. 
xiii.  33 
xiv. 
xvii. 
xvii.  9 
xviii. 
xviii.  21 
xviii., 
xxii. 


PAGE 
418 

416 

463 
421 

419 
465 
466 
463 
429 

434 
409 
466 
421 
39' 
399 
415 
461 
465 

377 
465 

443 
498 

451 
393 
488 

474 
448 
488 

399 
466 
4S0 
464 
443 
475 
481 
492 
474 
474 
475 
449 
399 
475 
412 

448 

499 
410 

399 

460 
424 
467 
466 
467 

399 
467 

403 
406 
450 
450 
450 
475 
443 
443 
396 
399 
434 
499 
435 
440 
426 

475 
465 

467 


1  Kings  xix.  8 

xix.  ij 
xxi. 

2  Kings  ii.  . 


v:.  , 
viii. 
xi.  3,  4 
xiii.  21 
XX.,  xix 
XX.,  xxi, 
xxii.  I . 
xxii.  14 
xxii.  14 

1  Chron.  vi.  .     . 

xxi.     . 

2  Chron.  v.  13  . 

xviii.  . 
xix.  2  . 
XX.  37 
xxiii. 

LXX. 
xxiv.  I 
xxvi.  . 
xxvi.  . 
xxvi.  . 
xxvi.  . 
xxxii., xxxii 
xxxiii. 

XXXV.  . 

Ezra  viii.  .     .  . 

Neh.  iii.    .     .  . 

viii. .     .  . 

viii.  10 .  . 

Esth.  iv.  16  .  . 

Job  i.,  etc.     .  . 

ix.  8,  LXX. 

X.  10  .     .  . 


xiv.  4,  LXX. 
XX.  15,  LXX. 
XX.  18,  LXX. 
xxxi.  5,  6    . 
XXXV.  7,  8   . 
xxxviii.  .     . 
xxxviii.  10,  I! 
xxxviii.  1 1  . 
xl.  24,  LXX. 
xiii.    .     .     . 


Ps.  i.  I, 


1.  2 

ii.  I,  2 
ii.  7     . 


11.  II 
iv.  4 


VI.  5  •  •  • 
vii.  4  .  .  . 
vii.  4  .  .  . 
vii.  15  .  . 
viii.  2  .  . 
xi.  7  .  .  . 
xii.  5  .  .  . 
xvii  8  .  . 
xviii.  26  .  . 
xviii.  43,  44 
xix.  7  .  .  . 
xxii.  12,  16  . 
xxii.  16  .  . 
xxii.  18  .  . 
xxii.  27,  28  . 
xxvi.  5,  4  . 
xxvii.  12 
xxviii.  9  .     . 


PAGE 

449 
480 
418 

475 
440 

399 

466 
480 

435 
396 
464 

475 
407 

396 
481 
492 
492 
475 
477 
475 
458 
45S 

406 
396 
410 
429 

450 

499 

407 

475 
475 
475 
475 
493 
469 

449 
452 
484 
441 
403 
434 
434 
424 

439 

487 

499 

472 
4S4 
467 
424 
461 

447 
412 

44- 
419 
466 
400 
419 
465 

43' 
484 
498 
447 
497 
416 
446 
458 
444 
444 
445 
455 
423 
444 
422 


PAGE 

PAGB 

Ps.  xxviii.  9  .     .     .     .     498 

Prov.  i.  16     .     .     . 

.     40^ 

xxxvi.  I  . 

.     406 

iii.  9    .     .     . 

4ij 

xxxvii.  16 

434 

iii.  9,  etc. 

43! 

xii.  I  .     . 

427 

iii.  9    .     .     . 

46^ 

xii.  10 

447 

iii.  28  .     .     . 

457 

xliv.  20   . 

497 

V.  3,  4 .     .     . 

394 

xiv.     .     . 

44S 

v.  II,  etc.     . 

394 

1.  9,  12,  etc. 

460 

v.  18,  etc.      . 

463 

1.  12    .     . 

Ii.  .     .     . 

459 
415 

V.  22    .     .     . 
vi.  2     .     .     . 

401 
466 

Ii.  lo  .     . 

483 

vi.  6,  etc.,  LXX 

425 

Ii.  10,  17 

460 

vi.  22  .     .     . 

462 

Ii.  12  .     . 

484 

vii.  I,  etc.     . 

394 

Iv.  17 

379 

vii.  25,  26     . 

394 

Ixiii.  II    . 

466 

viii.  22,  LXX. 

474 

Ixiv.  I 

486 

viii.  22-25    • 

448 

Ixvii.  17  . 

473 

ix.  I     .     .     . 

448 

Ixviii.  16 

451 

ix.  8     .     .     . 

466 

Ixviii.  17 

445 

X.  7      ... 

442 

Ixix.  21    . 

445 

X.  7      ... 

464 

l.x.xii.  (LXX 

.Ix 

xi. 

X.  12    .     .     . 

522 

5.  17    • 

521 

X.  18     .      .      . 

431 

Ixxiv.  4    . 

445 

xi.  4     .     .     . 

434 

Ixxiv.  15 

4S8 

xi.  22  .     .     . 

395 

Ixxiv.  16 

496 

-xi.  25  .     .     . 

413 

Ixxiv.  19 

400 

.xi.  26  .     .     . 

413 

Ixxxii.  6  . 

410 

xii.  4    .     .     . 

394 

Ixxxii.  6  . 

412 

xii.  4  in  LXX. 

395 

lx,xxii.  8  . 

447 

xii.  II  .     .     . 

425 

xci.  5,  6  . 

486 

xii.  28,  LXX. 

4'g 

xci.  7  .     . 

445 

xii.  28,  LXX. 

466 

xcvii.  4   . 

484 

xiii.  17,  LXX. 

467 

xcvii.  5    . 

4S4 

xiii.  20      .     . 

458 

ciii.  14     . 

44' 

xiii.  20     .     . 

467 

civ.  2  .     . 

487 

xiii.  24 

436 

civ.  9 .     . 

499 

xiv.  I  .     .     . 

395 

civ.  14,  15 

434 

xiv.  5  .     .     . 

442 

civ.  15     . 

494 

xiv.  12      .     . 

457 

civ.  24     . 

473 

xiv.  29,  LXX. 

414 

civ.  32     . 

484 

xiv.  29,  LXX. 

467 

cv.  16 

489 

xiv.  31      .     . 

466 

cvi.  9  .     . 

484 

xiv.  32      .     . 

414 

cvii.  34    . 

488 

.XV.  I,  LXX. 

397 

cix.  8  .     . 

454 

xvi.  6  .     .     . 

37S 

cix.  24     . 

449 

xvi.  6  .     .     . 

413 

ex.  I    .     . 

464 

xvi.  6  .     .     . 

427 

ex.  4  .     . 

410 

xvi.  6  .     .     . 

46S 

cxii.  5      . 

465 

xviii.  3     .     . 

395 

cxii.  9 

4'3 

xviii.  22    .     . 

456 

cxii.  9 

427 

xix.  13,  LXX. 

463 

cxiii.  I     . 

478 

xix.  14      .     . 

456 

cxiii.  3     . 

461 

xix.  14      .     . 

4t'3 

cxiii.  5     . 

482 

xix.  17      .     . 

427 

cxvi.  7     . 

464 

xix.  17      .     . 

46S 

cxvi.  12  . 

5'7 

xix.  18      .     . 

436 

cxvi.  15  . 

442 

xix.  1 8      .     . 

468 

cxvi.  15  . 

464 

xix.  24      .     . 

397 

cxvii.  2    . 

484 

xix.  24      .     . 

425 

cxix.  I,  2 

461 

XX.  9    .     .     . 

403 

cxix.  73  . 

441 

XX.  9    .      .     . 

4S4 

cxxi.  8     . 

483 

XX.  22 .     .     . 

392 

exxi.  8     . 

49' 

xxi.  9,  19      . 

395 

c.xxviii.  3,  4 

463 

XXI.  13      .     . 

427 

cxxx.  3    . 

402 

xxi.  13      .     . 

4(<S 

exxx.  3,  4 

4S5 

xxi.  19      .     . 

395 

exxxi.  I  . 

467 

xxi.  27      .     . 

460 

cxxxvi.  25 

490 

xxii.  10     .     . 

399 

cxxxix.  5,  6 

44' 

xxiii.    .     .     . 

498 

c.xxxix.  16 

441 

xxiii.  14   .     . 

436 

cxxxix.  21,  ' 

!2 

45S 

xxiii.  21    .     . 

397 

cxl.  II      . 

466 

xxiii.  29,  30 . 

498 

cxli.  5      . 

435 

xxiii.  31,  LXX. 

397 

cxl  v.  16  . 

434 

xxiv.  II.     . 

435 

cxl  v.  17  . 

442 

xxiv.  27    .     . 

400 

Prov.  i.  8  .     . 

398 

xxvi.  2      .     . 

430 

588         APOSTOLICAL   TEACHING, 

ETC.:    INDEX    OF   TEXTS. 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

Prov.  xxvi.  9     .     . 

49S 

Isa.  Iviii.  7     .     .     .     . 

427 

Dan.  iii 439 

Wisd.  iii.  i    .     .     .     .     464 

xxvi.  17    .     . 

419 

Iviii.  7    .     .     .    . 

468 

iii.    .     .     . 

440 

iii.  I    . 

498 

xxvi.  27    .     . 

431 

Iviii.  9    .     .     .     . 

428 

iii.    .     .     . 

475 

X.  6     . 

488 

xxvii.  I     .     . 

457 

Iviii.  9,  LXX. 

521 

iii.    .     . 

480 

Ecclus.  i.  28 . 

378 

xxix.  12   .     . 

403 

lix.  7,  8  .     .     .     . 

406 

iii.  7     .     . 

522 

ii.  4 

378 

xxix.  17    .     . 

436 

Ixii.  2     .     .     .     . 

431 

iv.  27    . 

427 

iii.  30    .     . 

522 

XXX.  6.     .     . 

468 

Ixii.  II    .     .     .     . 

401 

iv.  27    . 

468 

iv.  31     . 

378 

xxxi.  4,  LXX.  . 

498 

Ixii.  II    .     .     .     . 

49S 

vi.    .     .     . 

440 

iv.  31     .     . 

467 

xxxi.  10,  etc. 

394 

Ixiii.  10  .     .     . 

446 

vi.  10    .     . 

379 

v.  7  .     .     . 

457 

Eccles.  ii.  25,  LXX. 

434 

Ixiv.  I     .     .     . 

484 

vi.  16    .     . 

475 

jcxiv.  25 

451 

ii.  25,  LXX. 

469 

Ixiv.  8    .     .     . 

441 

vi.  16    .     . 

480 

XXV.  26. 

456 

iv.  5  .     .     . 

397 

Ixv.  I      .     .     . 

445 

vii.  10  .     . 

445 

xxvi.  29 

434 

iv.  5  .    .    . 

425 

Ixv.  2      .     .     . 

446 

vii.  10  . 

488 

XXX.    I  I  . 

436 

V.  5  •     •     •    • 

426 

Ixvi.  2     .     .     . 

396 

vii.  13  . 

448 

xxx.  12  . 

436 

V.  5  .     .     .     . 

436 

l.xvi.  2     .     .     . 

467 

viii.  13.     . 

473 

xxxi.  25-3 

498 

vii.  26  .     .     . 

395 

Ixvi.  2     .     .     . 

481 

X.  2,  3  . 

449 

xlix.  16 

488 

X.    I     .       .       .      . 

403 

Ixvi.  2,  5     .     . 

378 

xii.  2,  3 

440 

Bar.  iii.  35-37   . 

448 

X.  18        ... 

425 

Ixvi.  18  .     .     . 

522 

xii.  3    . 

441 

iv.  4  .     .     . 

461 

xii.  14    .     .     . 

440 

Ixvi.  24  .     .     . 

440 

Hos.  ii.  23    . 

517 

Hist.  Susanna  . 

414 

Cant.  ii.  15    .     .     . 

457 

Ixvi.  24  .     .     . 

5>9 

iv.   6     . 

456 

28 

418 

Isa.  i.  7     . 

433 

Ixvi.  24  .     .     . 

522 

iv.  9 

398 

48 

419 

i.  8     . 

451 

Jer.  i.  5     .... 

441 

i.x.  4      . 

460 

Matt.  i.  23     .     . 

446 

i.  II,  etc 

460 

11.  II,  10     .     . 

423 

X.  12     . 

397 

iii.  2 

420 

i.  16  . 

4S4 

iii.  II      ... 

423 

X.  13,  Lx: 

<. 

403 

iii.,  iv. 

469 

i.  19  . 

469 

iii.  22      .     .     . 

400 

Joel  ii.  28 

452 

V.  S 

^'l 

i.  22  . 

434 

iv.  4  .     .     .     . 

456 

ii.  32      . 

455 

V.  5 

396 

i.  23  . 

403 

V.  7    .     .     .     . 

442 

Amos  V.  23  . 

460 

V-  5 

•     467 

ii.  2    . 

452 

V.  22  .     .     .     . 

487 

ix.  1 1  . 

455 

V.  7 

.    39(5 

V.  2,  7 

391 

vi.  20      .     .     . 

460 

Jonah  i.  17    . 

406 

V.  7 

.    460 

V.  6    . 

451 

vii.  II     .     .     . 

521 

ii.  .     . 

406 

V.  7 

•    467 

V.  8    . 

391 

vii.  16     .     .     . 

434 

ii.  .     . 

440 

V.  8 

•    396 

V.  8    . 

409 

vii.  21,  22    .     . 

460 

ii.  .     . 

•    475 

V.  9 

•    396 

V.  20  . 

415 

viii.  4,  5      .     . 

400 

iii.  .     . 

.    485 

V.  9 

.    417 

V.  23  . 

415 

X.  2    .    .     .     . 

424 

.iii- 5   • 

•     449 

V.   II,   12 

•    399 

vi.  2  . 

488 

x.  2    .     .     .     . 

443 

Nah.  1.  3  .     . 

.     402 

V.   II,   12 

.    438 

vi.  3  . 

473 

xii.  7 .     .     .     . 

451 

i-3.  4    • 

.     484 

V.  18,  17 

.    458 

vi.  3  . 

488 

xii.  8.     .     .     . 

444 

i.  9  .     . 

.     501 

V.  19    . 

.    398 

vi.  9,  10 

428 

xii.  10    .     .     . 

402 

Hab.  ii.  9 

.     466 

V.  20    . 

•    413 

vi.  9,  10 

446 

XV.  I   .     .     .     . 

434 

Zech.  iii.  i.    . 

.     452 

V.  22      . 

.    412 

vii.  14 

446 

XV.  17     .     .     . 

424 

iii.  2,  etc. 

.     452 

V.  22      . 

.    419 

viii.  20,  LXX. 

458 

XV.  19     •     .     . 

421 

iii.  2     . 

484 

V.  22      . 

.    460 

viii.  20,  LXX. 

488 

xvii.  12  .     .     . 

.     451 

vii.  9    . 

413 

V.  23,  24 

.    381 

ix.  6  .     .     .     . 

446 

xxi.  8      .     .     . 

377 

viii.  17 

419 

V.  23,  24 

•    419 

ix.  6  .     .     .     . 

454 

xxiii.  15 .     .     . 

451 

ix.  9     . 

448 

V.  26     . 

.    377 

ix.  6,  LXX.     . 

487 

xxvi 

.     39S 

i.x.  17,  L> 

[X 

434 

V.  28 

.    391 

xi.  I    .     .     .     . 

454 

xxviii.,  xxix.    . 

481 

ix.  17   . 

469 

''■y:> 

.    461 

xi.  I,  10.     .     . 

448 

xxix.  22 .     .     . 

481 

X.3.     . 

402 

V.  34 

•    377 

xi.  4  .     .     .     . 

471 

Lam.  it.  20  .     .     . 

448 

xii.  I     . 

441 

V.  34 

•    443 

xiv.  19    .     .     . 

447 

iv.  20   .     .     . 

449 

xii.  10  . 

448 

V.  34 

.    466 

xxii.  13  .     .     . 

428 

Ezek.  ii.  7      ... 

398 

xiii.  2  . 

443 

V.38 

.    460 

xxvi.  19.     .     . 

440 

iii.  II  .     .     . 

398 

xiv.  5   . 

382 

V.  39 

.    377 

xxviii.  11     .     . 

479 

iii.  12  .     .     . 

473 

xiv.  5  , 

471 

v-39 

.    465 

xxix.  13 .     .     . 

5'8 

v.  7      ... 

423 

xiv.  7  . 

445 

V.  40 

•     W 

xxxiv.  4.     .     . 

522 

viii.  14     .     . 

443 

Mal.i.  6   .     . 

402 

V.  40 

.    465 

XXXV.  3  .     .     . 

414 

viii.  16     .     . 

443 

i.  6   .    . 

470 

V.  41 

.    277 

xl.  II       ... 

405 

viii.  17,  18    . 

443 

i.  6   .     . 

.    481 

V.  41 

■    465 

Ii.  10 .     .     .     . 

.    484 

xiv.  13,  14    . 

401 

i.  II  .     . 

381 

V.  42 

.    465 

lii.5.     .     .     . 

395 

xiv.  14,  20    . 

5.8 

i.  I  I  .     . 

461 

V.  43 

.    460 

...5.     .     .     . 

•    427 

xvi.  47     .    . 

423 

i.  n,  14 

381 

V.  44 

■    377 

...5.     .     .     . 

•     470 

xvi.  52      .     . 

.    423 

i.  II,  14 

471 

V.  44 

•    465 

In.  5  .     .     .     . 

•     521 

xviii.  2,  etc.. 

402 

ii.  7  .    . 

411 

V.  44,  45 

392 

liii.  I       .     .     . 

.    446 

xviii.  6     .     . 

■    463 

ii.  14,  15,  I 

6 

4<33 

V.  44,  46 

521 

liii.  4      ... 

•    409 

xviii.  20  .     . 

.    400 

ii.  15,  14 

456 

V.  45    . 

377 

liii.  II     .     .     . 

•     432 

xviii.,  xxxiii. 

.    485 

iv.  I  .     . 

.     522 

V.  45    • 

401 

liii.  II,  LXX. 

•     432 

XX.  2y     .    . 

•    459 

iv.  4.     . 

458 

V.  45    • 

420 

liii.  12    .     .     . 

.    409 

xxxiii.  2,  etc. 

398 

I  Mace,  i.,  etc. 

475 

V.  45    • 

465 

liii.  12     .     .     . 

•    445 

xxxiii.  7,  etc. 

.    398 

4  Esd.  xvi.  60 

487 

V.  46,  47 

377 

liii.  12     .     .     . 

.    447 

xxxiii.  10 

•    405 

Tobit  iv.  15  . 

377 

V.  46,  47 

465 

liv.  I.     .     .     . 

•     517 

xxxiii.  II 

.    400 

iv.  15  . 

465 

v.-vi.   . 

373 

liv.  14    .     .     . 

•    435 

xxxiv.  2,  etc. 

•    404 

iv.  16  . 

391 

v.-vii.  . 

38 1 

liv.  14     .     .     . 

.    466 

xxxiv.  3  .     . 

.    409 

iv.  16  . 

.    431 

vi.  3,  4 

430 

Ivii.  I,  LXX.  . 

•    442 

xxxiv.  4  .     . 

.     405 

Judith  viii.    . 

481 

vi.  5     . 

470 

Ivii.  19    .     .     . 

.    420 

xxxvi.  20-23 

•     521 

viii.  6 

•     449 

VI.  5,9-1; 

i 

379 

Ivii.  21    .     .     . 

.     458 

xxxvii.  II,  etc. 

•     440 

ix.  I,  etc 

428 

vi.  9,  etc. 

432 

Iviii.  6 

.     .     . 

.    419 

Dan,  ii.  34     .     .     . 

.     448 

xvi.  21,  : 

■3 

•     493 

vi.  9,  e 

tc. 

.    470 

APOSTOLICAL  TEACHING,    ETC.:    INDEX   OF   TEXTS.         589 


Matt.  vi.  9     . 

PAGE 

.        506 

Matt.  xvii.  24,  etc. 

PAGE 

417 

Matt,  xxvii.  46  .     . 

PAGE 

445 

PAG  I 

Luke  X.  20 iTC 

vi.  10  . 

420 

xvii.  24,  etc. 

442 

xxvii.  62,  etc. 

379 

xi.  3     . 
xn.  4,  5 

^7C 

vi.  II  . 

379 

xviii.  6,  7 

399 

xxviii.  19 

379 

0/3 

471 

vi.  12  . 

403 

xviii.  7     .     . 

392 

xxviii.  19 

410 

xii.  35  . 

vi.  13  . 

VI.  16   . 

379 

xviii.  10   .    . 

403 

xxviii.  19 

442 

xii.  35,  V 

379 

xviii.  II    .     . 

517 

xxviii.  19 

456 

xii.  48  . 

401 

vi.  20  . 

413 

428 

xviii.  12    .     . 

405 

xxviii.  19 

469 

xii.  57  . 

41' 

vi.  21  . 

xviii.  14   .     . 

401 

xxviii.  19 

476 

xiii.  27 

vi.  24  . 

465 

xviii.  15    .     . 

414 

xxviii.  20      .     . 

422 

xiv.  1 1 

vi.  24  . 

467 

xviii.  15-17  . 

381 

xxviii.  20 

478 

xiv.  13 

XV.    .       . 

411 

485 

vi.  24  . 

505 

xviii.  16  .     . 

482 

Mark  i.  44    .    .    .    . 

458 

vi.  24  . 

Si^ 

xviii.  17   .     . 

414 

ii.  17    .     .     .     . 

517 

XV.  4,  etc. 

40; 

vi.  26,  31, 

3- 

434 

xviii.  18    .     . 

399 

ii.  20   .     .     ,     . 

447 

XV.  7     . 

^  J 
40c 

vii.  2    . 

416 

xviii.  20    .     . 

496 

iii.  I,  etc. 

442 

XV.  7      . 

484 

vii   2    . 

418 

xviii.  21,  22  . 

417 

iii.  29,  30      . 

380 

XV.  7      . 

50- 

vii.  6    . 

380 

xviii.  22   .     . 

419 

V 

440 

XV.  21  . 

4'^ 

vii.  6   . 

427 

xix.  4  .     .     . 

.    462 

V.  9      ... 

484 

xvi. 

467 

vii.  12  . 

377 

xix.  4,  5    .     . 

456 

V.  34     .     .     . 

405 

xvi.  10-12 

5'9 

vii.  13,  14 

377 

xix.  6  .     .     . 

456 

vii.  22 .     .     . 

469 

xvi.  13 

S.8 

vii.  15. 

456 

xix.  14      .     . 

457 

xi.  10  .     .     . 

470 

xvi.  15 

467 

vii.  21  . 

518 

xix.  29      .     . 

485 

xi.  17  .     .     . 

521 

xvii.  14 

45S 

vii.  23  . 

5'f 

XX.  25  .     .     . 

405 

xii.  29       .     . 

398 

xviii.  8 

458 

viii.  4  . 

458 

XX.  26,  27 

432 

xii.  30,  31      . 

377 

xviii.  14 

378 

viii.  12 

439 

XX.  28 .     .     . 

•     432 

xii.  32 .     ,     . 

465 

xviii.  14 

467 

ix.  2     . 

405 

xxi.  9  .     .     . 

•     470 

xii.  42  .     .     . 

429 

xviii.  27 

441 

ix.  2,  etc. 

442 

xxi.  9  .     .     . 

490 

xiii.  35      .     . 

471 

xix.  10 

405 

ix.  12  . 

401 

xxi.  13     .     . 

•    403 

xiv.      .     .     . 

4S9 

xix.  10 

5'7 

ix.  12  . 

405 

XXI.  13      .     . 

521 

xiv.  25      .     . 

•     380 

xi.x.  44 

44  = 

ix.  12  . 

414 

xxi.  28,  etc.  . 

446 

xvi.  9  .     .     . 

445 

xix.  46 

521 

ix.  13  . 

517 

xxi.  35      .     . 

446 

xvi.  14      .     . 

445 

XX.  38  . 

46^ 

ix.  15  . 

447 

x.xi.  39      .     . 

446 

xvi.  16     .     . 

457 

xxi.  3,  4 

425 

ix.  22  . 

463 

xxi.  42      .     . 

446 

xvi.  17,  18    . 

479 

xxi.  18 

44c 

x.  2 

456 

xxi.  43      .     , 

446 

Luke  i.,  ii.     .     .     . 

481 

xxi.  19 

44c 

X.  10    . 

381 

xxii.  21     .     . 

•     417 

ii.  14    .     .     , 

•    478 

xxii.     . 

489 

X.  12    . 

420 

xxii.  21     .     . 

•     505 

ii.  14  «.     .     . 

.     490 

xxii.  19 

447 

X.  12,   13 

430 

xxii.  32     .     . 

•     498 

ii.  29,  etc.     . 

•     478 

.x.xii.  31 

452 

X.  16     . 

5'^ 

xxii.  37     .     . 

.     518 

ii.  36,  etc.     . 

.    426 

x.xii.  32 

452 

X.  17.  23 

438 

xxii.  37,  39  •. 

377 

ii.  36    .     .     . 

•     492 

xxii.  34 

44-1 

X.  22      . 

382 

xxiii.  3     .     . 

399 

ii.  36,  etc.     . 

•     493 

xxii.  42 

444 

X.  22      . 

438 

xxiii.  16   .     . 

443 

ii.  51    .     .    . 

.    461 

xxii.  47 

444 

X.  23    . 

438 

xxiii.  35    .     . 

446 

iii.  13  .     .     . 

•    414 

xxiii.  2 

444 

X.  23    . 

498 

xxiii.  38    .     . 

452 

111.  14  .     .     . 

495 

xxiii.  14 

444 

X.  28     . 

438 

xxiv.    .     .     . 

373 

iv.  24  .     .     . 

.    422 

xxiii.  21 

444 

X.  28     . 

5.8 

xxiv.    ,     .     . 

382 

V.  20    .     .     . 

•    405 

xxiii.  34 

402 

X.  32    . 

437 

x.xiv.    .     .     . 

471 

V.  32    .     .     . 

•    517 

xxiii.  34 

445 

X.  32    . 

5'^ 

xxiv.  4      .     . 

379 

V.  35    .     .     . 

447 

xxiii.  39. 

:tc 

445 

X.  33    • 

43^ 

xxiv.  10    .     . 

382 

vi.  13   .     .     . 

383 

xxiii.  40 

439 

X.  37    • 

438 

xxiv.  II,  12  . 

382 

vi.  22,  23.     . 

438 

xxiii.  46 

445 

X.  40    . 

380 

xxiv.  12,  13  . 

456 

vi.  27,  32  .     . 

521 

,\xiv.  18 

445 

X.  40    . 

499 

xxiv.  12,  24  . 

4>8 

vi.  28  .     .     . 

392 

John  i.  9  .     . 

44C 

X.  41     . 

471 

xxiv.  24    .     . 

382 

vi.  29  .     .     . 

377 

i.  18      . 

477 

xi.,  xiii. 

398 

xxiv.  24    .     . 

456 

vi.  29  .     .     . 

465 

ii.  3,  etc. 

442 

xi.  5     . 

479 

xxiv.  24    .     . 

457 

vi.  30  .    .     . 

377 

iii.  5     . 

457 

xi.  28  . 

393 

xxiv.  30    .     . 

382 

vi.  30  .     .     . 

427 

iii.  36    . 

449 

xii.  29. 

484 

xxiv.  30,  31  . 

382 

vi.  30  .     .     . 

465 

iv.  44    . 

422 

xii.  30 . 

420 

xxiv.  31    .     . 

380 

vi.  31   .     .     . 

zn 

V.25     . 

44a 

xii.  30 . 

432 

xxiv.  42    .     . 

382 

vi.  32  .     .     . 

377 

V.  39     • 

397 

xii.  31,32 

380 

xxiv.  51    .     . 

466 

VI.  32  .     .     . 

465 

V.  46     . 

397 

xii.  32  . 

457 

XXV.      .      .      . 

400 

vi.  37   •     •     . 

4' 3 

vi.  27    . 

423 

xii.  36. 

396 

XXV.  34,  etc. . 

437 

vi.  37   .     .     . 

416 

vi.  29    . 

423 

xii.  36. 

466 

XXV.  46     .     . 

47' 

vi.  37,  38  •     • 

406 

VI.  45    . 

495 

xii.  37  . 

396 

xxvi.    .     .     . 

418 

vi.  40  .     .     . 

439 

vi.  67    . 

460 

xii.  40 . 

445 

xxvi.    .     .     . 

489 

vi.  41    .     .     . 

403 

vii.  24  . 

■"^ 

xii.  50 . 

5'9 

xxvi.  15    .     . 

444 

vii 

440 

viii.  ir  . 

40S 

xiii.  16 

459 

xxvi.  21,  22  . 

444 

vii.  47  •     •     • 

408 

viii.  24. 

522 

xiii.  31 

427 

xxvi.  29    .     . 

380 

ix.  26  .     .     .     . 

438 

viii.  44. 

405 

xiv.  17,  et 

c. 

442 

xxvi.  30    .     . 

444 

ix.  30  .     .     . 

458 

ix.  I,  etc. 

442 

xiv.  20 

380 

xxvi.  31    .     . 

444 

.X.  5,6.     .     . 

430 

X.  II,  12 

405 
4S6 

xiv.  31 

467 

xxvi.  39,  42  . 

444 

X.  7 .     .     .     . 

38' 

X.  29     .     . 

XV.  II  . 

469 

xxvi.  41    .     . 

439 

X.  7  .     .     .     . 

.)o8 

xi.     .     . 

440 

XV.  37  . 
xvi.  24 

380 

xxvi.  41    .     . 

498 

X.  16     .      .      .      • 

■104 

xi.  25    . 

440 
461 

460 

xxvi.  47    .     . 

444 

X.  16    .     .     .     . 

4S1 

xi.  48    . 

xvi.  26 

438 

xxvii.  5     .     . 

4(>6 

X.  16    .     .     . 

409 

.xi.  51    . 

XII.  l)      . 

xii.  6     . 

480 

xvi.  26 

5.8 

xxvii.  9,  10  . 

444 

X.  18    ...     . 

4,S4 

443 

xvi.  27 

471 

x.\vii.  24,  25 

447 

.X.  19    ...     . 

484 

4OC; 

590 


APOSTOLICAL   TEACHING,    ETC.:    INDEX   OF  TEXTS. 


PAGE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

PAGE 

John  xii.  13  ...  .  470 

Acts  XX.  35  .  .  . 

•  433 

2  Cor.  vii.  I  .  .  .  .  490 

I  Tim.  V.  9  .  .  .  .  457 

xii.  43  . 

•  439 

XX.  35  .  .  . 

.  460 

vii.  I  . 

•  492 

V.  II  . 

.  426 

xiii.  4,  5 

.  432 

xxi.  9  .  .  . 

.  481 

viii.  19 

.  381 

vi.  2  . 

•  436 

xiii.  17  . 

.  461 

xxi.  10  .  .  .4^ 

ti,48i 

viii.  23 

.  383 

vi.  i6 

•  491 

xiii.  20 . 

499 

XX  vi.  14  .  . 

.  500 

xi.  5  . 

.  506 

vi.  21 

.  381 

xiii.  21,  et 

c. 

444 

Rom.  i.  25  .  .  . 

.  443 

xi.  13 

•  453 

2  Tim.  i.  5  . 

.  478 

xiii.  34 . 

460 

i.  25  .  .  . 

488 

xiii.  II 

.  522 

ii.  5  . 

.  401 

xiii.  35. 

397 

i.  28  .  .  . 

•  443 

Gal.  i.  19  .  . 

.  380 

ii.  15. 

•  471 

XV.  I   . 

380 

iii.  15  .  .  . 

.  406 

i.  19. 

.  485 

ii.  18. 

.  381 

XV.  13  . 

432 

iv.  17  .  .  . 

•  517 

iii.  10 

.  461 

ii.  19. 

.  420 

XV.  15  . 

459 

vi.  3  .  .  . 

•  431 

iv.  9. 

•  375 

iii.  3,  4 

.  416 

XV.  20  . 

438 

vi.  3  .  .  . 

.  446 

iv.  9. 

.  446 

iii.  8  . 

•  479 

xvi.  32  . 

444 

^!:  i  •  •  • 

•  476 

iv.  27 

•  517 

iv.  7  . 

.  498 

xvi.  33 . 

438 

vn.  8,  1 1  .  . 

.  522 

V.  9  . 

•  403 

iv.  10 

.  478 

xvii.  3  . 

446 

viii.  21  .  . 

•  475 

vi.  10 

.  466 

iv.  21 

.  478 

xvii.  3  . 

460 

ix.  25  .  .  . 

•  517 

Eph.  i.  13 

•  519 

Tit.  i.  6  .  . 

.  457 

xvii.  4,  6 

479 

xi.  4  .  .  . 

,  480 

i-23 

•  521 

i.  ID  . 

•  375 

xvii.  4,  6 

4S9 

xii.  I  .  .  . 

381 

ii.  17 

.  420 

iii.  I  . 

•  436 

xvii.  II,  2 

479 

xii.  2  .  .  . 

.  420 

iii.  14-2 

I 

.  507 

Philem.  . 

•  495 

xvii.  17 

4S6 

xiii.  I,  4,  7  . 

436 

iii.  15 

.  4S6 

I  . 

•  478 

xviii.  I . 

444 

xiii.  8  .  .  . 

.  436 

IV.  4 

.  416 

10 

.  478 

xviii.  3S 

444 

xiv.  20   .  . 

•  379 

iv.  18 

•  523 

Heb.  ii.  10 

•  523 

xix.  15,  6, 

12 

447 

XV.  27  .  .  . 

.  378 

iv.  26 

.  419 

V.  4 

•  429 

xi.\.  1 5 . 

461 

xvi.  7  .  .  . 

380 

V.  14 

•  507 

y.  5- 

.  410 

xix.  39  . 

448 

xvi.  20  .  . 

484 

V.  18 

.  498 

ix.  24 

.  521 

XX.  II,  etc 

445 

xvi.  21   .  . 

458 

V.  19 

.  506 

X.  I,  22 

.  522 

XX.  25  . 

447 

I  Cor.  i.  ID  .  .  . 

416 

V.  27 

.  424 

xi-37 

•  440 

Acts  i.  I  .  . 

398 

ii.  9  .  .  . 

472 

V;  31-3 

3 

•  521 

xii.  8 

•  399 

i.  3  .  . 

442 

ii.  9  .  .  , 

520 

vi.  . 

•  495 

xii.  23 

.  409 

i.  9  .  . 

442 

ii.  9  .  .  . 

521 

vi.  4 

.  378 

xiii.  4 

.  463 

i.  18.  . 

466 

iv.  16,  17  . 

375 

VI.  4 

396 

xiii.  7 

•  378 

i.  20 .  . 

454 

vi.  I,  etc.  . 

417 

vi-  5 

.  378 

xiii.  15 

.  381 

ji.  4  .  . 

448 

vi.  19,  20  . 

446 

VI.  5 

•  436 

Jas.  i.  12  . 

•  399 

iii.  I 

379 

vii.  17  .  .  . 

506 

VI.  5 

.  468 

V.  14. 

.  431 

iii.  15  . 

523 

vii.  25  ...  , 

436 

VI.  6 

•  436 

V.  16. 

•  378 

iv.  6.  . 

438 

vii.  25  .  .  . 

493 

vi.  7 

.  46S 

V.  19,  20 

.  521 

iv.  32  . 

378 

vii.  31  .  .  . 

380 

vi.  9 

.  378 

V.  20  . 

.  522 

V.    .   . 

466 

vii.  34  .  . 

436 

Phil.  ii.  2  . 

.  522 

I  Pet.  i.  19 

.  422 

v.  31   . 

523 

viii.  4,  etc.  . 

379 

ii.  17 

.  381 

ii.  2 

•  446 

V.  40,  41 

438 

ix.  9  .  .  . 

409 

iv.  3 

.  484 

!i-5 

.  381 

^:4'..  • 

520 

X.  18,  etc.  . 

379 

Col.  1.  15  . 

•  424 

"•5 

.  506 

vi.,  vii.  . 

418 

X.  20  .  .  . 

469 

i.  15. 

.  487 

11.9 

.  381 

vi.,  vii.  . 

492 

xi.  3  .  .  . 

394 

ii.  13,  14 

.  484 

11.9 

•  409 

vi.,  vii.  . 

500 

XI.  3  .  .  . 

42S 

iii.  16 

506 

ii.  9 

.  422 

vii.  56  . 

464 

xi.  3  .  .  . 

429 

iii.  22 

.  378 

ii.  9 

•  431 

viii.  .  . 

435 

XI.  5,  6  .  .  . 

506 

iii.  22,  2 

4 

436 

ii.  9 

490 

viii.  .  . 

452 

xi.  20-22,  33 

3S0 

iv. 

495 

ii.  II 

•  377 

viii.  14  .  . 

452 

xi.  23   .  . 

489 

iv.  I  . 

378 

ii.  II 

•    465 

viii.  19  . 

452 

xi.  23   .  . 

506 

iv.  I  . 

436 

ii.  13 

436 

viii.  20,  etc 

453 

xi.  26   .  .  . 

470 

iv.  16,  17 

478 

ii.  18 

436 

viii.  24  . 

453 

xi.  34   .  . 

375 

I  Thess.  ii.  6 

3S0 

!i:  23 

501 

viii.,  ix. 

500 

xi.  59   .  . 

470 

iv.  16 

471 

111.  0 

463 

ix.  5.  . 

500 

XII.  3  .  .  .  . 

380 

iv.  17 

382 

iii.  13 

377 

X.    •   . 

455 

xii.  8 .  .  .  . 

480 

2  Thess.  ii.  . 

471 

iii.  20 

488 

X.  9  .  .  . 

379 

xiv.  2   .  .  . 

380 

ii-  3.  4, 

8 

382 

iii.  21 

521 

X.  13,  etc. 

455 

xiv.  21  .  .  . 

479 

iii.  10 

381 

iv.  4,  1 

2 

522 

X.  34,  35.  4 

5  • 

455 

xiv.  29,  31  . 

380 

iii.  10 

425 

iv.  8 

522 

X.  42   .  . 

448 

xiv.  33  .  . 

499 

I  Tim.  i.  6  . 

381 

iv.  12 

382 

xi.  15  . 

455 

xiv.  34  .  . 

427 

i.  17  . 

523 

V.  I 

3S1 

xi.  2S  .  . 

481 

xiv.  40  .  .  . 

506 

ii.  I  , 

523 

V.  5 

466 

xiii.  22  .  . 

450 

XV.  5,  7  .  .  . 

380 

ii.  1-3 

506 

v-5 

481 

xiv.  4,  14 

380 

XV.  23  .  .  . 

382 

ii.  2  . 

489 

2  Pet.  ii.  13 

383 

xiv.  23  . 

381 

XV.  32   .  .  . 

428 

ii.  2  . 

490 

iii.  7,  I 

0 

522 

XV.  .  .  . 

454 

xvi.  20  .  . 

506 

ii.  4  . 

485 

iii.  9  . 

5" 

XV.  I 

454 

xvi.  22  .  .  . 

380 

iii.  2  .  . 

396 

iii.  9  . 

517 

XV.  7,  8 

455 

xvi.  22  .  .  , 

470 

iii.  2,  12 

457 

I  John  IV.  I 

375 

XV.  9,  10 

455 

2  Cor.  i.  3  ... 

482 

iii.  4  .  . 

381 

iv.  I  . 

383 

XV.  13,  etc. 

455 

V.  17  .  .  .  . 

458 

iii.  4  .  . 

396 

Rev.  i.  10.  . 

381 

XV.  20,  29  . 

379 

vi.  5  .  .  . 

503 

iii.  6  .  . 

396 

ii.  2  .  . 

383 

XV.  23,  etc. 

455 

VI.  14   .  . 

496 

iii.  15  . 

431 

ii.  2,  9  . 

375 

XV.  32  . 

481 

vi.  16   .  .  . 

483 

iv.  2  .  . 

503 

iii.  2 

517 

xix.  6  . 

5/9 

vi.  17   .  .  . 

451 

iv.  5  .  . 

523 

xii.  9 

382 

xix.  14  . 

481 

vii.  I  .  .  .  . 

476 

iv.  10  . 

465 

XX.  5 

382 

XX.  28  . 

422 

vii.  I  .  .  .  . 

483 

V.  8  .  . 

493 

xxii.  20 

38c 

XX.  28  . 

424 

vii.  I  .  .  . 

4S4 

V.  9  . 

426 

EARLY    LITURGIES. 


INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS. 


Access,  Prayer  of,  559,  567. 

Adseus  and  Maris,  Liturgy  of,  561- 

571- 

Allatius,  Leo,  533. 

Altar,  the,  538,  542,  543,  546,  547,  562, 
565 ;  Epistle  and  Gospel  sides  of, 
542,  562,  563;  prayer  at,  53S; 
reverence  to,  563,  566. 

Amen,  539,  542. 

Anaphora,  the  second  part  or  canon 
of  the  liturgy,  534 ;  the  Oblation, 
535;  prayer  of,  555;  of  St. 
James'  Liturgy,  restoration  of,  at- 
tempted, 534. 

Anthem,  the,  553. 

Atttidorott,  the,  536. 

Apocalypse,  the,  saturates  the  litur- 
gies, 561. 

Apostle  (Epistle),  the,  553,  561. 

Apostles,  the  Blessed,  Liturgy  of, 
561-569. 

Assemani,  533. 

Assyrians,  Liturgy  of,  570. 

Autun  Inscription,  536. 

Ave  Maria,  546. 

Benedictions,  538,  541,  543,  547,  553; 

final,  548,  56S. 
Bidding    Prayer,  the,   532  ;    the   free 

prayer  of   primitive   Christians, 

532.  53S  (»'^te) 
Bishop,  prayer  for  the,  551-553,  556. 
Body  and  Blood,  Ratramn  on  the,  545 

(note). 
Breaking  of  the  Bread.    See  Fraction. 

Canon,  use  of  the  word  according  to 
Suicer,  561  (note). 

Catechumens,  Liturgy  of,  535 ;  dis- 
missal of,  535,  54b,  554. 

Chalice,  or  cujj,  benediction  of,  544, 
55S;  commixture  of,  54S,  566; 
filling  of,  548;  veil  of,  543,  563. 

Choral  worship,  founded  by  Samuel, 

.53'>  .  .      . 

Christ,  commemoration  of  His  life, 
535,  539;  the  repose  of  the  dead, 

^     .535- 

Christian    sacrifice,    universal,    531 ; 

worship  from  the  beginning,  532; 

described  bv  Trollope,  534. 
Church,  the  Holy  Catholic,  545,  555, 

562-565,  and' Apostolic,  545.556; 

prayers  for,  552,  553,  556. 


Collect,  the,  553  (note). 

Commencement,  prayer  of,  537. 

Communion,  Holy,  535,  536;  recep- 
tion by  priest  and  laity,  548. 

Confession,  536. 

Confusions  and  difficulties,  where  ex- 
plained, 548,  549  (notes). 

Consecration,  prayer  of,  535,  557,  558. 

Credence,  the,  54S  and  note. 

Creed,  the,  535,  540,  554,  562. 

Cross,  sign  of,  542,  544,  548,  553-556, 
559.  563.  564.  566,  567- 

Deacons,  their  interjections,  544  and 

pas  situ. 
Deipara,  or  T/teotoce,  538  (note). 
Departed,  prayers  for,  535,  536,  and 

notes,  546,  556,  564,  569  (note;, 

571  (note). 
Diptychs,  the,  556. 
Disk  (discus),  the  paten,  548. 
Dismission,  the,  prayer  of,  550,  560. 
Distribution  of  the  elements,  559,  567. 

Embolisms,  the,  536,  537,  558,  567. 
Em|)eror,  prayer  for  the,  551,  555. 
Entrance,  the   Little,  and  prayers  at, 

535.    53^"^.   55-;    tlie   Great,   535, 

540,  554- 
Epistle,  the,  where  read,  535. 
Eucharist,  not  daily,  551 ;  antidote  to 

mortality,  566. 
Eucharistic  sacrifice.     See  Sacrifice. 

Faithful,  the  Liturgy  of  (Missa  Fidel- 

ium),  535,  540,  562;  prayers  for 

the,  53^. 
Fraction  of  the  Bread,  535,  536,  544, 

54S,  557,  566;  into  parts  for  the 

faithful,  559,  567. 

Gentile  nations,  their  universal  ac- 
ceiitancc  of  sacrifice,  530. 

Gloria  in  Excel  sis,  542. 

Gospel,  the,  read  by  the  deacon,  535, 
553;  salutation  of,  562. 

Gradual,  the,  561  (note). 

Gustate,  548. 

Hippolytus  on  the  dawn  of  Chris 

tianity,  530. 
Holy    Ghost,     invocation    of,    535; 

prayer  for  the  descent  of,  upon 

the  oblation,  546,  558. 


"  Holy  things  for  holv  persons,"  536, 
547.  569  ("ote). 

Homily,  or  sermon,  at  Holy  Com- 
munion, 535. 

Hosanna,  the,  544. 

Host,  the,  not  a  primitive  word,  566 
(note). 

Hymn,  the  Cherubic,  540,  554. 

Hymnology,  early  Hebrew,  531. 

Hymns,  German,  Hirscher's  remarks 
on,  570  (note). 

Incense,  553  (note)  and  passim  : 
prayers  of,  537,  552,  556;  offer- 
ing of,  554,  556,  564  ;  blessing  of, 

563: 

Inclination,  prayer  of,  536. 

Institution,  words  of,  535,  544,  557, 
564  ;  in  the  Malabar  Liturgy,  570. 

Intercessions  for  the  living  and  the 
departed,  535,  536,  5.^5,  546,  555, 
556,  564;  for  the  faithful,  539; 
general,  541,  542,  545,  555,  557. 

Interpolations,  533,  537.  546,  549,  563; 
lawful  and  unlawful,  537,  556 
(note);  not  idolatrous,  539;  cen- 
surable, 542 ;  post-Nicene,  544, 
545;  post-Kiihesine,  552. 

Introit,  the,  535. 

Invocation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  535, 

545.  55S.  565- 
Irenaeus,  St.,  on  the  Oblation  and  In- 
vocation, 571  (note). 

James,  St.,  Liturgy  of,  532,  533,  537- 
550. 

Jerusalem,  sacrifice  localized  in,  530; 
the  glorious  Sion,  545;  mother 
of  all  churches,  545;  the  holy 
city,  5t;6  (note):  fiiurgy  of,  532, 

533.  53"'7-550-.  ,  . 
Justin  Martyr,  St.,  his  account  of 
Christian  worship,  532;  testi- 
mony to  the  Clementine  Liturgy, 
572;  concurrence  of  St.  Ircnxus 
with,  572. 

Kiss  of  Peace,  535,  541  (note),  563. 
A'/rie  EleesoH,  551  and /</«//«. 

Lavaho  (prayer  of  prci)aration  of  the 

priest),  537. 
Lections,  or  lessons,  535,  539,  561. 
Leo  Allatius,  533. 
59' 


592 


EARLY    LITURGIES:    INDEX    OF    SUBJECTS. 


Litany,  the  universal,  541. 

Liturgies,  ancient,  four  families  of, 
532;  theories  of  their  origin  and 
dates,  533. 

Liturgiologists  and  liturgical  authori- 
ties (quoted  or  referred  to)  :  — 

Abu'lberkat,  534 ;  Assemani, 
533;  Augustine,  541,  569;  Bad- 
ger, 536,  56r,  562,  565,  570;  Ba- 
ronius,  534;  Basil,  571;  Bas- 
nage.  534;  Bellarmine,  533,  569; 
Bingham,  569  ;  Bona,  533  ;  Brett, 
5-9'  533  •  Bunsen,  534;  Bur- 
bidge,  536,  566,  571 ;  Cave,  534; 
Chrysostom,  569;  Clement  of 
Alexandria,  568;  Cyril,  571; 
Daniel,  533,  534;  Dupin,  534; 
Elias,  566;  Etheridge,  562;  Eu- 
sebius,  568;  Fabricius,  534; 
Field,  536,  543 ;  Freeman,  536, 
569:  Gelasius,  533;  Gregory 
the  Great,  533;  Hammond,  536, 

544,  551.  55-.  556.  558,  559.  561, 
562,  504,  569,  570;  Harvey,  571, 
572;  Hickes,  537;  Hilary,  533; 
Hippolytus,  570;  Hirscher,  569, 
570,  571  ;  Innocent,  533;  Ire- 
naius,  552,  571,  572;  Joseph, 
566;  Justin  Martyr,  572;  Le 
Brun,  533;  Le  Nourry,  534; 
Lee,  533;  Leo  Allatius,  533; 
Littleciale,  536,  548,  549,  Ma- 
bilion,  533;  Marriott,  536;  Me- 
nesius,  566 ;  Muratori,  533 ; 
Wusseus,   533;   Neale,   529,  532, 

533.  534.  535.  536,  548,  549.  561, 

570,  571  ;  Palmer,  532,  533,  561  , 
Pfuff,  536;  Probst,  533;  Ra- 
tramn,  545 ;  Rattray,  534 ;  Re- 
naudot,  529,  534,  551,  561,  562, 
565,  566,  570 ;  Scudamore,  536, 
542;  Sidonius,  533;  Tillemont, 
534;  Trevor,  536;  Trollope,  533, 
534;  Usher,  571  ;  Warren,  536; 
\Villiams,  571 ;  Zaccaria,  533. 

Liturgiology,  science  of,  in  its  in- 
fancy, 529. 

Liturgy,  meaning  of  the  word,  532 
(note) ;  Clementine,  529,  570, 
date  of,  533,  probable  use  of,  in 
Rome  and  Gaul,  572  (note) ; 
primitive,  no  normal  type  ex- 
tant, 529,  Clementine  nearest  to, 

571,  572,  Justin  Martyr's  ac- 
count of,  compared  with  Clemen- 
tine, 532,  the  two  parts  of,  534 ; 
of  St.  James  (Jerusalem),  532, 
533.  537-550;  of  ^t.  Mark  (Alex- 
andria), 532-534,  551-560,  single 
MS.  of,  551  (note) ;  of  Rome  and 
Gaul,  532,  533;  of  Edessa,  532; 
of  St.  Basil,  533;  of  St.  Chrysos- 
tom, 533  ;  of  the  Blessed  Apos- 


tles (or  Adaeus  and  Maris),  534, 
561-569;  of  St.  Cyril,  534;  of  St. 
Gregory,  534;  Ethiopic,  or  All 
Apostles,  534  ;  of  Nestorius,  534  ; 
of  Theodore  the  interpreter,  534 ; 
Malabar,  570,  571. 
Lord's  Prayer,  the,  535,  536,  547, 
558,  567  ;  understood  though 
not  written  in  the  Clementine 
Liturgy,  570. 

Ma^^nificat,  540. 

Malabar  Liturgy,  peculiarities  of, 
570;  its  Portuguese  revisers, 
570 ;  corrupted,  but  very  ancient, 

57 1; 

Malachi,  the  pure  oblation  of,   551, 

555- 

Maris,  one  of  the  Seventy,  570. 

Mark,  St.,  sister's  son  to  St.  Barna- 
bas and  pupil  of  St.  Peter,  St. 
Clement's  testimony  of,  568 ; 
founder  of  the  Evangelical  See, 
568 ;  commemoration  of,  569 ; 
Liturgy  of  (Alexandria),  551-560, 
MS.  of,  551  (note). 

Masses,  Roman  system  of,  Hirscher's 
strictures  on,  570  (note) ;  pur- 
chased by  the  rich,  571  (note). 

Missa  Fidelmm  and  Catechtivieno- 
rum,  535. 

Mosaic  system  of  sacrifice,  limits  of, 
530- 

Nestorius,  Liturgy  of,  570. 
Nile,  waters  of  the,  553. 

Oblation,  the  (Second,  or  Great),  535, 
544,  554  (note),  555,  558,  564, 
565;  First,  see  Offertory. 

Obsignation,  the  sign  of  the  Lord's 
cross,  56S. 

Offertory,  the  (or  First  Oblation), 
535,'  540,  562. 

Patriarch,  or  Papa,  prayer  for,  551- 

553.  556. 

Paul,  St.,  enlightened  by  Christ  Him- 
self, therefore  an  original  evan- 
gelist, 532 ;  delivers  the  ordi- 
nances, and  prescribes  order  and 
decorum,  532;  calls  himself  a 
liturge  and  hierurge,  532;  minis- 
ters the  Gospel  in  sacrifice,  532. 

Payne-Smith,  Dean,  his  Institutions 
of  Samuel,  530 ;  outline  of  his 
exposition,  531. 

Post-Communion,  the,  549,  550,  560, 
566-568. 

Prayers,  of  consecration,  535,  537, 
544,  558,  564;  the  secret,  551, 
558,  562,  563,  564,  565  ;  of  prepa- 
ration, 535,  537,  551. 


Preface,  the,  535,  543,  564. 

Preparation,  prayers  of,  535,  537,  551. 

Proanaphora,  first  part  of  the  lit- 
urgy, 534- 

Proclamation,  use  of  the  word,  562 
(note.) 

Prolcpsis,  divine,  exhibited  in  the 
Law  of  Moses,  530. 

Prophets,  Schools  of,  531. 

Propitiation,  543,  550,  556;  prayer 
of,  550 ;  primitive  use  of  the 
word,  571. 

Prothesis,  the,  552. 

Psalms  of  communion,  548. 

Psalter,    the,    530 ;    universality    of, 

531- 
Publican,  prayer  of,  558. 

Rabbinical  education,  531. 

Rattray,  Bishop,  on  the  restoration 

of  St.  James'  Liturgy,  534. 
Remission,  prayer  for,  546. 
Responsory,  use  of   the   word,  561, 

562,  567. 
Rock,  the,  545. 
Rome,  556  (note). 

Sacrifice,  universal  prevalence  of, 
530;  divinely  instituted,  530; 
localized  in  Jerusalem,  530 ; 
eucharistic,  the,  537,  540. 

Sacristy,  prayer  of,  550,  560. 

Saints,  commemoration  of,  546,  549, 
553.  556,  562. 

Salutation,  prayer  of,  554 ;  of  the 
Gospel,  562. 

Samuel,  Institutions  of,  530,  531. 

Sanctification,  prayer  for,  547. 

Sanctus.     See  Ter  Sanctus. 

Siirsmn  Corda,  535,  543,  555,  563. 

Synagogue,  worship  of,  provided  for 
villages,  a  preparation  for  Chris- 
tian worship,  531. 

Synaxis,  suceeeds  the  synagogue, 
532,  544- 

Ter  Sanctus,  the,  535,  544,  557,  564 ; 

preface  to,  564. 
Thaddeus,  St.,  apostle,  called  Addai 

in  Syriac,  570. 
Thanksgiving,  the,  536;  prayer  of,  560. 
Translators  of  the  liturgies,  529. 
Triad,  the,  559,  567. 
Trinity,  the,  547,  563. 
Trisagion,   the,   538,   544,    552,    553, 

557  :  prayer  of,  552. 
Triumphal  hymn,  the,  535;    prayer 

of.  535- 

Veil  (chalice),  prayer  of  the,  543  and 
note  ;  withdrawing  of,  543,  563. 

World,  four  parts  of,  555,  565. 


EARLY    LITURGIES. 


INDEX  OF  TEXTS. 


[These  Liturgies  furnish  endless  allusions  to  texts  of  Scripture  not  fully  quoted.] 


Gen.  xxii.  14 

Exod.  xxiii.  17 
xxxiv.  5 

Deut.  xii.  6  . 
xii.  21 
xii.  24 
xiv.  24 
xvi.  16 

I  Sam.  X.  5    . 
xix.  20 

I  Chron.  ix.  22 

Ps.  XV.        .      . 

xxiii.  .     . 


PAGE 

569 
530 
530 
530 
530 
530 
531 
531 
531 
561 
548 


Ps. 


PAGE 

xxxiv.      .     .     . 

54S 

xlii 

559 

xlii.  I       .     .     . 

559 

xlv.  13      .      .      . 

5-9 

11.  ....   . 

565 

Ixxiv.  6  .     .     . 

531 

Ix.wiii.  67-69  . 

53' 

Ixxxiii.  12    .     . 

531 

cxvii.       .     .     . 

548 

cxix.  108      .     . 

569 

cxxiii.      .     .     . 

565 

cxxxviii.  78 

56s 

cxlv 

S4S 

Mai.  i.  II      . 

i.  II 
Luke  xviii.  13 
John  iv. 21-23 

vi.  32-40 

X.  16    . 
Acts  i.  4,  14  . 

ii.  I,  42 

iii.  24    . 

iv.  24    . 

xii.  12  . 

xvi.  19  . 

xix.  27  . 


531 

551 
548 

531 
566 

555 
532 
532 
53' 
532 
568 

571 
571 


I  Cor.  vii.  17 

532 

xi.  2, 25, 33,  etc 

532 

XIV.  34-40  . 

532 

2  Cor.  V.  19,  20 

562 

Phil.  ii.  10     .     . 

559 

Col.  iv.  10 

S68 

I  Tim.  ii.  2 

55' 

Heb.  i.  6  . 

540 

V.  1-3 

543 

ix.  22 

53' 

xi.  19 

53' 

I  Pet.  V.  14  J-/  alibi 

541 

Rev.  V.  6  . 

56. 

593 


1 


i 


i 


UNIVERSITY   OF   CALIFORNIA,   LOS   ANGELES 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

305  De  Neve  Drive  -  Parking  Lot  17  •  Box  951388 

LOS  ANGELES,  CALIFORNIA  90095-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library  from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


,:ii!i!i 


3  1158  01280  7433 


A  A      000  333  108    9 


