Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2022 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/apocryphalnewtesO000mont 


5 
Sa = 
xe _ 
= 
\ af 
SS 
——— 
A 
—- ae 


THE 
APOCRYPHAL 
NEW TESTAMENT 


Oxford University Press, Ely House, London W. 1 


GLASGOW NEW YORK TORONTO MELBOURNE WELLINGTON 
CAPE TOWN SALISBURY IBADAN NAIROBI LUSAKA ADDIS ABABA 
BOMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS KARACHI LAHORE DACCA 
KUALA LUMPUR SINGAPORE HONG KONG TOKYO 


[en 


THE 


APOCRYPHAL 
NEW TESTAMENT 


BEING THE 


APOCRYPHAL GOSPELS, ACTS 
EPISTLES, AND APOCALYPSES 


WITH OTHER NARRATIVES AND FRAGMENTS 


NEWLY TRANSLATED BY 


MONTAGUE RHODES JAMES 
Lirr.D., F.B.A., F.S.A. 


PROVOST OF ETON ; SOMETIME PROVOST OF KIN@’S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE 


OXFORD 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 


FIRST EDITION 1924 

REPRINTED 1926, 1945, 1950 

1953 (CORRECTED), 1955, 1960 
1963, 1966, 1969 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 
PREFACE . S : - . : ; - xi 
Object of this collection A : xi 
Existence and purpose of the apocryphal writings. ’ Their 
inadequacy. Their importance and interest . xii 
The meaning and use of the words apocrypha and 
apocryphal : eX 


Hone’s Apocryphal New Testament, misleading and un- 
original, based on a false view of the history of the 
Canon. The true state of the case ° xiv 

The test of Canonicity, viz. use of books in public worship 
of Catholic congregations. Books which were so used 
but failed to obtain permanent recognition . XVii 

This collection not absolutely complete. Classes of 
writings not included in it: Gnostic Apocrypha, 
Books of Church Order, Liturgies, the Clementine 
literature, The Pseudo-Dionysian writings, books 
bearing names of Old Testament worthies, other 
late and unimportant compositions 3 é . Xxii 


NoTEe.—Titles are italicized in the case of texts of which 
an abstract, not a full translation, is given. 


FRAGMENTS OF EARLY GOSPELS, ETC. 


The Gospel according to the Hebrews . ° ; : 1 
The Gospel of the Ebionites < 5 : 8 
The Gospel according to the Egyptians “ ; LO 
The Gospel of Philip . : ° . eel 
The Gospel or Traditions of “Matthias. - - : 12 
The Gospel of Peter (ancient testimonies) . 5 eS 
The Gospel of Thomas (ancient testimonies) . 7 . 14 
The Preaching of Peter : - 5 ‘5 : - 16 
LOST HERETICAL BOOKS . 
The Birth of Mary . . ‘ 6 . f~ 1D 
The Lesser Questions of Mary 5 0 é - 20 
The Ascents of James and other lost books . - = YU 
The Memoria of the Apostles 5 . - . 5 Pal 


Lists of Apocryphal Books : 
The Gelasian Decree . . ° 3 . . . 


vi CONTENTS 


The List of the Sixty Books : c : 
The Stichometry of Nicephorus . : 
The Synopsis of Pseudo-Athanasius 


FRAGMENTS OF GOSPELS, ETC., preserved in manu- 
scripts discovered in recent years : 


A. GREEK FRAGMENTS : 
The Fayoum Gospel-fragment . 
The Oxyrhynchus Sayings of Jesus 
Fragment of a Gospel 5 
Fragment of another Gospel 
B. Copric FRAGMENTS : 
The Strasburg papyrus. 
Fragment preserved with the Pistis Sophia 
Fragment preserved with the Acts of Paul 


AGRAPHA . 


A. Agrapha found as additions 6 the ere of the Gospels 
The Freer-logion . 


B. Agrapha preserved i in quotations 


INFANCY GOSPELS 


The Book of James, or Protevangelium 
The Gospel of Thomas. Greek text A . 
Greek text B . : 
Latin text : : 2 
Appendixes to the Gospel of Thomas. I. From the 
Pistis Sophia : 
II. Miracles of the Dyer, The Children in the ‘Oven, 
The Boy in the Tower . 
The Liber de Infantia, or Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew 
The Gospel of the Birth of Mary 
The Arabic Gospel of the Infancy 
The Armenian Gospel of the Infancy. 5 
The History of Joseph the Carpenter, or Death a Joseph - 
Coptic Lives, &c., of the Virgin . = 
Discourse by Evodius ? A 
Discourse of Cyril of Jerusalem 
Discourse of Demetrius of Antioch 
Discourse of Cyril of Alexandria c 
A modern Infancy Gospel, and other modern ‘forgeries 


PASSION GOSPELS 


The Gospel of Peter, Fragment I 


The Gospel of Beas nee or Acts acgh Pilate . 
PartI . 


° 


CONTENTS 


Part II. The Descent into Hell. Latin text A . 3 
Greek a : - 5 A : 
Latin text B i P 5 : c 6 


Letter of Pilate to Claudius 3 2 
Coptic Narratives of the ee and Passion : thirteen 


fragments . ° 
The Book of the Cock: : : : : 5 
An Ethiopic fragment 5 ° A 
Other Appendixes to the Acts of Pilate : 


Letter of Pilate to Tiberius 
Report and Paradosis of Pilate . 
Letters of Pilate and Herod 
Letier of Tiberius to Pilate ‘ ; é 5 
The Death of Pilate . < - : C 
The Vengeance or Avenging of the Saviour . : 
The Story of Joseph of Arimathaea 
The Gospel of Bartholomew : 
The Book of the Resurrection of Christ by Bartholomew 4 


The Book of John the Evangelist : 5 
The Assumption of the Virgin F : : . 
Coptic Texts. The Narrative of Evodius 5 


The Discourse of Cyril of Jerusalem 

The Discourse of Theodosius . 

A Sahidic fragment : c : 
Greek Narrative, of John the Evangelist é : 

of John of Thessalonica ; : A 
Latin Narrative of Pseudo-Melito 

of Joseph of Arimathaea : : 
Syriac Narratives. 1. The Six (Five) Books : 


2,2a. Fragmentary Narratives - . 

8. The History of the Virgin . 5 : 3 

4. Obsequies of the Virgin . 3 g 7 ; 
ACTS . “ 7 A . : : 
The Acts of J ohn A ; é 5 . 
The Banishment . Z 3 . 


The Episode of Lycomedes é ; 7 : : 


The Temple of Artemis . . 4 2 : ; 
The Parricide . 3 ° . ; C ‘ a 
The Partridge : : : : : 


The Episode of Drusiana 

The Discourse of John concerning the Lord : : 

The Latin episodes. Atticus and Eugenius 6 : 
Aristodemus : the Poison-cup A C 

The Greek fragment from Oxyrhynchus : i 

The fragment in the Epistle of Titus 0 

The Death of John ° C ; : 


viii CONTENTS 


PAGE 
The Acts of Paul 5 e + : . - 270 
The Episode of Panchares 5 ° ° : 5 24rAl 
The Story of Thecla C . ; . 272 
The Episode of Hermocrates of ‘Myra . ¢ - 281 
The Episode of Sidon - . : - 284 
The Episode of Tyre . ° 5 ° 5 - 285 
The Episode of Frontina . 287 
The Correspondence with Corinth (Third Epistle to the 
Corinthians) . : 288 
The Fight with Beasts at ‘Ephesus 291 
The Prophecies of Cleobius and ae 293 
The Martyrdom 4 293 
Unplaced and Uncertain Fragments : 297 
The Acts of Peter ; : ‘ . 9 300 
The Coptic Fragment : : ° . : 300 
The Gardener’s ter ° 5 : 303 
The Vercelli Acts. : . . 4 3804 
The Martyrdom . - 5 : . : (330) 332 
The Acts of Andrew ° 6 c 337 
The Miracles, by Gregory of Tours : . 4 337 
Detached fragments of the Acts : ° . 349 
Fragment of Andrew’s discourse in ae ° 2 350 
The Martyrdom : 357 
The ActsofThomas . . . 364 
i. The Sale, and the Wedding ‘Feast : : - 865 
ii. The Palace in Heaven ° A S 371 
Note by Professor Burkitt ° ° . 5 yas} 
iii. The Serpent : 5 . 3878 
iv. The Ass’s Colt 6 . < - 3883 
v. The Devil and the Woman : : - 3885 
vi. The Youth that murdered the Woman 6 - 3888 
vii. The Captain (Siphor) : 393 
viii. The Wild Asses 5 396 
ix. Mygdonia the wife of Charisius . : 402 
The Hymn of the Soul é A 411 
x. The Baptism of Mygdonia fs 417 
xi. Tertia the wife of Misdaeus : 422 
xii. Iuzanes the son of Misdaeus . 5 5 425 
The Prayer of Thomas - 428 
xiii. The Baptism of Iuzanes and the rest . - 430 
(xiv). The Martyrdom . . ; - 434 
THE SECONDARY ACTS . 438 
The Acts of Philip ; 439 
i. The Widow Z , 439 
ii. At Athens . A ‘ 439 


iii. In Parthia . 


44,2 


CONTENTS 


iv. The daughter of Nicocleides : : : 
v. At Nicatera A A F : 
vi. Ireus and Aristarchus r 

vii. Nerkela and Ireus . : 


vili. The Leopard and the Kid . : 
ix. The Dragon slain : : 
xv. The Martyrdom 
The Syriac Act 
The Acts of Andrew and Matthias (Matthew) « 
The Acts of Peter and Andrew 5 
The Martyrdom of Matthew . 
The Apostolic History of Pseudo-Abdias 
Book I. Peter. Book II. Paul. Book III. Andrew. 
Book IV. James the Great . 


Book V. John 
Book VI. (a) James the Less . . 

(b) Simon and Jude . : ° . 
Book VII. Matthew s F 5 = 
Book VIII. Bartholomew . , A 4 : 


Book IX. Thomas . - é c 4 
Book X. Philip 7 . ° ° ° 
NOTICES OF MINOR ACTS 


Acts of John by Prochorus : Syriac Bisons: of John 
Acts of Barnabas, of James the Great, of Thomas . 
Acts and Passions of Peter and Paul . 7 
Acts of Thaddaeus, of disciples of the Apostles 

On the Oriental Acts, Coptic, pee and ue 
Acts of Andrew and Paul 

Fragmentary story of Andrew 

Slavonic Acts of Peter 


EPISTLES . . . 
The Letters of Christ and Abgarus : 
The Letter of Lentulus 
The Epistle to the Laodiceans 
A fragment, perhaps of an Epistle 
The correspondence of Paul and Seneca ( . 
The Epistle of the Apostles 5 5 ° . ° 


APOCALYPSES . ; ° 
The Apocalypse of Peter . 
A. Ancient Quotations . 
B. The Akhmim Fragment (or Fragment II of the 
Gospel of Peter) 
C. The Bodleian Leaf 
D. The Ethiopic Text . . 
E. Appendix. The Sibylline Oracles ‘I, 190-338 ° 


x CONTENTS 


PAGE 

The Apocalypse of Paul . : 4 5 . 525 

The Apocalypse of Thomas . 555 

A. Text of Verona and Munich MSS. (Wilhelm) | . 556 

B. Text of Munich and Vienna MSS. Pe Nhe) - 559 

The Apocalypse of the Virgin. A. Greek é . 563 

B. Ethiopic 0 5 ° - 563 

The Revelation of Stephen : . ° C : - 564 

APPENDIXES: 

I. Unknown Gospel . é : : : : . 569 

II. Acts of Paul : : ; : c : . 570 
INDEXES: 

Of Apocryphal Writings mentioned . ; . 579 

Of Writers cited. I. Ancient and Mediaeval : . 582 

II. Modern. ‘ : ; . 583 

Of Proper Names. I. Persons . ; , ; . 584 

II. Places : . : : . 589 


Of Subjects : : : : ‘ : : . 591 


PREFACE 


Ir is a matter of common knowledge that there exist 
such things as Apocryphal Gospels, Acts, Epistles, Reve- 
lations—in fact apocryphal representatives of every one of 
the classes of writings which form the New Testament. 
Bible dictionaries, encyclopaedias, manuals, and text-books 
have made the fact familiar. Moreover, without much 
trouble it is possible for the less incurious to get hold of 
translations of a good many of these books. But I do not 
think I am speaking inaccurately when I say that there is 
at present no one book in existence which will supply the 
English reader—or for that matter any reader, of Latin, 
Greek, or Oriental languages—with a comprehensive view 
of all that is meant by the phrase, ‘the apocryphal literature 
of the New Testament’. 

The object of the present volume is to give that compre- 
hensive view. It contains fresh versions of all the really 
important texts, and full summaries, with extracts, of those 
which do not need to be translated word for word. Further, 
it attempts to put the reader in possession of the results of 
the very fruitful researches of the last generation. In those 
thirty years a great mass of material has been added to the 
available stock, and, what is not less important, there has 
been a sifting of what is early from what is late, and an 
order and chronology of the writings, which is not likely to 
be seriously disturbed, has been settled. 

From the historical and the literary point of view, then, 
it is worth while to present the apocryphal literature of the 
New Testament afresh; but it is also worth while from the 
religious point of view. People may still be heard to say, 
‘After all, these Apocryphal Gospels and Acts, as you call 
them, are just as interesting as the old ones. It was only 
by accident or caprice that they were not put into the New 
Testament’. The best answer to such loose talk has always 
been, and is now, to produce the writings and let them tell 
their own story. It will very quickly be seen that there is 


xii PREFACE 


no question of any one’s having excluded them from the 
New Testament: they have done that for themselves. 

Interesting as they are—and I will try to show later why 
they are interesting—they do not achieve either of the two 
principal purposes for which they were written, the instilling 
of true religion and the conveyance of true history. 

As religious books they were meant to reinforce the existing 
stock of Christian beliefs: either by revealing new doctrines 
—usually differing from those which held the field; or by 
interpreting old ones—again, usually in a fresh sense; or by 
extolling some special virtue, as chastity or temperance; 
or by enforcing belief in certain doctrines or events, e. g. the 
Virgin birth, the resurrection of Christ, the second coming, 
the future state—by the production of evidence which, if 
true, should be irrefragable. For all these purposes the 
highest authority is claimed by the writings; they are the 
work, they tell us, of eyewitnesses of the events, or they 
report the utterances of the Lord himself. As books of 
history they aim at supplementing the scanty data (as they 
seemed) of the Gospels and Acts, and in this they resemble 
many of the Jewish Midrashim and apocrypha. Like these, 
they sometimes bear testimony to the currency of a tradition 
which has other and better evidence to support it, as when 
the Acts of John assume John’s residence at Ephesus, and 
the Acts of Peter and Paul the martyrdom of those apostles 
at Rome. 

But, as I have said, they fail of their purpose. Among 
the prayers and discourses of the apostles in the spurious 
Acts some utterances may be found which are remarkable 
and even beautiful: not a few of the stories are notable 
and imaginative, and have been consecrated and made 
familiar to us by the genius of mediaeval artists. But the 
authors do not speak with the voices of Paul or of John, or 
with the quiet simplicity of the three first Gospels. It is 
not unfair to say that when they attempt the former tone, 
they are theatrical, and when they essay the latter, they are 
jejune. In short, the result of anything like an attentive 
study of the literature, in bulk and in detail, is an added 
respect for the sense of the Church Catholic, and for the 
wisdom of the scholars of Alexandria, Antioch, and Rome: 
assuredly in this case they were tried money-changers, who 
proved all things and held fast that which was good. Many 


PREFACE xiii 


a book, like the venerable Gospel according to the Hebrews 
and the Preaching of Peter, which we should dearly have 
liked to possess for the light they would throw on primitive 
Christian history, has perished as a consequence of their 
unfavourable verdict, and we regret the loss—no one more 
keenly than myself: but with the verdict that consigned 
them first to obscurity and then to destruction I cannot 
quarrel. 

But, it may be said, if these writings are good neither as 
books of history, nor of religion, nor even as literature, 
why spend time and labour on giving them a vogue which 
on your own showing they do not deserve? Partly, of 
course, in order to enable others to form a judgement on 
them; but that is not the whole case. The truth is that 
they must not be regarded only from the point of view 
which they claim for themselves. In almost every other 
aspect they have a great and enduring interest. 

If they are not good sources of history in one sense, they 
are in another. They record the imaginations, hopes, and 
fears of the men who wrote them; they show what was 
acceptable to the unlearned Christians of the first ages, 
what interested them, what they admired, what ideals of 
conduct they cherished for this life, what they thought they 
would find inthe next. As folk-lore and romance, again, they 
are precious; and to the lover and student of mediaeval 
literature and art they reveal the source of no inconsiderable 
part of his material and the solution of many a puzzle. They 
have, indeed, exercised an influence (wholly disproportionate 
to their intrinsic merits) so great and so widespread, that 
no one who cares about the history of Christian thought and 
Christian art can possibly afford to neglect them. 


The remainder of this Preface will be devoted to the 
explanation of several matters: the word apocryphal and 
my use of it: the misleading character of the last ‘ Apocry- 
phal New Testament ’ and the fallacies which dominate it : 
the contents of the present one: and, lastly, some notice of 
the writings which are not included in it. 

First as to the title—the Apocryphal New Testament. 

The words apocrypha and apocryphal, particularly the 
latter, have come to mean, oftener than not, in common 
speech, that which is spurious or untrue. They do not mean 


XiV PREFACE 


that in themselves, nor did they in the minds of those who 
first applied them to books. They began by being terms of 
dignity and respect: they have degenerated into terms of 
something like abuse. An apocryphal book was—originally 
—one too sacred and secret to be in every one’s hands: it 
must be reserved for the initiate, the inner circle of believers. 
But, in order to enlist respect, such books were almost 
always issued under venerable names which they had no 
true right to bear. We hear of apocryphal books of Adam, 
Moses, and so forth. The pretence was that these had 
lately been brought to light, after ages of concealment by 
pious disciples. I do not intend to write a history of the 
gradual degradation of the words: I need only say that the 
falsity of the attributions was soon recognized: and so (to 
pass over three centuries of transition), in the parlance of 
Jerome, who has influenced posterity more than any one 
else in this matter, apocryphal means spurious, false, to be 
rejected and, probably, disliked. 

The application of the word Apocrypha to that Appendix 
to the Old Testament which we have in our Bibles is a new 
departure, due to the reformers of the sixteenth century, 
and it is not consistent either with the original sense of the 
word or with Jerome’s usage of it, for that Appendix contains 
no books of secret lore (unless 2 Esdras be so reckoned), 
but several books which are not spurious, besides some that 
are. There is, then, some confusion here, and the existence 
of that confusion has led scholars in recent years to use the 
long word pseudepigraphic (= falsely entitled) when they 
wish to describe a really spurious book, as distinct from 
those contained in our ‘Apocrypha’. 

But, though all the writings in the present collection could 
be called pseudepigrapha, the old word apocrypha is good 
enough for my purpose, and I employ it here in the sense 
of false and spurious, even when I am dealing with writings 
which may contain ancient and truthful elements. This 
book, then, I call the Apocryphal New Testament. 

It is not the first of its name. Just over a hundred years 
ago, in 1820, an Apocryphal New Testament was issued by 
William Hone, best remembered as the author of the Every- 
day Book, the Year Book, the Table Book, Ancient Mysteries 
Explained. 

Hone’s book has long held the field: it is constantly being 


PREFACE Xv 


reprinted, and it has enjoyed a popularity which is in truth 
far beyond its deserts. For it is a misleading and an un- 
original book. 

Misleading, because all its externals suggest that it is 
a supplement to the New Testament. Printed in double 
columns, with all the books divided into chapters and 
verses, with a summary prefixed to each chapter in italic 
type, with head-lines of the same character on every page, 
with an ‘Order of Books’ beginning ‘Mary hath Chapters 8’, 
it presents the familiar aspect of the English Bible to any 
one who opens it. Misleading, again, because about half 
the volume is occupied by the writings of the Apostolic 
Fathers—the Epistles of Clement of Rome, Barnabas, 
Ignatius, and Polycarp, and the Shepherd of Hermas— 
which are not apocryphal. Misleading also in a more serious 
way, because title-page and preface tell us that it contains 
the writings which were ‘not included in the New Testament 
by its compilers’ when it was first ‘collected into a volume’. 

Unoriginal, because the whole contents of the book 
except the prefaces are borrowed bodily from two books 
about a hundred years older than Hone’s. All the apocryphal 
writings are taken—I think without any acknowledgement 
—from Jeremiah Jones’s New and Full Method of Settling 
the Canonical Authority of the New Testament, published in 
1736, while the version of the Apostolic Fathers is that 
of Archbishop Wake—whose footnotes, by the way, record- 
ing various readings of the manuscripts in Greek and Latin, 
have suffered sadly at the hands of Hone’s, and subse- 
quent, compositors. 

It is, in fact, to speak frankly, a very bad book; and 
I should be justified in criticizing its composition and 
particularly its prefaces much more sharply than I do. 
Only I cannot forget that it was the first book on the New 
Testament Apocrypha which fell into my hands, and that 
it then exercised a fascination which has never lost its hold 
upon me. I feel, therefore, that if I could consign it to 
a more or less honourable grave by providing a better 
substitute for it, I should in some sort be paying a debt of 
gratitude and at the same time doing a service to the reading 

ublic. 
P I have said, and I think proved, that Hone’s is a quite 
unoriginal book: I have also said that it is misleading in 


Xvi PREFACE 


several ways, but this latter assertion I have not as yet 
sufficiently supported. In doing se, i shall attempt to 
present a truth as well as expose an error. 

The key-note of the book, the animus of it, comes out in 
the phrase which I have quoted from its title-page, and 
which speaks of writings ‘not included in the New Testament 
by its compilers’. The words call up a picture of a number 
of men—probably bishops in mitres—seated round a table 
piled with rolls and books. One pile is labelled ‘Gospels’, 
another ‘Epistles’, and so on. The members of this com- 
mittee examine each volume with more or less care: most 
of them are put aside with gestures of disapproval. Finally 
a small selection is made, and entrusted to the chairman, 
who draws up a careful list of its contents, and subsequently, 
no doubt, hands it over to a publisher with a proper au- 
thorization. In due time the New Testament ‘collected 
into a volume’ is disseminated throughout the Christian 
world. I really believe that something not very unlike this 
fable is fairly deducible from Hone’s prefaces. 

The fallacy which dominates it is the notion that the 
writings which comprise our New Testament were ‘collected 
into a volume’ at a given moment by a definite act of the 
authorities of the Church. Those who have read any 
modern elementary account of the formation of the Canon 
are aware that the processes of inclusion and exclusion were 
gradual: that by the end of the second century we find the 
Four Gospels in a secure position, and Irenaeus arguing 
from the analogy of nature that there could be no more and 
no fewer than four: that the Pauline Epistles are already 
formed into a collection: that the authority of the Acts is 
not doubted. Doubt, indeed, really attaches only to some 
of the lesser Epistles, and the Revelation: and the grounds 
of doubt are various, the Revelation, for instance, being 
disliked for its teaching about the millennium or its obscurity, 
and some of the minor Epistles failing to find recognition 
from their shortness and relative unimportance. Exceptional 
(within the Church) is the attitude of a party (so obscure is 
its history that we are not sure whether it was a group of 
people or a single writer) who in the second century rejected 
the Johannine writings in bulk. 

The details of all this must be sought in professed histories 
of the Canon: only the most general statements can find 


PREFACE xvii 


a place here. The point is this, that when Hone or any one 
else speaks in terms which suggest that our New Testament 
is the result of a selection made by a council of the Church 
or any similar body, from among a number of competing 
books which might just as well have been included in it as 
not, he is very much astray. 

Yet, as is usually the case, there is a grain of truth under- 
lying the fallacy. There were a few books which attained 
a measure of recognition and eventually lost it. 

Let us say that the best external test of the canonicity of 
a writing is, whether or not it was read in the public worship 
of Christian congregations which were in communion with 
the generality of other Christian congregations. We know 
that there were such congregations, or churches, all over 
the ancient world, and that there were others which were 
not in communion with these, but could be labelled as 
adherents of some teacher whose doctrine differed from that 
of the majority—were he Marcion, Valentinus, Montanus, 
or any other. 

Now what books do we find, outside those of the Ne 
Testament, which we can be sure were so used by what we 
will call normal or Catholic Christians? The best evidence 
we can get, apart from definite statements by early writers 
(of which there are not many), is that of our oldest manu- 
scripts of the complete Bible, made for public use. One of 
these, the Codex Sinaiticus, of the fourth century, adds to 
our books the Epistle of Barnabas and the Shepherd of 
Hermas. Another, the Codex Alexandrinus, of the fifth 
century, adds the Epistle of Clement of Rome to the 
Corinthians, and what is called his Second Epistle, which 
is really a sermon by another person unknown. We are 
definitely told that the First Epistle was read in many 
churches. 

Then (turning to some facts we gather from other sources) 
the ‘Muratorian fragment’ (late in the second century ?) 
tells us that the Revelation of Peter was received, not 
unanimously, at Rome: and a fifth-century Church historian, 
Sozomen, records that in his time it was read annually on 
Good Friday in some churches in Palestine. 

A manuscript at Constantinople, which perhaps was 
copied from a supplement to a large Bible, gives us, together 
with the Epistles of Clement, Barnabas, Ignatius, and 


870 b 


XViii PREFACE 


Polycarp, another writing called the Teaching (Didache) of 
the Apostles. This book Eusebius, in the fourth century, 
classes among those that were not certainly spurious or 
certainly canonical, but disputed. We cannot say that it 
was used publicly by any Church. 

A list of Biblical books in a sixth-century manuscript of 
the Epistles (Codex Claromontanus, Paris) includes among 
Biblical books, Barnabas, Hermas, the Revelation of Peter, 
and the Acts of Paul. But it is impossible to maintain that 
these Acts enjoyed a reputation equal to that of the other 
books.+ 

So our list is a very short one. We may fairly say that 
the only books which had a real chance of being included 
in the Canon of the New Testament were the Epistles of 
Clement and Barnabas, the Revelation of Peter, and the 
Shepherd of Hermas; for I do not think we need reckon in 
the Didache or the Acts of Paul. And we may be thankful 
that the Church at large finally declared against them; for 
the first Epistle of Clement is the only one of them which 
we should have found tolerable now. 

There was, then, a serious claim for the recognition of four 
or five books. But when we have said this much, we have 
by no means exhausted the list of writings for which the 
same claim was made and was not so seriously entertained: 
books which in larger or smaller circles were placed on a 
level with those of our Canon, but were regarded by the 
Church at large as the Book of Mormon or the writings of 
Mrs. Mary Baker G. Eddy are now. Outside the ranks of 
these, too, there is an immense crowd of smaller writings 
which claim, indeed, to supplement the Bible in one way 
or another, but of which it is difficult to say that any one 
was ever looked upon as ‘Scripture’. Such are many of the 
lesser Passion-narratives, or again those of the Death of the 
Virgin. Documents of this kind may be said to shade off 
gradually into the category of the Lives of the Saints. 

Of all these classes is the present collection composed. 
A brief survey of the arrangement will make this clear. 

I have placed first the remains of the oldest books, mainly 


+ One writing of the fifth century uses them, and cannot be proved 
to use the Canonical Acts ; but it is an exception, and an eccentric one 


in itself{—a book called the Supper of (pseudo-)Cyprian, a cento of Bible 
tags, made perhaps for use in schools. 


PREFACE xix 


the Secondary Gospels, of none of which do we possess a com- 
plete text, and of one only, the Gospel of Peter, so much as. 
a few pages. With these I have put a selection of the most 
important Agrapha (a rather clumsy name for the non- 
Biblical sayings of, and traditions about, our Lord). Notices 
of lost heretical books, and lists of apocrypha, are collected 
in the same section. 

These fragments are followed by the complete texts, 
among which what have been called Gospels come first: 
and first among them is a group of Infancy Gospels and 
stories of the birth of the Virgin. Two of them, the Book 
of James (or Protevangelium), and the Gospel of Thomas, 
are second-century books. The first we have with com- 
paratively slight alterations; the second has been drastically 
expurgated. The short prefatory notices prefixed to the 
several books give, I hope, enough details to guide the 
reader. 

The later texts are summarized, not translated word for 
word. This plan I have adopted in order to avoid repetition, 
and to place the more important books in relief. The reader 
loses nothing by it, and is spared a vast deal of verbiage. 

Of the Ministry we have no apocryphal narratives, except 
some rather late Coptic fragments, which I have classed 
with the Passion stories. 

The Passion Gospels or narratives which are really 
important are two: the fragment of the Gospel of Peter, 
and the Acts of Pilate (Gospel of Nicodemus). The first is of 
the second century (about A.D. 150), the other of the fourth. 
There are old elements, perhaps, in the Report of Pilate. 
This, and the mass of later texts which deal with the Passion. 
and Resurrection are, as before, summarized. 

To these I append what is now called the Gospel of 
Bartholomew, probably a late réchauffé of a second-century 
book, a summary of a Coptic Book of Bartholomew, and 
a version of an heretical book attributed to John. 

Between Gospels and Acts I place the famous legend 
of the Death and Assumption of the Virgin, translating the 
two leading narratives, and summarizing the rest. I cannot 
regard any of the texts as older than the fourth century, 
but the nucleus of the story may be—I think must be— 
at least as old as the third. 

Of the Acts it will be useful to say a little more here; 


ox PREFACE 


The series was begun by the man who called himself Leucius 
—that being the name (traditional or invented) of a com- 
panion and disciple of St. John. ‘Leucius’ writes the Acts 
of Joun not later than the middle of the second century, 
taking the Canonical Acts as his model, but infusing into 
his work more romantic elements. His presentation of 
the Person of our Lord, and his use of Gnostic terminology, 
cannot in my mind be reconciled with the view that he 
was an orthodox Christian. A generation later, a priest of 
Asia Minor writes the Acts of Pau, with the object of 
doing honour to the apostle. His authorship of the book 
is detected, his book is regarded as an imposture, and he 
is degraded from his office. So Tertullian tells us,! placing 
the event in his own time. 

This writer also takes St. Luke’s Acts for his model. 
There is little imitation of Leucius, but enough to show 
that he knew the Acts of John. Next, not later than 
A. D. 200, come the Acts of PETER: orthodox, as are those 
of Paul, but written by a very close imitator of Leucius. 
So servile, indeed, is his imitation, that I have tried before 
now to prove that he was Leucius. I am, however, no 
longer of that opinion. This author was an Asiatic, probably: 
at any rate he knew very little about Rome. 

The Acts of ANDREW and of THomas both belong to 
the third century. It is contended (I must refer the reader 
to the notice prefixed to Tuomas) that the latter were 
composed in Syriac. Imitation of Leucius is very apparent 
in both books; but while ANDREW may be regarded at 
a pinch as orthodox, Tuomas certainly oversteps the line. 

These five books were collected into a corpus, probably 
by the Manichaean sect. These, the disciples of Mani, 
who blended Christianity with the old Magian religion 
of Persia, teaching that the powers of Good and Evil were 
coeternal, and that the material world was of the Evil 
side, welcomed these books, in which asceticism is constantly 

. A difficulty as to date has to be noted. Jerome, who repeats 
‘Tertullian’s story, adds something to it (we know not on what authority), 
namely, the detail that the priest was convicted ‘in the presence of 
John’ (‘apud Ioannem’). This is not possible historically, but the words 
stand for something. My conjecture that we ought to read ‘at Iconium’ 


(‘apud Iconium’) has met with some approval, and I believe it may be 


right. It certainly agrees with all else that we know of the provenance 
of these Acts. 


PREFACE Xxi 


superexalted, and marriage condemned (at least by Leucius) 
as an institution of the devil. In the fourth century, the 
Manichaeans upheld these as the true Acts of the Apostles, 
and most likely rejected the Canonical Acts in their favour. 
Photius, the learned patriarch of Constantinople at the end 
of the ninth century, read all five books as the work of 
Leucius, whose name had by that time come to be attached 
to the whole. But it is to be kept in mind that though 
they all came to be lumped together as the work of one 
heretical author, they are by five different writers, and 
three out of the five are, speaking somewhat generously, 
orthodox. 

They were followed by a host of legends of the apostles, 
of which enough is said in the body of this book. 

The Epistles are few. The famous correspondence of 
Christ with Abgarus is probably of the third century, the 
dull Epistle to the Laodiceans may be of the second, the 
letters of Paul and Seneca, equally poor, are not older 
than the fourth. But the Epistle of the Apostles, now 
first appearing in English, is dated by its editor at about 
A.D. 160, and the ‘Third Epistle to the Corinthians’ (which 
is part of the Acts of Paul) is also of that date. 

The Apocalypses are headed by that of Peter, which 
I would assign to the first quarter of the second century. 
It has distinct resemblances in language and in matter 
to the Second Epistle of Peter. For instance, that book 
alone among the canonical scriptures speaks of the destruc- 
tion of the world by fire; and this is prominent in the 
Apocalypse of Peter. For the first time, all the remains. 
we have of this early book are brought together. 

The Apocalypse of Paul follows. Though only of the 
fourth century, it is extremely interesting as a direct 
descendant of Peter, and as the parent of innumerable 
later visions of the next world. 

That of Thomas—of uncertain date—appears (in a very 
ragged guise, it is true) for the first time in English. For 
the Virgin’s Apocalypse and that of Stephen (a very doubt- 
ful item) summaries are enough. I have excluded, as not 
sufficiently interesting, the late Apocalypse of John which 
Tischendorf prints. 

In translating my texts I have employed a style meant 
to remind the reader of the Authorized Version of the Bible. 


XXii PREFACE 


In introducing them I have not attempted to record every 
mention of them which is to be found in Church writers. 
Where the date and character of a book is sufficiently 
established, it is not important to know that Augustine 
or even Eusebius names it. It is only when such writers 
tell us something that we do not learn from other sources 
that I quote them. And I have reduced the explanatory 
notes, the mention of previous editions, and the record 
of various readings, to an absolute minimum. In so doing 
I have followed the example set in Hennecke’s recent (1904) 
German collection of New Testament Apocrypha. The 
first volume of that excellent work contains only introduc- 
tions and texts: the notes on language, text, and inter- 
pretation fill a second volume as large as the first. But 
it is for the specialist that this second volume is meant: 
the first is intended for the general reader, and it is for 
him that my work also is designed. 


Numerous as are the texts which appear here, the collec- 
tion is not an absolutely complete corpus of the apocryphal 
literature of the New Testament. Several whole groups 
of writings do not find a place in it: I hope, for sufficient 
reasons. Of these some notice must now be given. 

The first class of books which I have found it impossible 
to include is that of the Gnostic Apocrypha. We have 
a considerable mass of this literature, all in Coptic. As 
a rule it is safe to assume that the Coptic is a version from 
Greek: but in the case of some of these books it may 
possibly be the original language. 

The oldest of the extant Gnostic treatises have not yet 
been published. They are contained in a manuscript of the 
fifth century at Berlin, which is almost complete. ‘The first 
of them is a Gospel of Mary, in which the risen Saviour 
instructs the apostles, and Mary then describes a vision in 
which she was shown the progress of the ‘gnostic’ (en- 
lightened) soul through the seven planetary spheres. 

The second is an apocryphon of John, which we know to 
be earlier than a.p. 180, since Irenaeus used it for his 
account of a particular school of Gnostics, in Book I, 29-31, 
of his refutation of heresies. It begins with a dialogue 


between John and a Pharisee, but quickly merges int 
Gnostic technicalities. j 7 ; 


PREFACE xxiii 


The third is a Wisdom of Jesus Christ: revelations made 
after the resurrection to the Twelve and to seven holy 
women, oa a mountain in Galilee. 

The last thing in the manuscript is an episode from the 
Acts of Peter, which has been published and will be found 
in its proper place among the Acts. 

A manuscript, probably of the fifth century, in the British 
Museum, called Codex Askewianus from a former owner 
Askew, contains a bulky work, or works (for not all the 
treatises of which it is composed are of one date) known as 
the Pistis Sophia (Faith(ful) Wisdom) from the spiritual 
being of that name with whose progress through the universe 
it is largely concerned. This also is in the form of revelations 
given to the apostles and holy women after the resurrection. 
It is of the third century, has been more than once edited, 
and has been translated into English. 

A very mutilated papyrus manuscript in the Bodleian 
Library, brought from Egypt by the famous traveller 
Bruce, and called the Codex Brucianus, contains two 
Gnostic treatises. One is the Two Books of Jet (a spiritual 
being), the other, which is older, has lost its title. These 
are somewhat earlier in date than the Pistis Sophia. The 
whole manuscript has been finely edited by C. Schmidt. 

While the Pistis Sophia is just readable, the Books of 
Jeti are not. The revelations they contain are conveyed in 
mystic diagrams, and numbers, and meaningless collections 
of letters, and it requires a vast deal of historical imagination 
and sympathy to put oneself in the place of anybody who 
could tolerate, let alone reverence, the dreary stuff. 

A second large group of books omitted here consists of 
those which deal with Church order and with liturgy. 

The earliest of these is the Teaching of the Apostles or 
Didache already mentioned, discovered about forty years 
ago and repeatedly edited and translated since. 

Ultimately this short book was incorporated into a large 
work, the Apostolic Constitutions, in eight books, compiled by 
an Arian of Palestine in the fourth century. These eight 
books are compounded, with additions, out of the Didascalia 
(extant in Syriac and partly in Latin, and of the third 
century), which underlie Books I-VI of the Constitutions : the 
Didache and other early material (Book VII): the Church 
Order of Hippolytus, and additions by the compiler (Book 


XXIV PREFACE 


VIII). With these eight books should be reckoned the 
Canons of the Apostles, in the form of a code of rules. 

All these books are occupied with prescribing rules for 
Church government, and for the order of divine service; 
and books of the same kind, purporting to emanate from 
the apostles and (very usually) to be recorded by Clement, 
were current all over Eastern Christendom: we have them 
in Syriac, Arabic, Coptic, Ethiopic. One, called the Apostolic 
Church Order, is couched in a series of speeches each pro- 
nounced by an apostle. This we have in Greek. Another 
notable member of the group is the Testament of the Lord 
(Syriac) which is a fairly recent discovery. It differs from 
the rest in beginning with an apocalyptic portion—a prophecy 
uttered by Christ—part of which is embodied in another 
Testament of the Lord which is prefixed, in the Ethiopic 
version, to the Epistle of the Apostles. 

The attribution of many of these books to the Lord or 
the apostles is a very transparent fiction: one hardly 
knows how seriously the writers themselves expected or 
wished it to be taken. The same is true of the numerous 
Liturgies (i.e. Communion offices) which are current under 
the names of apostles. 

A third group is known as the Clementine literature. 
We have, in Greek, Latin, and Syriac, a work in two forms. 
The setting is derived from secular romance; it is the 
ancient theme of the members of a family parted from 
one another by a series of accidents for many years, and 
in the end reunited: in this case it is Clement’s family. 
His parents, his brothers, and himself are brought together 
by the agency of St. Peter. This setting is filled in, and 
indeed completely overlaid, by the matter which conveys 
the real purpose of the book, namely, the discourses of 
Peter; partly his debates with Simon Magus, and partly 
his unopposed expositions of doctrine. 

_ The body of doctrine thus set forth is not orthodox. It 
is, in fact, eccentric. At one time it was contended that 
these books were precious monuments of a condition of the 
Church in primitive times, when the Twelve were in op- 
position to Paul; it being doubtless the case that Simon 
Magus in these books is to some extent Paul under a mask. 
But it is now recognized that the books are not only rather 
late in date (not earlier than the end of the third or beginning 


PREFACE XXV 


of the fourth century), but also that they do not represent 
the views of a large school of thought, but of a small and 
obscure sect. 

The Greek form of the romance consists of twenty so- 
called Homilies—the Clementine Homilies. The Latin is 
a version of another form, expurgated and translated by 
Rufinus in the fourth century. It is in ten books, and 
is called the Clementine Recognitions. The Syriac, never 
yet translated, mingles the two forms together. 

There are Epitomes and other off-shoots of this literature 
much later in date, which need not detain us. But with 
this same Clement’s name are associated certain Revelations 
made to him by Peter which deserve a passing notice. Of 
these, again, there are several forms, extant in Syriac, 
Arabic, and Ethiopic, and not yet discriminated nor edited 
fully. Some of them treat of the whole history of the 
world from its creation to its end, with prophecies of such 
late events as the rise and progress of Islam. In one of 
the Ethiopic recensions the old Apocalypse of Peter was 
found embedded. Others are wholly devoted to ordinances 
for Church government. 

A fourth group should perhaps just be mentioned, the 
works ascribed to Dionysius the Areopagite, Paul’s Athenian 
convert. They consist of treatises on mystical theology, 
and letters: there is also a long Epistle to Timothy on the 
deaths of Peter and Paul. None of these are older than the 
fifth century. The theological treatises have had a great 
influence on Christian speculation: but they need a great 
deal of exposition by a specialist to make them intelligible. 

Mention of a good many later books will be found under 
various heads in the body of this work. The names of 
a few which have escaped other notice may be given here. 

There are Lives of St. John Baptist, by Mark, and by 
a supposed disciple, Eurippus, which have been edited by 
F. Nau in the Patrologia Orientalis with a French version. 

An account of the death of Zacharias, and his being 
raised in order to be baptized by Christ, along with John, 
exists in Slavonic, and was translated by Berendts (Zacharias- 
Apokryphen). I have summarized it in my Lost Apocrypha 
of the Old Testament. 

A document called the ‘Priesthood of Jesus’ is given by 
the twelfth-century lexicographer Suidas, s.v. Jesus. It 


XXvi PREFACE 


was rendered into Latin by Robert Grosseteste, Bishop of 
Lincoln, in the thirteenth century. It is a late production, 
telling how Jesus was appointed to fill a vacancy in the priest- 
hood; how his pedigree had to be investigated, and how 
the Virgin was summoned (Joseph being dead) and gave 
an account of the Conception. All this purports to be 
taken from the Jewish archives. 

A long book, a discussion of Christianity at the Persian 
court, contains a narrative of signs and wonders which 
took place in a Persian temple at the birth of Christ, and 
started the Magi on their journey. It was last edited by 
Bratke in Teate und Untersuchungen. 

A Dispute between Christ and the Devil exists in Greek. 
Vassiliev prints two forms of it in his Anecdota Graeco- 
Byzantina. It has some slight affinities with the Gospel of 
Bartholomew, but it is very late and not very interesting. 

A Revelation of Lazarus describing the torments of Hell 
is perhaps the latest of the apocryphal Apocalypses. I have 
only seen it in Old French. It occurs in the ‘Calendrier des 
Bergers’, is described by Nisard in his Histoire de la littérature 
populaire, and is also to be found, illustrated by paintings 
of the early part of the sixteenth century, at the west end 
of the cathedral of Albi. 

All Rabbinic and Mohammedan traditions about Jesus 
are excluded: among the latter is the very lengthy Gospel 
of Barnabas (well edited by Canon Ragg in 1907) which 
is a forgery of the fifteenth century at earliest, written in 
Italian by a renegade from Christianity to Islam. 

_ It is, I hope, obvious that I ought not to have included 
in an apocryphal New Testament the Christian or Christian- 
ized books which bear the names of Old Testament worthies; 
but I shall be right in recording that there are such books: 
notably the Viston (perhaps the whole book known as the 
Ascension) of Isaiah; the two first (and two last) chapters 
of 4 Esdras (2 Esdras of our Apocrypha); the Apocalypses 
of Elijah, Daniel, and Zephaniah: two books of Baruch: 
an Apocalypse of Esdras edited by Tischendorf, and another, 
in Latin, printed by Mercati: the Apocalypse of Sedrach: 
probably the lost apocryphal Ezekiel: the Testaments of 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Job: and not a few more. 
Under this heading, too, may be placed many portions of 
the Sibylline Oracles and the lost Prophecy of Hystaspes. 


PREFACE XXVii 


Again I may refer readers to my Lost Apocrypha of the Old 
Testament. 

I have not even now enumerated all the writings, printed 
and unprinted, fragmentary or complete, which might be 
considered by some one to have a claim to appear in an 
Apocryphal New Testament. I have rather aimed at 
showing what manner of books those are which I have 
set aside, and at suggesting the reasons why they do not 
figure in this volume. 


I am greatly indebted to Professor C. H. Turner, F.B.A., 
who has been so good as to read through the proofs of this 
book, and to call my attention to a number of doubtful 
points : he must not be held responsible for the errors which 
survive. Tothe Bishop of Ripon, who last year suggested tome 
the desirability of providing a substitute for Hone’s Apocry- 
phal New Testament, and who has also read through many 
of the sheets, my cordial thanks are likewise offered ; and to 
Professor F. C. Burkitt, D.D., F.B.A., for his valuable note 
on a passage of the Acts of Thomas. 


Eton, August 19238. 


1 See p. 378. 


NOTE ON FIFTH IMPRESSION 


In this impression two Appendixes have been added by 
Dr. J. W. B. Barns in which are translated (1) the text 
published by [Sir] Harold Idris Bell and T. C. Skeat in Frag- 
ments of an Unknown Gospel and in The New Gospel Fragments 
(both 1985), and (2) some new portions of the Acts of Paul of 
which the most important is the Hamburg Greek papyrus 
edited by Schmidt and Schubart as IJPASEIX' ITAYAOY 
(1936). 


Mal 
Str Ce aie 
aieea’ = = 
nt ‘> re 5 ws '; “4 d 
Pia ‘ea ala. 8% nae ae * saslen A 


a 


Ee Te 


wwe ° ) Fios 
(a 2 oh 
Ay she 
, Sere 


pe Tae 
wi ; 7 i> 
AY Ae =~ J 


; 


SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 


References to less important works will be found in the body of the 
book. Antiquated publications are omitted. 


COLLECTIONS OF TEXTS 


Fasricius, Jo. ALBERT. Codex Apocryphus Novi Testamenti. 8vo. 

3 vols.in 2. Hamburg, 1719, 1743. 
The first really good book: still indispensable. 

Tuto, Jo. Car. Codex Apocryphus N. T. Vol. I (all published). 

Leipzig, 1832. 
Excellent commentaries. 

TISCHENDORF, Const. Evangelia Apocrypha. Ed. 2. 1876. 

(Acta Apostolorum Apocrypha. 1851. Superseded: see below.) 

—— Apocalypses Apocryphae. 1866. (Apoc. of Paul. Assumption 
of the Virgin.) 

HENNECKE, EpcGar (and others). Neutestamentliche Apokryphen. 
1904. Introductions and translations. 

—— Handbuch zu den NTlichen Apokryphen. 1904. Commentaries 
and notes. 

Be 1, H. I., andSxeart, T.C., Fragments of an Unknown Gospel; text also 
in The New Gospel Fragments. Both London, British Museum, 1935. 

PREUSCHEN, EK. Antilegomena. Giessen, 1901. 

Evetyn Waiter, H. G. The Sayings of Jesus from Oxyrhynchus. 
Cambridge, 1920. 

Rescu, A. Agrapha, 1889, &c. ‘ 

Rores, J. H. Die Spriiche Jesu. fsuam ee s oa nad 

(Select Agrapha.) ) sph paras 2 


GOSPELS 


AmANN, E. Le Protévangile de Jacques et ses remaniements latins. 
1910. In Les Apocryphes du N. T., Bousquet and Amann. 
Full commentary. 

Micuet, C., and Peeters, P. Evangiles apocryphesI. 1911. (Protev. 
and History of Joseph.) 

—— Eivangiles apocryphes II. 1914. (Syriac, Arabic, and Armenian 
Infancy-Gospels): in Textes et Documents, Hemmer and Lejay. 

Swere, H. B. Gospel of Peter. Macmillan, 1893. 

Bonwetscu, N. Die apokryphen Fragen des Bartholomius. Géttinger 
Nachr., Philos.-Philol. Kl. 1897. (Greek and Slavonic). 
Witmart, Dom A., and TissERANT, E. Fragments grecs et latins de 

VEvangile de Barthélemy. Revue Biblique, 1913. 
Moricca, U. Un nuovo testo dell’ Evangelo di Bartolommeo. (The 
complete Latin version.) Ibid. 1921-2. 


XXX SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Rosinson, Forses. Coptic Apocryphal Gospels. Cambridge, 1896. 
In Texts and Studies. 

Revittout, E. Apocryphes coptes. In Patrologia Orientalis, Graffin 
and Nau. II. fase. 2, IX. fase. 2. 

Lacau, P. Fragments d’Apocryphes coptes. Mém. de I’Inst. Archéol. 
du Caire. 1904. 

BunpcE, Sir E. A. Watuis. Coptic Apocrypha. 

-—— Coptic Martyrdoms. 

— Miscellaneous Texts. 

British Museum, 1913, 1914, 1915. (Containing the Book of 

Bartholomew, Apoc. of Paul, &c.) 


ABGARUS AND VERONICA LEGENDS 
Dosscuitz, E. von. Christusbilder, 1899. (Texte u. Untersuchungen.) 


ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN 


(TiscHENDORF, C. Apocalypses Apocr., above.) 

Wricur, W. Contributions to the Apocryphal Literature of the N.T 
1865. 

Lewis, Mrs. A. S. Apocrypha Arabica. (Studia Sinaitica XI.) 
Cambridge, 1902. 

Bunce, Sir E. A. W. History of the B.V.M., &c. 1899. In Luzac’s 
Semitic Text and Transl. Series. 


ACTS 


Liesius, R. A. Die apokryphen Apostelgeschichten, 1883. Supple- 
ment, 1890. (4 vols.) Studies of the literature. 

(TiscHENDoRF, C. Acta Apost. Apocr., 1851, is superseded by) 

Liesius, R. A., and Bonnet, Max. Acta Apostolorum Apocrypha. 
I. Peter, Paul and Thecla, Thaddaeus. 1891. 
II. 1. (Bonnet.) Andrew, Bartholomew, John, Matthew. 1898. 
II. 2. Philip, Thomas, Barnabas. 19038. 

Zaun, TH. Acta Joannis. Erlangen, 1880. 

(The complete text of Prochorus.) 

Scumipr, C. Acta Pauli. 1904. The Coptic text, &c. 

—— Die alten Petrusakten. 1903. In Texte und Untersuchungen. 
ee the Coptic fragment, and an important study of the whole 

subject. 
and ScuuBart, W. IIPAZEIX ITAYAOY. 1936. New portions of the 
Greek text. 
Vovuaux, L. Les Actes de Paul et ses lettres apocryphes. 19138. 
— Les Actes de Pierre. 1922. 
Both in Les Apocryphes du N. T. 

FLAMION, J. Les Actes apocryphes de l’Apétre André. Louvain, 1911. 
A study of these Acts. 

Wricut, W. Apocryphal Acts of the Apostles (Syriac). 2 vols. 
Text and translation. 1871. 

Bunce, Sir E. A. W. Contendings of the Apostles (Ethiopic). 2 vols. 
Text and translation. 1901. 

Lewis, Mrs. A. S. The Mythological Acts of the Apostles (Arabic). 
Horae Semiticae IV. Cambridge, 1904. 


SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY XXXI 


EPISTLES. 


DoxsscutTz, E. von. Christusbilder, 1899. (Above.) 

Vovuaux, L. Actes de Paul, above. 

GUERRIER, L. Testament de N.-S.en Galilée. (Epistle of the Apostles, 
Ethiopic.) In Patrologia Orientalis IX, fasc. 3. 1913. 

Scumipt, C. Gespriche Jesu mit seinen Jiingern, &c. (Epistle of the 
Apostles.) In Texte u. Unters. 1919. 


APOCALYPSES 


James, M. R. A new text of the Apocalypse of Peter. Journal of 
Theol. Studies, 1910-11. 

— Apocrypha Anecdota I (Texts and Studies). Cambridge, 1893. 
(Apoc. of Paul, Latin, and of the Virgin.) 


WRITINGS NOT INCLUDED 


Scumipt, C. Koptisch-gnostische Schriften I. (Pistis Sophia, Books 
of Jet.) 1905. 

SCHWARTZE AND PETERMANN’S earlier edition of the Pistis Sophia has 
a Latin version. 

The Teaching of the Apostles (Didache), ed. Harnack 1886, Funk 
1887, &e. 

The Apostolic Church Order. Ed. Bickell, Geschichte des Kirchenrechts, 
1843. 

The Didascalia. Bunsen, Analecta Ante-Nicaena. 1854, 

Gibson, Mrs. Horae Semiticae I. 1903. 

Hauler, E. Fragmenta Veronensia. 1900. 

The Apostolic Constitutions. Ed. F. X. Funk, 1905. 

The Testament of our Lord. Cooper and Maclean, 1902. 

Clementine Literature. Homilies. Lagarde, 1865. 

Recognitions. Gersdorf, 1838. 

English translations of some of the above will be found in T. & T. 
Clark’s Ante-Nicene Christian Library. 

Lives of John Baptist. Ed. F, Nau. Patrologia Orientalis IV, fasc. 5, 

Gospel of Barnabas. Ed. L. and L. Ragg. Oxford, 1907. 

Sibylline Oracles. J. Geffcken. Berlin, 1902. 


doe *ee ar! . 
ia - ™~ 
7 ela at /, yoy 


ee ee ee ee 
ne ee 
tae ee ee Gab ahs we 
2 ae | ont a a ho 


eos eed? - b> era nyt 


eit > eo & i Np he 


FRAGMENTS OF EARLY GOSPELS, ETC. 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO THE HEBREWS 


Tuts is on a different level from all the other books we have to 
deal with. It was a divergent yet not heretical form of our Gospel 
according to St. Matthew. Even to sketch the controversies which 
have raged about it is impracticable here. What may be regarded as 
established is that it existed in either Hebrew or Aramaic, and was 
used by a Jewish Christian sect who were known as Nazaraeans 
(Nazarenes), and that it resembled our Matthew closely enough to have 
been regarded as the original Hebrew of that Gospel. I believe few, 
if any, would now contend that it was that original. It is generally, 
and I believe rightly, looked upon as a secondary document. What 
was the extent of the additions to or omissions from Matthew we do 
not know: but two considerations must be mentioned bearing on this: 
(1) The Stichometry of Nicephorus assigns it 2,200 lines, 300 less than 
Matthew. This figure, if correct, means that a good deal was left out. 
(2) If the Oxyrhynchus Sayings (see post) are really, as competent 
scholars think, extracts from it, we must suppose a large quantity of 
additional matter: for we have but two rather brief fragments of that 
collection of sayings, and eight out of thirteen sayings are either not 
represented in the canonical text, or differ widely therefrom. 

Jerome, who is our chief source of knowledge about this Gospel, 
says that he had made a Greek and a Latin version of it. The state- 
ment is wholly rejected by some, and by others thought to be an 
exaggeration. It is very difficult to accept it as it stands. Perhaps, 
as Lagrange suggests, the truth may be that Jerome took notes of the 
text in Greek and Latin. Schmidtke, it should be added, has tried 
to show that all Jerome’s quotations from it are borrowed from an 
earlier writer, Apollinaris; but there is no positive evidence for this. 

If the Oxyrhynchus Sayings do come from Hebrews, they seem to 
imply the existence of a Greek version before Jerome’s time. This 
is also implied by the entry in the Stichometry. 

I will translate the fragments as they appear in the most recent 
study on the subject, that of the Rev. Pére Lagrange in the Revue 
Biblique, 1922. 

He begins by giving the fragments quoted by Epiphanius from what 
is properly called the Gospel of the Ebionites. Then he gives those 
of our Gospel, arranging them in the chronological order of the writers 
and the works in which they are found. This entails some little repeti- 
tion, but is otherwise historically interesting, and sound. 


IRENAEUuS against Heresies, i. 26. 2. But the Ebionites use only 
that Gospel which is according to Matthew, and repudiate the 
Apostle Paul, calling him an apostate from the Law. 

870 Bs 


2 FRAGMENTS OF EARLY GOSPELS, ETC. 


iii. 11. '7. For the Ebionites, who use only that Gospel which 
is according to Matthew, are convicted out of that very book as 
not holding right views about the Lord. 

The Ebionites mentioned here are a more primitive sect than those of 
whom Epiphanius speaks. See below. 


CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA (Stromateis), i. 9. 45. Even (or also) 
in the Gospel according to the Hebrews is written the saying, ‘he 
that wondereth shall reign, and he that reigneth shall rest’. 

id. (Strom.) v. 14. 96. For those words have the same force as 
these: He shall not cease from seeking until he find, and having 
found, he will be amazed, and having been amazed will reign, 
and having reigned will rest. 


This is identical with one of the Sayings from Oxyrhynchus: see 
below. 


ORIGEN on John, ii. 12. And if any accept the Gospel according 
to the Hebrews, where the Saviour himself saith, ‘Even now did 
my mother the Holy Spirit take me by one of mine hairs, and 
carried me away unto the great mountain Thabor’, he will be 
perplexed, &c.... 

On Jeremiah, homily xv.4. And if any one receive that saying, 
‘Even now my mother the Holy Spirit took me and carried me 
up unto the great mountain Thabor’, and the rest... . 

The description of the Holy Spirit as ‘my mother’ is due to the 
fact that the Hebrew word for spirit is of the feminine gender. The 
saying, it is generally thought, refers to the Temptation. 


Evusesius, Eccl. Hist. iii. 39. 17, speaking of the early writer 
Papias, says: He has also set forth (or expounded) another story, 
about a woman accused of many sins before the Lord, which the 
Gospel according to the Hebrews also contains. 

It is the obvious, and general, view that this story was that of the 
woman taken in adultery, which, as is well known, forms no part of 
the true text of St. John’s Gospel, though it is inserted by most manu- 
scripts at the beginning of the eighth chapter. A few manuscripts 
place it in St. Luke’s Gospel. The description suggests that Papias’s 
story, with its mention of many sins, differed from ours in detail. 

id. iv. 22. 8. Hegesippus made use in his Memoirs of the 
Gospel according to the Hebrews. 

id. iil. 25. 5 (in his list of antilegomena, writings whose canonicity 
was disputed): And among them some have placed the Gospel 
according to the Hebrews which is the especial delight of those 
of the Hebrews who have accepted Christ. 

il. 27.4. (The Ebionites repudiated Paul) and used only the 
Gospel called according to the Hebrews, making but slight account 
of the others. 

Theophany, iv. 12 (preserved in Syriac). As we have found 
somewhere in the Gospel which the Jews have in the Hebrew 


THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO THE HEBREWS~ 3 


tongue, where it is said: I choose for myself them that are good 
(or well pleasing) : the good are they whom my Father which in 
heaven giveth (or hath given) me. 

ibid. (A passage preserved in Greek also.) But since the Gospel 
written in Hebrew characters which has reached our hands turns 
the threat not against the man who hid the talent, but against him 
who had lived riotously (for it told of three servants, one who 
devoured his master’s substance with harlots and flute-girls, 
another who multiplied it by trading, and another who hid the 
talent; and made the one to be accepted, another only rebuked, 
and another to be shut up in prison), the question occurs to me 
whether in Matthew, after the conclusion of the speech against 
the man who did nothing, the threat that follows may refer, not 
to him, but by epanalepsis (i.e. taking up a former subject again) 
be said of the first, who ate and drank with the drunken. 


EPIPHANIUS, Heresy xxix. 9.4 (Nazoraeans). They have the 
Gospel according to Matthew quite complete, in Hebrew: for 
this Gospel is certainly still preserved among them as it was first 
written, in Hebrew letters. I do not know if they have even 
removed the genealogy from Abraham to Christ. 

Their Gospel was ‘quite complete’ as distinguished from the Ebionite 
Gospel, which was mutilated. 


STICHOMETRY OF NicEePHoRuS (of uncertain date, but much 
older than the ninth-century chronicle to which it is attached). 

Antilegomena of the New Testament: 

Apocalypse of John, Apocalypse of Peter, Epistle of Barnabas, 
and 

Gospel according to the Hebrews, 2,200 lines (300 lines less 
than the canonical Matthew). 


JEROME. He is our principal authority in this matter. 

On Ephesians, v. 4. As also we read in the Hebrew Gospel: 
‘And never, saith he, be ye joyful, save when ye behold your 
brother with love.’ 

On Micah, vii. 6. (The quotation about the Holy Spirit given 
above under Origen. Jerome quotes it again several times, not 
always in full.) 

Of illustrious men, 2 (on James the Lord’s brother). 

Also the Gospel called according to the Hebrews, lately trans- 
lated by me into Greek and Latin speech, which Origen often 
uses, tells, after the resurrection of the Saviour: ‘Now the Lord, 
when he had given the linen cloth unto the servant of the priest, 
went unto James and appeared to him (for James had sworn that 
he would not eat bread from that hour wherein he had drunk 
the Lord’s cup until he should see him risen again from among 
them that sleep) ’, and again after a little, ‘ Bring ye, saith the Lord, 
a table and bread’, and immediately it is added, ‘He took bread 


4, FRAGMENTS OF EARLY GOSPELS, ETC. 


and blessed and brake and gave it unto James the Just and said 
unto him: My brother, eat thy bread, for the Son of Man is risen 
from among them that sleep’. 

This is a famous passage. One interesting clause is apt to escape 
notice, about the giving of the shroud to the servant of the (high) 
priest, which implies that the priests must have been apprised of the 
resurrection as soon as the apostles. Was the servant of the priest 
Malchus ? Presumably the servant was at the sepulchre : if so, it was 
being guarded by the Jews as well as the Roman soldiers (as in the 
Gospel of Peter). 


ibid. 8. Further, the Hebrew itself (or original) is preserved to 
this day in the library at Caesarea which was collected with such 
care by the martyr Pamphilus. I also had an opportunity of 
copying it afforded me by the Nazarenes who use the book, at 
Beroea, a city of Syria. 

This Beroea is Aleppo. In later years Jerome ceased to regard this 
Hebrew Gospel as the original Matthew. 


ibid. 16. Of the Epistle of Ignatius ‘to Polycarp’ (really to 
Smyrna). In it he also inserts a testimony about the person of 
Christ, from the Gospel which was lately translated by me; his 
words are: But I hoth saw him (this is wrongly quoted) in the 
flesh after the resurrection, and believe that he is in the flesh: and 
when he came to Peter and those who were with Peter, he said 
to them: Lo, feel me and see that I am not a bodiless spirit 
(demon). And forthwith they touched him and believed. 

Ignatius, to the Smyrnaeans, iii. 1, really says: For I know, and 
I believe that he is in the flesh even after his resurrection. 

Another citation of these words of Christ is given by Origen as from 
the Doctrine of Peter: see p. 18. 


On Mait. ii. Bethlehem of Judaea. This is a mistake of the 
scribes: for I think it was originally expressed by the Evangelist 
as we read in the Hebrew, ‘of Judah’, not Judaea. 

On Matt. vi. 11 (the Lord’s prayer). 

In the Gospel called according to the Hebrews for ‘super- 
substantial’ bread I found mahar, which means ‘of the morrow’, 
so that the sense is: Our bread of the morrow, that is, of the 
future, give us this day. 

The word supersubstantial is meant to render literally the difficult 
word epiousios which we translate ‘daily’. 


On Ps. exxxv. In the Hebrew Gospel according to Matthew 
it is thus: Our bread of the morrow give us this day; that is, 
oS bread which thou wilt give us in thy kingdom, give us this 

ay’. 

On Mait. xii. 18. In the Gospel which the Nazarenes and 
Ebionites use (which I have lately translated into Greek from 
the Hebrew, and which is called by many (or most) people the 
original of Matthew), this man who has the withered hand is 


THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO THE HEBREWS 5 


described as a mason, who prays for help in such words as these: 
‘I was a mason seeking a livelihood with my hands: I pray thee, 
Jesu, to restore me mine health, that I may not beg meanly for 
my food.’ 

The mention of the Ebionites here is gratuitous. Jerome nowhere 
else speaks of them as using the Gospel, and everything goes to show 
that, in his time, they did not. 

Letter to Damasus (20) on Matt. xxi. 9. Matthew, who wrote 
his Gospel in the Hebrew speech, put it thus: Osanna barrama, 
i.e. Osanna in the highest. 

On Matt. xxiii. 35. In the Gospel which the Nazarenes use, 
for ‘son of Barachias’ I find ‘of Joiada’ written. 

This reading avoids an historical difficulty, and is doubtless secondary. 


On Matt. xxvii. 16. This Barabbas, in the Gospel entitled 
(written) according to the Hebrews, is interpreted ‘son of their 
master’ (teacher). 

By ‘interpreted’, says Lagrange, it is not meant that the Gospel 
translated the name, but that it used a form of it which suggested the 
meaning—Bar-rabban. 

On Matt. xxvii. 51. In the Gospel I so often mention we read 
that a lintel of the temple of immense size was broken and 
divided. 

Letter to Hedibia (ep. 120) 8. But in the Gospel that is written 
in Hebrew letters we read, not that the veil of the temple was 
rent, but that a lintel of the temple of wondrous size fell. 

This was probably a change made under the influence of Isa. vi. 4, 
‘the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that cried’. 

On Isa. xi. 2. (The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him) not 
partially as in the case of other holy men: but, according to the 
Gospel written in the Hebrew speech, which the Nazarenes read, 
‘There shall descend upon him the whole fount of the Holy 
Spirit’. .. . In the Gospel I mentioned above, I find this written: 
And it came to pass when the Lord was come up out of the water, 
the whole fount of the Holy Spirit descended and rested upon 
him, and said unto him: My son, in all the prophets was I waiting 
for thee that thou shouldst come, and I might rest in thee. For 
thou art my rest, thou art my first begotten son, that reignest 
for ever. 

On Isa. xi. 9, My mother the Holy Spirit. 

On Isa., preface to bk. xviii. For when the Apostles thought 
him to be a spirit, or, in the words of the Gospel which is of the 
Hebrews which the Nazarenes are wont to read, ‘a bodiless 
demon’, he said to them (Luke xxiv. 38). 

On Ezek. xvi. 18. My mother, the Holy Spirit. 

On Ezek. xviii. '7. And in the Gospel according to the Hebrews 
which the Nazarenes are accustomed to read, it is placed among 
the greatest sins ‘if a man have grieved the spirit of his brother’. 


6 FRAGMENTS OF EARLY GOSPELS, ETC. 


Dialogue against Pelagius, iii. 2. In the Gospel according to 
the Hebrews which is indeed in the Chaldaean and Syrian speech 
butis written in Hebrew letters, which the Nazarenes use tothisday, 
called ‘according to the apostles’, or, as most term it, ‘accord- 
ing to Matthew’, which also is to be seen in the library of Caesarea, 
the story tells: Behold, the mother of the Lord and his brethren 
said unto him: John Baptist baptizeth unto.the remission of 
sins; let us go and be baptized of him. But he said unto them: 
Wherein (what) have I sinned, that I should go and be baptized 
of him? unless peradventure this very thing that I have said is 
a sin of ignorance. 

ibid. And in the same book: If thy brother (saith he) have 
sinned by a word and made thee amends, seven times in a day 
receive thou him. Simon his disciple said unto him: Seven times 
in a day? The Lord answered and said unto him: Yea, I say 
unto thee, unto seventy times seven times. For in the prophets 
also, after they were anointed by the Holy Spirit, the word of 
sin was found. 

‘Word of sin’ is Hebraistic for ‘somewhat of sin’: similarly ‘sinned 
by a word’ means ‘sinned in anything’. 

Latin version of Origen on Matthew (now called Pseudo-Origen). 

It is written in a certain Gospel which is called according to 
the Hebrews (if at least any one care to accept it, not as authori- 
tative, but to throw light on the question before us) : 

The second of the rich men (it saith) said unto him: Master, 
what good thing can I do and live? He said unto him: O man, 
fulfil (do) the law and the prophets. 

He answered him: I have kept them. He said unto him: Go, 
sell all that thou ownest, and distribute it unto the poor, and 
come, follow me. But the rich man began to scratch his head, 
and it pleased him not. And the Lord said unto him: How 
sayest thou: I have kept the law and the prophets? For it is 
written in the law: Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself, 
and lo, many of thy brethren, sons of Abraham, are clad in filth, 
dying for hunger, and thine house is full of many good things, 
and nought at all goeth out of it unto them. 

And he turned and said unto Simon his disciple who was sitting 
by him: Simon, son of Joanna, it is easier for a camel to enter in 
by a needle’s eye than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom 
of heaven. 

It is probable that this extract was found by the translator of 
Origen’s commentary in some work of Jerome. It seems to be agreed 
that it was not in Origen’s own commentary. 

Some manuscripts of the Gospels have marginal notes recording 
readings of “the Jewish’ Gospel, by which our Gospel is evidently meant. 
Some of these were published by Tischendorf, others more recently by 
Schmidtke. According to the latter these notes were originally made 
between 370 and 500 by some one who did his work at Jerusalem. 


THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO THE HEBREWS 7 


Matt. iv. 5. The Jewish copy has not ‘unto the holy city’ 
but ‘in Jerusalem’. 

Matt. v. 22. The word ‘without cause’ is not inserted in some 
copies, nor in the Jewish. 

Matt. vii. 5. The Jewish has here: If ye be in my bosom and 
do not the will of my Father which is in heaven, out of my bosom 
will I cast you away. 

(The ‘Second Epistle of Clement’, iv. 5, has: The Lord said: 
If ye be with me gathered together in my bosom and do not my 
commandments, I will cast you away and say unto you: Depart 
from me; I know you not whence ye are, ye workers of wickedness.) 

Matt. x. 16. The Jewish has ‘(wise) more than serpents’ 
instead of ‘as serpents’. 

Matt. xi. 12. (The kingdom of heaven suffereth violence.) 
The Jewish has: ‘is ravished (or plundered).’ 

Matt. xi. 25. (I thank thee (lit. confess unto thee), O Father.) 
The Jewish: ‘I give thee thanks.’ 

Matt. xii. 40. The Jewish has not: three days and three 
nights (in the heart of the earth). 

. Matt. xv. 5. The Jewish: Corban by which ye shall be profited 
y us. 

Probably it is meant that the verse ran: But ye say to your father 
and mother: Corban, &c. 

Matt. xvi. 2, 3. Omitted by ‘the Jewish’ (as by many extant 
manuscripts). 

Matt. xvi. 17. The Jewish: (Simon) son of John. 

Matt. xviii. 22. The Jewish has, immediately after the seventy 
times seven: For in the prophets, after they were anointed with 
the Holy Spirit, there was found in them a word (matter) of sin. 

This shows the identity of ‘the Jewish’ with Jerome’s gospel. 


Matt. xxvi. 74. The Jewish: and he denied and swore and 
cursed. 

Matt. xxvii. 65. The Jewish: And he delivered unto them 
armed men, that they might sit over against the cave and keep 
it day and night. 


A commentary on Isaiah (liii. 12) by Haimo of Auxerre (c. 850) 
has this apropos of the word ‘Father forgive them’ : 

For, as is contained in the Gospel of the Nazarenes, at this 
word of the Lord many thousands of Jews that stood round about 
the Cross believed. 

A marginal note (thirteenth century) on a copy of the versified 
Bible called the Aurora (by Petrus de Riga), in a manuscript 
at the Fitzwilliam Museum, Cambridge (one of a number of 
remarkable notes) is: 

At the cleansing of the Temple: 

In the books of the Gospels which the Nazarenes use it is read that 


8 FRAGMENTS OF EARLY GOSPELS, ETC. 


rays issued from his eyes whereby they were terrified and put 
to flight. 

Jerome on Matt. xxi. 12 says that the people whom Jesus drove out 
did not resist him: ‘For a certain fiery and starry light shone (radiated) 
from his eyes and the majesty of Godhead gieamed in his face.’ 

When I published the note, I took it that it was a reminiscence of 
Jerome’s words: ray and radiate occur in both. But Dr. Zahn was of 
opinion that it might really represent something in the old Gospel: 
so I include it, though with hesitation. 

One other mention of this Gospel has to be added. 

In Budge’s Miscellaneous Coptic Texts is a Discourse on Mary by 
Cyril of Jerusalem. Cyril (Pseudo-Cyril) relates that he had to send 
for a monk of Maiéma of Gaza who was teaching false doctrine. Called 
on for an account of his belief the monk (p. 687, Eng. trans.) said: It 
is written in the Gospel to the Hebrews that when Christ wished to 
come upon the earth to men, the Good Father called a mighty power 
in the heavens which was called Michael, and committed Christ to the 
care thereof. And the power came down into the world and it was 
called Mary, and Christ was in her womb seven months. Afterwards 
she gave birth to him, and he increased in stature, and he chose the 
apostles, ... ‘was crucified, and taken up by the Father’. Cyril asked: 
Where in the Four Gospels is it said that the holy Virgin Mary the 
mother of God is a force? The monk said: In the Gospel to the 
Hebrews. Then, said Cyril, there are five Gospels? Where is the 
fifth? The monk said: It is the Gospel that was written to the 
Hebrews. (Cyril convinced him of his error and burned the books. 
No more is told of the Gospel, which, whatever it may have been, was 
certainly not the book we have been dealing with, but a writing of 
pronouncedly heretical (Docetic?) views. The last sentence of the 
monk’s account of Christ, which I did not quote in full just now, is 
perhaps worth recording.) ‘After they had raised him up on the cross, 
the Father took him up into heaven unto himself.’ This, with its 
omission of all mention of the resurrection, might be construed as 
heretical: on the other hand, it may be merely a case of extreme 
compression of the narrative. 


THE GOSPEL OF THE EBIONITES 


All our knowledge of this is derived from Epiphanius, and he uses 
very confusing language about it (as about many other things). The 
passages are as follows : all occur in his work against Heresies—no. xxx. 


And they (the Ebionites) receive the Gospel according to 
Matthew. For this they too, like the followers of Cerinthus 
and Merinthus, use to the exclusion of others. And they call it 
according to the Hebrews, as the truth is, that Matthew alone 
of New Testament writers made his exposition and preaching of 
the Gospel in Hebrew and in Hebrew letters. 


THE GOSPEL OF THE EBIONITES 9 


Epiphanius goes on to say that he had heard of Hebrew versions of 
John and Acts kept privately in the treasuries (Geniza ?) at Tiberias, and 
continues : 

In the Gospel they have, called according to Matthew, but not 
wholly complete, but falsified and mutilated (they call it the 
Hebrew Gospel), it is contained that ‘There was a certain man 
named Jesus, and he was about thirty years old, who chose us. 
And coming unto Capernaum he entered into the house of 
Simon who was surnamed Peter, and opened his mouth and 
said: As I passed by the lake of Tiberias, I chose John and 
James the sons of Zebedee, and Simon and Andrew and <Philip 
and Bartholomew, James the son of Alphaeus and Thomas)> 
Thaddaeus and Simon the Zealot and Judas the Iscariot: and 
thee, Matthew, as thou satest at the receipt of custom I called, 
and thou followedst me. You therefore I willto be twelve apostles 
for a testimony unto (of) Israel. 

And: 

John was baptizing, and there went out unto him Pharisees 
and were baptized, and all Jerusalem. And John had raiment 
of camel’s hair and a leathern girdle about his loins: and his 
meat (it saith) was wild honey, whereof the taste is the taste 
of manna, as a cake dipped in oil. That, forsooth, they may 
pervert the word of truth into a lie and for locusts put a cake 
dipped in honey (sic). 

These Ebionites were vegetarians and objected to the idea of eating 
locusts. A locust in Greek is akris, and the word they used for cake is 
enkris, so the change is slight. We shall meet with this tendency again. 

And the beginning of their Gospel says that : It came to pass in 
the days of Herod the king of Judaea <when Caiaphas was high 
priest> that there came <a certain man> John <by name), 
baptizing with the baptism of repentance in the river Jordan, 
who was said to be of the lineage of Aaron the priest, child of 
Zacharias and Elisabeth, and all went out unto him. 

The borrowing from St. Luke is very evident here. He goes on: 
And after a good deal more it continues that: 

After the people were baptized, Jesus also came and was 
baptized by John; and as he came up from the water, the 
heavens were opened, and he saw the Holy Ghost in the likeness 
of a dove that descended and entered into him: and a voice 
from heaven saying: Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I am 
well pleased: and again: This day have I begotten thee. And 
straightway there shone about the place a great light. Which 
when John saw (it saith) he saith unto him: Who art thou, 
Lord? and again there was a voice from heaven saying unto 
him: This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. And 
then (it saith) John fell down before him and said: I beseech thee, 
Lord, baptizethoume. But he prevented him saying: Suffer it (or 
let it go): for thus it behoveth that all things should be fulfilled. 


10 FRAGMENTS OF EARLY GOSPELS, ETC. 


And on this account they say that Jesus was begotten of the 
seed of a man, and was chosen; and so by the choice of God he 
was called the Son of God from the Christ that came into him 
from above in the likeness of a dove. And they deny that he 
was begotten of God the Father, but say that he was created, 
as one of the archangels, yet greater, and that he is Lord of 
angels and of all things made by the Almighty, and that 
he came and taught, as the Gospel (so called) current among 
them contains, that, ‘I came to destroy the sacrifices, and 
if ye cease not from sacrificing, the wrath of God will not cease 
from you’. 

(With reference to the Passover and the evasion of the idea that Jesus 
partook of flesh :) 

They have changed the saying, as is plain to all from the 
combination of phrases, and have made the disciples say: Where 
wilt thou that we make ready for thee to eat the Passover? and 
him, forsooth, say: Have I desired with desire to eat this flesh 
of the Passover with you? 

These fragments show clearly that the Gospel was designed to sup- 
port a particular set of views. They enable us also to distinguish it 
from the Gospel according to the Hebrews, for, among other things, 
the accounts of the Baptism in the two are quite different. Epiphanius 
is only confusing the issue when he talks of it as the Hebrew Gospel— 
or rather, the Ebionites may be guilty of the confusion, for he attributes 
the name to them. 

The Gospel according to the Twelve, or ‘of the Twelve’, mentioned 
by Origen (Ambrose and Jerome) is identified by Zahn with the 
Ebionite Gospel. He makes a good case for the identification. If the 
two are not identical, it can only be said that we know nothing of the 
Gospel according to the Twelve. 

Revillout, indeed, claims the title for certain Coptic fragments of 
narratives of the Passion which are described in their proper place in 
this collection: but no one has been found to follow his lead. 


THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO THE EGYPTIANS 


Origen, in his first Homily on Luke, speaks of those who ‘took in 
hand’ or ‘attempted’ to write gospels (as Luke says in his prologue). 
These, he says, came to the task rashly, without the needful gifts of 
grace, unlike Matthew, Mark, John, and Luke himself. Such were 
those who composed the Gospel which is written ‘according to the 
Egyptians’ and the Gospel entitled ‘of the Twelve’. 

Apart from this there are but few mentions of the book. A series 
of passages from Clement of Alexandria is our chief source of knowledge. 
They are as follows: 

CLEeM. ALEX. Strom. iii. 9. 64. 

Whence it is with reason that after the Word had told about 
the End, Salome saith: Until when shall men continue to die? 


THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO THE EGYPTIANS 11 


(Now the Scripture speaks of man in two senses, the one that 
is seen, and the soul: and again, of him that is in a state of 
salvation, and him that is not: and sin is called the death of the 
soul) and it is advisedly that the Lord makes answer: So long as 
women bear children. 

66. And why do not they who walk by anything rather than 
the true rule of the Gospel go on to quote the rest of that 
which was said to Salome: for when she had said, ‘I have done 
well, then, in not bearing children?’ (as if childbearing were not 
the right thing to accept) the Lord answers and says: Every 
plant eat thou, but that which hath bitterness eat not. 

iil. 13. 92. When Salome inquired when the things concerning 
which she asked should be known, the Lord said: When ye have 
trampled on the garment of shame, and when the two become 
one and the male with the female is neither male nor female. In 
the first place, then, we have not this saying in the four Gospels 
that have been delivered to us, but in that according to the 
Egyptians. 

(The so-called Second Epistle of Clement has this, in a slightly 
different form, c. xii. 2: 

For the Lord himself being asked by some one when his king- 
dom should come, said: When the two shall be one, and the 
outside (that which is without) as the inside (that which is within), 
and the male with the female neither male nor female.) 

There are allusions to the saying in the Apocryphal Acts, see pp. 335, 
429, 450. 

iii. 6. 45. The Lord said to Salome when she inquired: How 
long shall death prevail? ‘As long as ye women bear children’, 
not because life is an ill, and the creation evil: but as showing the 
sequence of nature: for in all cases birth is followed by decay. 

Eacerpts from Theodotus, 67. And when the Saviour says to 
Salome that there shall be death as long as women bear children, 
he did not say it as abusing birth, for that is necessary for the 
salvation of believers. 

Strom. iii. 9. 68. But those who set themselves against God’s 
creation because of continence, which has a fair-sounding name, 
quote also those words which were spoken to Salome, of which 
I made mention before. They are contained, I think (or I take it) 
in the Gospel according to the Egyptians. For they say that 
‘the Saviour himself said: I came to destroy the works of the 
female’. By female he means lust: by works, birth and decay. 


Hippotytus against Heresies, v.77. (The Naassenes) say that 
the soul is very hard to find and to perceive; for it does not 
continue in the same fashion or shape or in one emotion so that 
one can either describe it or comprehend it in essence. And they 
have these various changes of the soul, set forth in the Gospel 
entitled according to the Egyptians. 


12 FRAGMENTS OF EARLY GOSPELS, ETC. 


Eprenanius, Heresy |xii. 2 (Sabellians). Their whole deceit 
(error) and the strength of it they draw from some apocryphal 
books, especially from what is called the Egyptian Gospel, to 
which some have given that name. For in it many suchlike 
things are recorded (or attributed) as from the person of the 
Saviour, said in a corner, purporting that he showed his disciples 
that the same person was Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. 

All this goes to show that this Gospel was a secondary work with 
a distinct doctrinal tendency. It resembles the later Gnostic books 
such as the Pistis Sophia in assigning an important réle in the dialogues 
with Christ to the female disciples. 


GOSPEL OF PHILIP 


One mention and citation of this occurs in Epiphanius, Heresy xxvi. 
13. Speaking of the ‘ Gnostics ’ of Egypt in his time (fourth century) 
he says : 

They produce a Gospel forged in the name of Philip the holy 
disciple, which says: 

The Lord revealed unto me what the soul must say as it goeth 
up into heaven, and how it must answer each of the Powers 
above. ‘I have taken knowledge (it saith) of myself, and have 
gathered myself together out of every quarter and have not 
begotten (sown) children unto the Ruler, but have rooted out his 
roots and gathered together the members that were scattered 
abroad. And I know thee who thou art, for I (it saith) am of 
them that are from above.’ 

A very leading Gnostic doctrine was that the soul contained sparks 
of the Divine, which were dispersed about among the world of matter, 
and must be collected, destined as they were some day to be removed 
out of the influence of matter and taken up into the higher world. 
This is enunciated here. 

In the Pistis Sophia Philip is one of the disciples who are specially 
ordered to write the revelations uttered by Christ. 


GOSPEL OR TRADITIONS OF MATTHIAS 


Origen on Luke (Hom. 1) says that he knows of a Gospel according 
to Matthias. Ambrose and Jerome, it seems, repeat his statement. 
Eusebius also mentions the book: none of these give more than 
the bare name. In the Gelasian Decree it is condemned, which 
need not mean that it was known to the condemner. It also occurs in 
the Greek ‘List of the Sixty Books’. 

It is possible that this book was identical with the Traditions of 


Matthias, a writing of which Clement of Alexandria speaks in the 
following passages: 


Strom. ii. 9. 45. The beginning (of truth) is to wonder at 
things, as Plato says in the Theaetetus, and Matthias in the 


GOSPEL OR TRADITIONS OF MATTHIAS 13 


Traditions, advising us: Wonder thou at the things that are 
before thee: making this the first step to further knowledge. 

iii. 4, 26. (The Gnostics) say that Matthias also taught thus: 
that we should fight with the flesh and abuse it, not yielding to it 
at all for licentious pleasure, but should make the soul grow by 
faith and knowledge. 

vii. 13.82. They say that in the Traditions Matthias the apostle 
said that on every occasion, if the neighbour of a chosen one sin, 
the chosen one hath sinned: for had he behaved himself as the 
word enjoins, the neighbour also would have been ashamed of his 
way of life, so as not to sin. 


This, too, is thought by Zahn to be traceable to the same 
source: 

Strom. iv. 6. 85. It is said that Zacchaeus (or, as some say, 
Matthias), the chief publican, when he had heard the Lord, who 
condescended to come to him, said: Behold, the half of my goods 
I give in alms, Lord: and if I have defrauded any man of ought, 
I restore it fourfold. Whereupon also the Saviour said: The Son 
of man is come to-day and hath found that which was lost. 

Hippolytus tells us that the heretics Basilides and Isidorus (his son) 
asserted that Matthias had spoken unto them certain secret words 
which he had heard from the Saviour, being taught by him apart. 


GOSPEL OF PETER 


The two fragments which we possess of the text of this book will be 
found among the Passion narratives and the Apocalypses respectively. 
Here I place the notices of it that are found in the Church writers. 
There are but three. 


ORIGEN on Matthew, x.17. (They of Nazareth thought that 
Jesus) was the son of Joseph and Mary: but the brothers of 
Jesus some (founding on a tradition of the Gospel entitled 
according to Peter or of the Book of James) say were sons of 
Joseph by a former wife who had lived with him before Mary. 

The Book of James is the so-called Protevangelium, given below. 


Evusestius, Eccl. Hist. vi. 12, treating of Serapion, bishop of 
Antioch about A.D. 190, says: 

There is another treatise composed by him about the Gospel 
called ‘according to Peter’, which he drew up to expose the false 
statements contained in it, for the benefit of some members of 
the church at Rhossus, who by the means of the aforesaid book 
had succumbed to unorthodox doctrines. Of this it will be well to 
adduce some passages in which he states his view of the book, 
writing thus: 

For we, brethren, accept Peter and the other apostles as we 
would Christ, but, as experienced men, we repudiate what is 


14 FRAGMENTS OF EARLY GOSPELS, ETC. 


falsely written under their name, knowing that we have not had 
any such things delivered to us. For I, when I was with you, 
supposed that all of you adhered to the right faith, and, not 
having gone through the Gospel which they produced under the 
name of Peter, I said: If this is all that seems to cause you 
scruples, let it be read. But now that I have learned from what 
has been told me, that somewhat of heresy was nesting in 
their mind (lit. their mind had its lair in a certain heresy), I will 
take care to come to you again: so, brethren, expect me soon. 

But you, who have comprehended of what manner of heresy 
Marcion (Gr. Marcianus) was, and how he contradicted himself, 
not understanding what he uttered, will learn the truth from what 
has been written to you (in this treatise). 

For we have been enabled to borrow this very Gospel from 
others who used it, namely, the successors of those who were its 
authors (lit. began it) whom we call Docetae (Seemers)—for most 
of their notions belong to that school—and to go through it, and 
to find that most of it is of the right teaching (word) of the 
Saviour, but some things are adventitious; a list of which we have 
drawn up for you. 


EUSEBIUS (iii. 8. 2) also names the Gospel (with the Acts, 
Apocalypse, and Preaching of Peter) as a writing not handed down 
among the ‘Catholic’ Scriptures, and not used as testimony by 
ancient or modern church writers. (This, as regards the Apoca- 
lypse and Preaching, is an exaggeration.) 


THEODORET (of heretical Fables, ii.2) says: ‘The Nazaraeans are 
Jews who know Christ as a righteous man, and use the Gospel 
called “according to Peter’’.’ (What we know of the Gospel and of 
the Nazarenes forbids us to give credence to this statement.) 


GOSPEL OF THOMAS 


_The Infancy Gospel current under the name of Thomas is also 
given below. The ancient testimonies, as in the case of Peter, are 
placed here. We are not absolutely certain that our Gospel of Thomas 
is a form of the older one, though the one quotation we have of the 
latter coincides curiously with the subject of the former. I have, 
myself, very little doubt that our Gospel is the skeleton of the old one— 
the stories retained and the unorthodox discourses cut out.! 


ORIGEN says (Hom. 1 on Luke): There is also current the Gospel 
according to Thomas. 


» Indian influence has been suggested as a factor in these stories, 
and tales of the childhood of Krishna and of Buddha have been cited 
which have a colourable resemblance to some of those in the Gospel. 
The thesis is not proved, but I have sometimes thought that the name 
given to Thomas in the Latin version, ‘Ismaelite’, might be the 


GOSPEL OF THOMAS 15 


Hiprotytus against Heresies, v.'7. The Naassenes speak of 
a nature of man at once hidden and manifesting itself, which they 
say is within man, and is the kingdom of heaven that is sought 
after: and they deliver this concerning it, expressly, in the 
Gospel entitled according to Thomas, in these words: He that 
seeketh me will find me in children from seven years old and 
upwards: for there am I manifested, who am hidden in the 
fourteenth age (aeon). 

Our Gospel of Thomas tells of the acts of Jesus at five, six, and 
eight years of age: the naming of the age may originally have been 
significant. The fragment seems to indicate that the years from seven 
to fourteen were a period of mystic importance. 


CyRIL OF JERUSALEM (A.D. 348) speaks of this book as a Mani- 
chaean production. Very likely the Manichaeans used it, but it 
was older than their sect. He says (Catech. iv. 36): 

And of the New Testament read the four Gospels only. The 
others are apocryphal (pseudepigraphic) and harmful. The 
Manichaeans also wrote a Gospel according to Thomas, which, 
though coloured with the fragrance of a gospel-name, corrupts 
the souls of the simpler. 

ib. vi. 81. Let no one read the Gospel according to Thomas, 
for it is not by one of the twelve apostles, but by one of the three 
wicked disciples of Manes. 

Eusebius names it among undoubtedly spurious books. 

The Stichometry of Nicephorus assigns it 1,300 lines. 


IRENAEUS (i. 18. 1) says that the Marcosian sect support 
their doctrines by a vast number of apocryphal writings. ‘They 
adduce, too, this false invention, that when the Lord as a child 
was learning the alphabet, and his teacher said, as the custom is: 
Say Alpha; he answered: Alpha. But when the teacher bade 
him say Beta, the Lord answered: First tell thou me what Alpha 
is, and then will I tell thee what Beta is. And this they interpret 
as meaning that he alone knew the unknown mystery, which he 
manifested in the form of Alpha.’ 


It seems probable from Irenaeus’s language that the Marcosians took 


original reading, and that if so, it might be interpreted as suggesting 
a connexion with the further Hast. 
' The case stands thus. The Greek text A calls the writer ‘Thomas 
the Israelite the Philosopher’. Greek B, ‘the holy apostle Thomas’, 
Latin, ‘Thomas the Israelite (or Ismaelite) the apostle of the Lord’. 
‘Israelite’ is a curious and pointless designation, if the apostle is 
meant, and a very easy corruption of Ismaelite. ‘Philosopher’ is a 
strikingly unusual description. The combination of Ismaelite and 
Philosopher would serve to convey the idea of an Eastern sage. 
From a somewhat different point of view, it is not to be forgotten 
that Thomas the apostle was connected with India by a tradition 
probably a good deal older than the Acts of Thomas. 


16 FRAGMENTS OF EARLY GOSPELS, ETC. 


this from an apocryphal writing. I have not much doubt that that was 
the Gospel of Thomas. The story occurs in text A, c. vi, and in all 
Infancy Gospels in some form. It is also told shortly in the Epistle of 
the Apostles, c. 4: see p. 486. 


THE PREACHING OF PETER 


Again our principal source of knowledge is Clement of Alexandria, 
who makes a series of quotations from it. 


CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA, Strom. i. 29. 182. And in the 
Preaching of Peter you may find the Lord called ‘Law and Word’. 
Twice again he quotes this phrase. 


vi. 5. 89. But that the most approved of the Greeks do not 
know God by direct knowledge, but indirectly, Peter says in his 
Preaching: Know ye then that there is one God who made the 
beginning of all things and hath power over their end; and: The 
invisible who seeth all things, uncontainable, who containeth all, 
having need of nought, of whom all things stand in need and for 
whose sake they exist, incomprehensible, perpetual, incorruptible, 
uncreated, who made all things by the word of his power... . 
that is, the Son.! 


Then he goes on: This God worship ye, not after the manner 
of the Greeks... showing that we and the good (approved) 
Greeks worship the same God, though not according to 
perfect knowledge for they had not learned the tradition of 
the Son. ‘Do not’, he says, ‘worship’—he does not say ‘the 
God whom the Greeks worship’, but ‘not after the manner 
of the Greeks’: he would change the method of worship 
of God, not proclaim another God. What, then, is meant by 
‘not after the manner of the Greeks’? Peter himself will 
explain, for he continues: Carried away by ignorance and not 
knowing God as we do, according to the perfect knowledge, but 
shaping those things over which he gave them power, for their 
use, even wood and stones, brass and iron, gold and silver 
(forgetting) their material and proper use, they set up things 
subservient to their existence and worship them; and what 
things God hath given them for food, the fowls of the air and 
the creatures that swim in the sea and creep upon the earth, wild 
beasts and fourfooted cattle of the field, weasels too and mice, 
cats and dogs and apes; yea, their own eatables do they sacrifice 
as offerings to eatable gods, and offering dead things to the dead 


1 In vi. 7. 58 he repeats a clause of this: 

For there is in very deed one God, who made the beginning of 
all things: meaning his first begotten Son; thus Peter writes, 
understanding rightly the words: In the beginning God created 
the heaven and the earth. 


The words In the beginning were interpreted as meaning ‘ By the Son *, 


THE PREACHING OF PETER 17 


as to gods, they show ingratitude to God, by these practices 
denying that he exists. . . . He will continue again in this fashion: 
Neither worship ye him as do the Jews, for they, who suppose 
that they alone know God, do not know him, serving angels and 
archangels, the month and the moon: and if no moon be seen, 
they do not celebrate what is called the first sabbath, nor keep 
the new moon, nor the days of unleavened bread, nor the feast 
(of tabernacles?), nor the great day (of atonement). 

Then he adds the finale (colophon) of what is required: So 
then do ye, learning in a holy and righteous sort that which we 
deliver unto you, observe it, worshipping God through Christ in 
anew way. For we have found in the Scriptures, how the Lord 
saith: Behold, I make with you a new covenant, not as the cove- 
nant with your fathers in mount Horeb. He hath made a new 
one with us: for the ways of the Greeks and Jews are old, but 
we are they that worship him in a new way in a third generation 
(or race), even Christians.1 

Shortly after this he cites Paul ‘in addition to the Preaching of 
Peter’ as referring to the Sibyl and Hystaspes. The passage is given 
below as a possible fragment of the Acts of Paul. 


After his quotation from Paul, Clement continues : 

Therefore Peter says that the Lord said to the apostles: If 
then any of Israel will repent, to believe in God through my 
name, his sins shall be forgiven him: (and) after twelve years go 
ye out into the world, lest any say: We did not hear. 


In the next chapter (vi. 6) he has : 

For example, in the Preaching of Peter the Lord says: I chose 
out you twelve, judging you to be disciples worthy of me, whom 
the Lord willed, and thinking you faithful apostles; sending you 
unto the world to preach the Gospel to men throughout the world, 
that they should know that there is one God; to declare by faith 
in me [the Christ] what shall be, that they that have heard and 
believed may be saved, and that they which have not believed 
may hear and bear witness, not having any defence so as to say 
“We did not hear’. 


1 ORIGEN on John, xiii. 17, has part of the above passages: 

It is too much to set forth now the quotations of Heracleon 
taken from the book entitled The Preaching of Peter and dwell 
on them, inquiring about the book whether it is genuine or 
spurious or compounded of both elements: so we willingly post- 
pone that, and only note that according to him (Heracleon) Peter 
taught that we must not worship as do the Greeks, receiving the 
things of matter, and serving stocks and stones: nor worship God 
as do the Jews, since they, who suppose that they alone know God, 
are ignorant of him, and serve angels and the month and the moon. 


870 Cc 


18 FRAGMENTS OF EARLY GOSPELS, ETC. 


After a few lines : 


And to all reasonable souls it hath been said above: Whatsoever 
things any of you did in ignorance, not knowing God clearly, all 
his sins shall be forgiven him. 

vi. 15. 128. Peter in the Preaching, speaking of the apostles, 
says: But we having opened the books of the prophets which we 
had, found, sometimes expressed by parables, sometimes by 
riddles, and sometimes directly (authentically) and in so many 
words naming Jesus Christ, both his coming and his death and 
the cross and all the other torments which the Jews inflicted on 
him, and his resurrection and assumption into the heavens before 
Jerusalem was founded (MS. judged), even all these things as 
they had been written, what he must suffer and what shall be 
after him. When, therefore, we took knowledge of these things, 
we believed in God through that which had been written of him. 

And a little after he adds that the prophecies came by Divine 
providence, in these terms: For we know that God commanded 
them in very deed, and without the Scripture we say nothing. 

The character of the heathen worship, with its mention of weasels, 
cats, &c., and the fact that our authorities are all Alexandrine, point 
to the Egyptian origin and currency of the Preaching. We see also that 
it was an orthodox book. Origen even faces the possibility of its 
being genuine in whole or in part. The earliest of the Greek apologists 
for Christianity whose work we have, Aristides, takes a very similar 
line to the Preaching, and is thought to have used it. 

A Syriac Preaching of Simon Cephas in the city of Rome (to be 
found in Cureton’s Syriac Documents) has nothing in common with 
our book. Its gist is, briefly, this: A great assembly gathers to hear 
Peter. He speaks to them of the life and death of Jesus, and the call 
of the apostles, exhorts them to shun idolatry: reverts to the signs 
at the crucifixion, and the report of Pilate to Caesar and the senate, 
and warns them against Simon Magus. We then have the incident of 
the dead man raised by Peter after Simon had failed. Peter’s episcopate 
of twenty-five years, his martyrdom and that of Paul, Nero’s death, 
and a famine which ensued after many years, are shortly told. 

In the Clementine Recognitions, &c., a great deal is said about 
books of Preachings of Peter: but these are toa great extent imaginary, 
and, if ever they existed, must have belonged to the same peculiar 
school of thought as the rest of that literature. 

There are certain other fragments of a ‘Teaching of Peter’ which 
may be another name for the Preaching. Opinion is divided. Probably 


the first, from Origen, is from the Preaching. The others are of a 
different complexion. 


ORIGEN on First Principles i, prologue 8. But if any would pro- 
duce to us from that book which is called The Doctrine of Peter, the 
passage where the Saviour is represented as saying (lit. seems to 
say) to the disciples: I am not a bodiless spirit (demon): he 
must be answered in the first place that that book is not reckoned 
among the books of the church: (and then) it must be shown that 


THE PREACHING OF PETER 19 


the writing is neither by Peter nor by any one else who was 
inspired by the spirit of God. 


The quotation agrees with one from the Gospel according to the 
Hebrews. See p. 4. 


GREGORY OF NAZIANZUS, ep. 16. ‘A soul in trouble is near 
unto God’, saith Peter somewhere—a marvellous utterance. 

(JoHN oF Damascus), Sacred Parallels, A. 12: 

Of Peter: Wretched that I am, I remembered not that God 
seeth the mind and observeth the voice of the soul. Allying 
myself with sin, I said unto myself: God is merciful, and will 
bear with thee: and because I was not immediately smitten, 
I ceased not, but rather despised pardon, and exhausted the 
long-suffering of God. 

ibid. From the Teaching of Peter: Rich is he that hath 
mercy on many, and he that, imitating God, giveth of that he 
hath. For God hath given all things unto all, of his own creatures. 
Understand then, ye rich, that ye ought to minister, for ye have 
received more than ye yourselves need. Learn that others lack 
the things ye have in superfluity. Be ashamed to keep things 
that belong to others. Imitate the fairness (equality) of God, 
and no man will be poor. 

OECUMENIUS on James, v.16. And that happens to us which 
blessed Peter says: One building and one pulling down! they 
gain nought but their labour. 


LOST HERETICAL BOOKS 


Three such are quoted or described by Epiphanius which may be 
properly reckoned as New Testament Apocrypha. I exclude the 
Gospel of Eve and such books as the prophecies of Parchor and other 
mythical persons, and the book of Elxai. 


First is a book called the Birth of Mary. 

EripHANius, Heresy xxvi. 12. 

(The Gnostics have a book which they call the Birth (or 
Descent) of Mary, in which are horrible and deadly things.) For 
they say that the reason of Zacharias being slain in the Temple 
was this, because, say they, he saw a vision and in his fear, as 
he was about to tell the vision, his mouth was stopped. For, say 
they, he saw at the hour of incense, as he was burning incense, 
4 man standing there who had the form of an ass. And when he 
went out, they say, and would have said: Woe unto you! what 
(or whom) do ye worship? he that was seen of him within the 
Temple shut his mouth, that he might not be able to speak. And 
when his mouth was opened, so that he could speak, then he 
revealed it to them and they slew him. And thus, say they, died 


20 FRAGMENTS OF EARLY GOSPELS, ETC. 


Zacharias. For on this account the priest was commanded by the 
lawgiver himself to wear bells, that when he enters in to do his 
priestly office, he whom they worship may hear the sound of the 
bells and hide himself, that the likeness of his shape may not be 
detected. 


This is the vulgarest expression of the hatred of the Old Covenant 
of which Marcion was the noblest exponent. I need not dwell here 
upon the prevalence of the belief among heathens that Jews and 
Christians worshipped a deity in the form of an ass. The Palatine 
graffito of the crucified figure with an ass’s head will occur to many 
readers. 

Another Gospel (?) of similar tendency was that which was used by 
the nameless ‘ Adversary of the Law and the Prophets’ whom Augustine 
refutes, and from which the following is quoted: 


The apostles having asked the Lord what they were to think 
about the Jewish prophets, who were thought in the past to have 
foretold his coming, he was troubled that they even yet had such 
thoughts, and answered: Ye have given up (let go) the living 
one who is before your eyes, and talk idly of the dead. 


EprIeuHantus in Her. xxvi. 8 quotes the Lesser Questions of Mary: 
but I must be excused from repeating the passage. 

In Her. xxx. 16 he tells of a book used by the Ebionites called 
the Ascents of James: 

Certain supposititious Ascents, and Discourses, so called, do they 
produce in the Ascents of James, representing him as speaking 
against the Temple and the sacrifices, and the fire on the altar; 
and many other things full of empty sound. And there, too, they 
are not ashamed to indict Paul, with forged discourses full of the 
malice and error of their false apostles: calling him a man of 
Tarsus (which he confesses and does not deny), but asserting that 
he came of the Greeks; taking their occasion from the place, 
because of the words truthfully spoken by him: I am a man of 
Tarsus, a citizen of no mean city; they then say that he was 
a Greek, the child of a Greek mother and a Greek father, and that 
he went up to Jerusalem and remained there some time, and 
desired to take the daughter of the high priest to wife, and on that 
account became a proselyte and was circumcised, and when he 
failed to secure the maiden he was enraged, and wrote against 
circumcision and against the sabbath and the Law. 

The book, as Lightfoot (Galatians, 330, n. 2) says, ‘was so called 
doubtless as describing the ascents of James up the Temple stairs, 
whence he harangued the people’. Relics of it may probably be 
discerned in the latter chapters of the first book of the Clementine 
Recognitions. Lightfoot also suggests, very ingeniously (l.c. 867, 
n. 1), that the account of the death of James, quoted by Eusebius 
from Hegesippus, in which James is cast down from the pinnacle 
of the Temple, ‘was the grand finale of these ascents’. In the 
Recognitions he addresses the people from the Temple steps, and is 


LOST HERETICAL BOOKS 21 


thrown down and left for dead by the enemy (Paul); in Hegesippus 
he speaks from the pinnacle, ‘is hurled from the still loftier station, 
and this time his death is made sure’. It is an attractive conjecture. 

Epiphanius mentions some other heretical apocrypha: a Gospel of 
Judas Iscariot (Irenaeus also speaks of this) and an heretical Ascension 
(Anabaticon) of Paul, used by the Caianites or Cainites. They are 
mere names to us. 

We also hear of ‘Gospels’ of heresiarchs—Basilides, Valentinus, and 
others: but these we cannot think of as real Gospels. They are—if 
they are not mere ghost-books—the treatises in which these teachers 
set forth their views, and they were nicknamed Gospels. The Gospel of 
Marcion is of a different class: it was an edition of Luke, from which 
all that went counter to Marcion’s views was removed. He made 
@ similar text of the Pauline Epistles. 


From a Latin writer, Orosius, comes our only fragment of another 
heretical apocryphon, the Memoria (? Memoirs) of the Apostles. It 
was current among the Priscillianists who had their head-quarters in 
Spain in the fourth century. It was evidently a dualist book, no doubt 
Manichaean in origin. 

Orostius, Admonition of the errors of the Priscillianists and Ori- 
genists. Priscillian delivered that the names of the Patriarchs 
are members (parts) of the soul: for that Ruben was in the head, 
Levi in the heart, Juda in the heart, Benjamin in the thighs, and 
the like. In the members of the body, on the other hand, the 
heavenly signs are arranged, viz. the Ram in the head, the Bull 
in the neck, the Twins in the arms, the Crab in the heart, &c. He 
would have it understood that the darkness is eternal, and that 
out of it the ruler of this world came forth. He confirms this 
from a book called the Memoria of the Apostles, where the Saviour 
is represented as being questioned privately by the disciples, and 
explaining that in the parable of the Gospel which says: A sower 
went forth to sow his seed, the sower was not good: asserting, that 
had he been good, he would not have been careless, nor cast the 
seed by the wayside or on stony places or untilled ground: willing 
it to be understood that this (the ruler of the world?) was the 
sower, who scattered the souls he had caught into various bodies, 
as he pleased. In the same book much is said of the principle of 
moist things, and the principle of fire: he would have it under- 
stood that all good things happen in this world, not by the power 
of God, but by contrivance (art). 

(The cause of rain is then expounded in a manner best not 
repeated.) 


In the Gelasian Decree ‘Of Books to be received and not to be 
received’ are the titles of many Apocryphal books. The date and 
source of this Decree are matters of dispute, but it cannot be later 
than the sixth century. Many of the titles that occur in it are derived 
from the works of Church writers, especially Jerome: the books had 
not been seen by the author of the Decree. 


22 FRAGMENTS OF EARLY GOSPELS, ETC. 


Its list of New Testament Apocrypha is remarkable alike for omissions 
and insertions. It runs thus: 


The Itinerary under the name of the apostle Peter which is 
ealled of Saint Clement, nine books. 
(= the Clementine Recognitions: in ten books.) 


Acts under the name of Andrew the apostle. 


+ * Thomas 6 
” ” Peter 99 
6 x Philip 20 


(These will be found in their place in this collection.) 


Gospel under the name of Matthias (see p. 12). 

op Barnabas. 

(Both the above occur in the Greek list of the Sixty Books, but the 
existence of a Gospel of Barnabas is most doubtful. The extant book 
under that name (ed. Ragg, 1907) is in Italian, a forgery of the late 
fifteenth or sixteenth century, by a renegade from Christianity to 
Islam.) 

Gospel under the name of James the Less. 

(Probably the Protevangelium: but a lesson on the Circumcision of 
Christ (printed by Bannister in Journal of Theol. Studies, 1908, p. 417), 
in a fragment of a tenth-century service book in an Irish hand, is 
headed: Lesson of the Gospel according to James son of Alphaeus. 
It is hardly worth translating.) 

Gospel under the name of Peter the Apostle (fragments exist). 

Gospel under the name of Thomas which the Manichaeans use 
(extant). 

Gospel under the name of Bartholomew (extant). 

Gospels under the name of Andrew (non-existent: a confusion 
with the Acts). 

Gospels which Lucianus falsified. 

op Hesychius es 

(These are recensions of the text of the canonical gospels, of which we 
know little.) 

é oon concerning the Infancy of the Saviour (Pseudo-Matthew’s 
ospel). 

Book concerning the birth of the Saviour, and Mary, or the 
midwife (the same as the last, or the Protevangelium). 

The book called of the Shepherd (of Hermas). 

All the books which Leucius the disciple of the devil made. 

(Leucius is really the name attached to the Acts of John only: the 
entry is quite a vague one). 

The book called the Foundation. 

% Py Treasure. 


(Writings attributed to Manes, founder of the Manichaean sect.) 


I omit, in what follows, the titles of Old Testament Apocrypha and 
patristic writings. 


LOST HERETICAL BOOKS 23 


The book called the Acts of Thecla and Paul (an episode from 
the Acts of Paul, current separately). 
The Revelation called of Paul (extant). 
. A Thomas (extant). 
af - Stephen (see under Apocalypses). 
The book called the Passing of Saint Mary (probably Pseudo- 
Melito’s narrative). 
The book called the Lots of the Apostles (a system of divination). 
The book called Lusa apostolorum (an unexplained title). 
_ The book called Canons of the Apostles (extant, but not given 
in this collection). 
Epistle of Jesus to Abgarus. Epistle of Abgarus to Jesus (extant). 


I may append to this the portions of the leading Greek lists of biblical} 
books which mention New Testament Apocrypha. 


a. The List of the Sixty Books 
It is as old as the seventh century. The Sixty Books are those of 
the Bible. Then follow lists of those ‘outside the sixty’ (nine) and of 
‘such as are Apocryphal’. 
Nos. 1-14 of these are Old Testament. 
15. History of James ( = Protevangelium). 
16. Apocalypse of Peter. 
17. Travels and Teachings of the Apostles (the Apocryphal 
Acts in general). 
18. Epistle of Barnabas. 
19. Acts of Paul. 
20. Apocalypse of Paul. 
21. Teaching (Didascalia) of Clement (Apostolic Consti- 
tutions). 
22. Teaching of Ignatius ( = his letters). 
23. Teaching of Polycarp ( = his letter). 
24. Gospel according to Barnabas (see p. 22). 
25. Gospel according to Matthias (see p. 12). 


b. Stichometry of Nicephorus 


Thought to have been drawn up in Jerusalem: possibly as old as 
the fourth century: appended ultimately to the ninth-century 
Chronography of Nicephorus. 


Such of the New Testament books as are disputed. 


1. Apocalypse of John lines 1,400 

2. Apocalypse of Peter ns 800 

8. Epistle of Barnabas » 1,860 

4. Gospel according to the Hebrews » 2,200 
Such of the New Testament as are Apocryphal. 

1. Travels of Paul ( = Acts) lines 3,600 


2. Travels of Peter 9 2,750 


24 FRAGMENTS OF EARLY GOSPELS, ETC. 


8. Travels of John (=Acts) lines 2,600 
4. Travels of Thomas >», 1,600 
5. Gospel according to Thomas » 13800 
6. Teaching (Didache) of the Apostles . 200 
7. Of Clement (two Epistles) », 2,600 
8. Of Ignatius, Polycarp, and Hermas. 


c. The Synopsis of Scripture ‘ of Athanasius’. 

Extant in but one manuscript, at Eton. Inthe list of Old Testament 
Apocrypha it is identical with the last, only it does not give the number 
of lines. In the New Testament list it is confused, calling the obviously 
apocryphal books ‘disputed’ only, and omitting the real ‘antilegomena’. 
Thus: 

Of the New Testament again these are disputed. Travels of 
Peter, Travels of John, Travels of Thomas, Gospel according to 
Thomas, Teaching of the Apostles, Clementine writings: out of 
which the truer and inspired portions have been selected and 
paraphrased. 


FRAGMENTS OF GOSPELS, ETC. 


PRESERVED IN MANUSCRIPTS DISCOVERED IN 
RECENT YEARS 


A. GREEK FRAGMENTS (See also Appendix I) 


1. THE FAYOUM GOSPEL-FRAGMENT 


Tuts is a piece of papyrus of the third (?) century, in the Archduke 
Rainer’s collection of papyri at Vienna: first published in 1885. There 
have been many attempts (as in all these cases) at restoring the 
missing words and letters. The first line remains quite doubtful. 
What may be regarded as certain is: 

all ye in this 
night shall be offended according to 
the scripture: I will smite the shepherd and the 
sheep shall be scattered. And when Peter 
said: Even if all, not I, the Lord 
said: The cock shall twice crow and thou 
said: Before the cock crow twice to-day 
a shalt thrice deny me 
thou shalt thrice deny me. 

It is not certain that this is a fragment of a Gospel: it may be, 
and is by many held to be, a somewhat abridged quotation made by 
a preacher or commentator. It omits, for instance, the clause: After 
I am risen I will go before you into Galilee. If the preacher or 
expositor wished to emphasize Peter’s denial, he might easily pass 
over these words. On the other hand the first editor of it, and others, 
have thought that the omission was a mark of early date. 

The word for crow is literally cry cuckoo. 


2. THE OXYRHYNCHUS SAYINGS OF JESUS 


These are on two papyri found at Oxyrhynchus by Messrs. Grenfell 
and Hunt in excavations carried out for the Graeco-Roman branch 
of the Egypt Exploration Fund. 

The first was found in 1897: it is a leaf of a papyrus book, of the 
third century. It is numbered, apparently, ‘11’. The second was 
found in 1908: it is a piece of a papyrus roll, also of the third century, 
but a little later in date than the other. It has a title or prologue. 

Both are mutilated. The latest editor, Professor H. G. Evelyn 
White (The Sayings of Jesus from Oxyrhynchus, Cambridge, 1920), has 
shown good cause for believing both fragments to belong to the same 
collection of Sayings. He makes the second precede the first (as I 
said, it has a title), and believes that the Sayings are extracts from 
the Gospel according to the Hebrews. I shail follow his order in 


26 FRAGMENTS OF GOSPELS, ETC. 


translating the Sayings: but I must refrain from quoting all his very 
ingenious restorations. As a rule I shall only give the practically 
certain supplements. 


Oxyrhynchus Papyrus 654. 

Prologue. These are the( . . . ) words which Jesus that liveth 
and(. . . )spaketo(. . . )andto Thomas. And 
he said: (Whosoever heareth) these words shall not taste 
(of death). 

i. Let not him that seeketh cease (seeking till he) find, and 
when he findeth (he shall marvel, and) having marvelled 
he shall reign, and (having reigned) he shall rest. 

(Quoted by Clement of Alexandria as from the Gospel according to 

the Hebrews: see p. 2.) 

ii. (. . . ) saith (Who are they that) draw us( . . e 
5 0 ) the kingdom that is in heaven 
(Ge) * ee) the) towlsiofithesheavien 

whatsoever is under the earth 
the fish of the sea. (These are they 
that draw) you; and the kingdom (of heaven) is 
within you: (and whosoever) knoweth( . . . ) 
shall find it( . . . ) know yourselves 
(6 6 5 )NOERME( 6 6 6 )oOrune 
Father( . . . ) ye shall know your- 
selves to bein( . . . ). Andi yevare 
the city (?) (of God (See below for suggested restorations.) 
iii. A man shall not hesitate ( 
having found ?) to ask of ( 
concerning the place of ( 
for (ye shall find?) that many (first shall be last and) 
the last first and they shall ( 
iv. Jesus saith ( 
before thy face and (that which is hidden) 
from thee shall be revealed (to thee: for there is nothing) 
hid that shall not be manifested 
and buried that (shall not be found or raised up) 
Vv. his disciples) question him (and) 
say: How shall we fast (and how shall we 
) and how (shall we 
) and what shall we observe ( 
). Jesus saith ( 
) Do not do ( 
) of the truth ( 
) hidden ( 
) blessed is he ( 


Oxyrhynchus Papyrus 1. 


vi. And then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote which 
is in thy brother’s eye. 


GREEK 27 


vii. Jesus saith: If ye fast not from the world ye shall not find 
the kingdom of God, and if ye keep not Sabbath for the 
whole week, ye shall not see the Father. 

viii. Jesus saith: I stood in the midst of the world, and in flesh 
appeared I unto them: and I found all men drunken, and 
none did I find thirsting among them and my soul is 
afflicted for the sons of men, because they are blind in 
their heart and see not .. . 

(bottom of the column gone) 


ix, col. 2. poverty 
x. (Jesus saith) Wheresoever there are (two, they are not 
without) God: and where there is one alone I say I am 
with him. Lift up the stone and there shalt thou find me: 
cleave the wood, and I am there. 
xi. Jesus saith: A prophet is not acceptable in his own country, 
nor doth a physician do cures upon them that know him. 
xii. Jesus saith: A city built upon the top of an high mountain 
and established can neither fall nor be hidden. 
xili. Jesus saith: Thou hearest with(in) thy (one) ear (but the 
other thou hast closed). . . 

It is not practicable to give the numerous attempts at restoration 
which have been made. For these I refer the reader to Evelyn White’s 
excellent edition. But by way of a specimen I will give Evelyn White’s 
and Lagrange’s suggestions for Saying II, which is one of the most 
puzzling of them all. Lagrange’s appeared in the Revue Biblique, 
1922, p. 432. 

Evelyn White would restore thus: 


Judas) saith: (Who then 

are they that draw us, (and when shall come 
the kingdom that is in heaven? (Jesus saith:) 
The fowls of the heaven (and of the beasts what 
-ever is beneath the earth (or upon the earth, and) 
the fishes of the sea, (these are they that 
draw you: and the kingdom (of heaven) 
is within you: (and whosoever) knoweth (himself) 
shail find (it: and having found it) 
ye shall know yourselves, (that) ye are (sons and heirs) 
of the Father the (Almighty, and) 
shall know yourselves (that ye are) in (God and God in you). 
And ye are the (City of God). 

Judas the interrogator is ‘not Iscariot’. 

Lagrange: 
(Judas) saith: (Who then 

are they that draw us (unto heaven above, if 
the kingdom (is) in heaven? (Jesus saith) 
The fowls of the heaven, (the beasts and if 


28 


FRAGMENTS OF GOSPELS, ETC. 


& there be anything beneath the earth (or upon the earth, and 
the fishes of the sea (are they that) draw you (unto God} 
and the kingdom (of heaven) 
is within you (and whosoever) knoweth (God) 
shall find it: (for if ye know him) 

10 ye shall know yourselves (and shall know that) ye are (sons) 
of the Father that is (perfect: and likewise) 
ye shall know yourselves (to be citizens in heaven). 
And ye are the city (of God) or (that which affrighteth Satan). 


He gives an alternative for lines 8-10: 


is within you (and whosoever) knoweth (himself) 
shall find it. (Take pains therefore) 
to know yourselves, &c. 


FRAGMENT OF A GOSPEL 


Oxyrhynchus Papyrus 655. This is a broken leaf of a papyrus roll of 
the third century. Very little of the second column—only the 
beginnings of words—remains. 


(Take no thought) 

from morning until evening 
nor from evening 

to morning, either for 

your food, what ye 

shall eat, nor for your 
raiment, what ye shall 

put on. Much better 

are ye than the lilies 

which do not card 

nor spin... 

having one gar- 

ment, what... and 

ye, who can add 

unto your stat- 

ure? He shall give 

you your rai- 

ment. His disciples 

say unto him 

When wilt thou 

be manifest unto us and when 
shall we see thee? He saith: 
When ye have put off your raiment and 
are not ashamed. 


(Cf. the Gospel according to the Egyptians.) 
Col. 2. The sense of the lower part only can be made out with 


certainty. 


GREEK 29 


He said The key of knowledge have ye hidden: 

yourselves ye entered not in, and to them that were 

coming in ye opened not 

: : : . : (after two lines) 
harmless as doves. 

The other little pieces of the leaf give no sense. 


FRAGMENT OF ANOTHER GOSPEL 


Oxyrhynchus Papyri, Part V, 1908. 
A leaf of a parchment book of the third century, almost complete. 


first, before he doeth wrong he excuseth himself (or falleth into 
error). But take ye heed lest haply ye also suffer like things 
with them. For not only among the living do evildoers among 
men receive (retribution), but they endure also a punishment 
and great torment. 

And he took them with him and led them to the cleansing-place 
itself (or holy place) and walked in the Temple. And there came 
near a Pharisee, an high priest, Levi (?) by name, and met them 
and said unto the Saviour: Who hath given thee leave to tread 
this holy place and to look upon these holy vessels, without 
thy first bathing thyself, and without thy disciples having washed 
their feet, but unclean as thou art hast thou walked in this Temple, 
which is a clean place, wherein no man walketh but one that 
hath bathed himself and changed his clothes, nor presumeth 
to look upon these holy vessels ? 

And straightway (the Saviour) stood with his disciples and 
answered him: Art thou then clean, that art here in the Temple? 
He said unto him: [I am clean, for I have bathed myself in the 
pool of David, and when I had gone down into it by the one ladder 
(stair), I came up by the other: and I have put on white and 
clean raiment, and then did I come, and have looked upon 
these holy vessels. The Saviour answered him and said: Woe 
unto you, ye blind, that see not! Thou hast bathed thyself in 
these waters that are poured forth, into which, night and day, 
dogs and swine are cast: and after thou hadst washed thyself 
didst scour thine outer skin, which the harlots also and flute- 
girls anoint and bathe and scour and beautify to (arouse) desire 
in men,? but within it is (or they are) filled with scorpions and 


1 The above is mainly Zahn’s rendering. Swete’s is: ‘beforehand 
he useth every device to injure first (unlike the righteous, who—see 
Wisdom xviii. 2—do not retaliate when they are injured first).... For 
evildoers do not receive retribution among animals only (animals that do 
harm are punished here and now) but hereafter also undergo torment,’ &c. 

2 J am reminded of an addition in the Septuagint to the text of 
1 Kings xxii. 88: They washed (Ahab’s) chariot at the fountain of 
Samaria: and the swine and the dogs licked up the blood, and the 
harlots washed themselves in the blood, according to the word of the 


Lord which he spake. 


30 FRAGMENTS OF GOSPELS, ETC. 


all evil. But I and my disciples, of whom thou sayest, that 
we are not washed, have been washed in living waters which 
came down from (God out of heaven). But woe unto them that 
(wash the outside, but within are unclean, is Dr. Swete’s suggested 
supplement). 

The writer seems to show gross ignorance of Jewish matters in 
assuming that swine could be suffered in the neighbourhood of the 
Temple, and in other ways. Yet some have defended him on this score. 

We have no clue to the identity of the book from which the frag- 
ment comes. If it were not that Jesus is here spoken of as ‘the 
Saviour’, not ‘the Lord’, I should suggest the Gospel of Peter. ‘Saviour’ 
is the common word in the Gnostic literature. The Gospel of the 
Egyptians is an obvious possibility: but all is uncertain. At least, 
the leaf is not from the Gospel according to the Hebrews: and it 
approaches the style of the Synoptists more nearly than do the next 
fragments. 


B. COPTIC 


1. Afragmentary papyrus of the fourth or fifth century at Strasburg, 
edited by A. Jacoby in 1900. I follow the rendering in Hennecke’s 
Apokr. d. N.T., which seems better than Jacoby’s. 

[front] that he may be known by his (hospitality to strangers) 
and be praised for his fruit: for... 

... Amen. Give me now thy (strength) O Father, that (they) 
with me may endure the world. Amen. (I have) received the 
crown (or sceptre) of the kingdom. 


I am become king through thee, Father. Thou wilt subject 
all things unto me. (Amen.) Through whom shall (the last) 
enemy be destroyed? Through (Christ). Through whom shall 
the sting of death be (destroyed)? (Through the) only-begotten. 
Amen. 

Unto whom belongeth the dominion? (Unto the Son.) Amen. 


[back] Now when he had ended all the (song of praise to his 
Father?) he turned himself to us and said (unto us): The hour 
is come when I shall be taken from you. 

The spirit (is) willing, but the flesh is weak: (stay) and watch 
with me. 

But we the apostles wept, saying: 

He answered and said unto us: Fear not (because of) the 
destruction (of the body) but (fear) much more . . . the power 
of (darkness). Remember all (that I) have said unto you: (If) 
they have persecuted me, (they will) persecute you also. ... 
(Ye) rejoice because I (have overcome the world). 


COPTIC 81 


Another fragment of the same. 

[front] (that I) may reveal unto you all my glory and show you 
all your strength and the mystery of your apostleship. .. . 

[back] Our eyes penetrated through all places. We beheld 
the glory of his Godhead and all the glory of his dominion. He 
clothed us with the power of (our) apostleship. 

We gain little from this. The scene is evidently the garden of 
Gethsemane. Our Lord utters a hymn to the Father: a faint resem- 
blance to that in the Acts of John is perceptible. In it are clear 
reminiscences of 1 Cor. xv. Further reminiscences of St. John’s Gospel 
occur just after this. The second fragment implies a vision of the 
glorified Christ seen by the apostles. The writing of which these are 
fragments cannot have been a very early production. The apostles 
speak in the first person plural: but we need not infer that the book 
was a Gospel or the Gospel according to the Twelve (though this is 
Revillout’s view). As in other cases (e.g. the Gospel of Peter) a single 
apostle would most likely have figured as the author in some other 
part of it. 


2. Bound up with the fifth-century manuscript which contains the 
Pistis Sophia is a slightly later leaf on which is the end of a book that 
may have been a Gospel. It has echoes of the last twelve verses of 
St. Mark. 
the righteous man. They went forth by threes to the four 
regions of the heaven and preached the gospel of the kingdom 
in the whole world, Christ working with them by the word of 
strengthening and the signs and wonders which accompanied 
them. And so have men learned of the kingdom of God in all 
the earth and in the whole world of Israel for a testimony for 
all nations that are from the rising of the sun unto the going down 
thereof. 


3.1 Similarly the remains of the ancient manuscript of the Acts of 
Paul include a single leaf of a Gospel narrative: 
ue RU LCUVOLK SME rms aie 
they wondered greatly and pondered 
in their hearts. He said unto them: 
Why marvel ye that I raise 
the dead, or that I make the lame 
to go, or that I cleanse the lepers 
or raise up the sick, or that I have 
healed the palsied and the possessed, 
or that I have parted a few 
loaves and satisfied many, or that I 
have walked on the sea or that I 
have commanded the winds? If ye 
believe this and are convinced, 
then are ye great. For verily I say 


1 See Appendix IT. 


82 


FRAGMENTS OF GOSPELS, ETC. 


unto you: If ye say unto this mountain 
Lift thyself and be cast into the sea 
without having doubted in your soul, 

it shall happen unto you... 

as one of them was convinced 

whose name was Simon, and who 

said: O Lord verily great are 

the works which thou doest. For 

we have never heard, nor have we seen 


[2nd page] ever a man that hath raised 


the dead, save thee. 

The Lord said unto him: Ye shall 

pray for the works, which I myself shall do 

. -- But the other works will I 

do straightway. For these I do 

for the sake of (?) a momentary sal- 

vation in time, in these places where 

they are, that they may believe on him who 

hath sent me. Simon said unto him: 

O Lord, command me, that I may 

speak. He said unto him: Speak, Peter. 

For from that day he did 

call them by name. He said: 

What then is this work which is greater than these 
-.. except the raising of the dead 

and the feeding of such a multitude? 

The Lord said unto him: There is somewhat that is greater 
than this, and blessed are they, that have believed 
with their whole heart. But Philip 

lifted up his voice in wrath 

saying: What manner of 

thing is this, that thou wilt teach us? 

But he said unto him: Thou 


This again is not very instructive. The burden of it is, ‘Greater 
works than these will I do’. There is nothing in it which goes outside 
the sphere of the canonical Gospels, save Philip’s anger. We shall see 
that in the Acts of Philip his proneness to wrath is emphasized. 


AGRAPHA 


By this curious name, which means ‘unwritten things’, it is usual to 
designate sayings and traditions of Christ which are not recorded in 
our Gospels, and are not capable of being traced to their source. But 
collectors of them—especially Resch—have swept into their net all 
manner of fragments which do not come under the original definition. 

Many of these appear in other parts of this volume: but there is 
a residue for which a place must be found here. 

I distinguish two classes. First, those which are found as additions. 
to the text of our Gospels, in manuscripts of the Gospels; second,,. 
those which are quoted by other writers. 


A 


1. At Matt. xx. 28, Codex Bezae (D of the Gospels, at Cam- 
bridge) and some Latin and Syriac authorities add: But ye seek 
(or seek ye) to increase from smallness and from the greater to. 
become less. And when ye go in and are invited to dine, do not 
recline in the prominent place lest haply one more illustrious 
than thou come in, and he that bade thee to dinner say to thee: 
Go yet lower down; and thou shalt be put to shame. But if 
thou recline in the lesser place, and a lesser man come in, he that 
bade thee to dinner will say to thee: Get thee yet higher up; 
and this will be profitable to thee. 

Cf. Luke xiv. 8-10. 

2. At Luke vi. 4, Codex Bezae has: On the same day, seeing 
one working on the sabbath, he said unto him: Man, if indeed 
thou knowest what thou doest, thou art blessed: but if thou 
knowest not, thou art cursed, and a transgressor of the law. 

8. At Matt. iii. 17, the fourth-century Latin Codex Vercellensis 
has: And when he was being baptized, a very great light shone 
round about from the water, so that all that had come thither 
feared. 

The Codex Sangermanensis (g!) has: And when Jesus was 
being baptized, a great light shone from the water, so that all 
that were gathered together feared. 

The same addition is found in many early writers. Justin Martyr 
(Dialogue with Trypho, 88) says, ‘a fire was kindled in Jordan’, Ephraem 
Syrus (fourth century) has, ‘a light rising over the water’. See also 
the Gospel of the Ebionites. 

4. At Mark xvi. 8, after the words ‘roll away the stone from 
the door of the sepulchre’, the early Codex Bobiensis k (at Turin) 
has: But suddenly at the third hour of the day (or by day) 

870 D 


34 AGRAPHA 


there came darkness throughout all the globe of the earth; and 
angels came down from the heavens, and rising in the glory 
(brightness) of the living God they went up together with him, 
and immediately there was light. Then the women drew near 
to the sepulchre and saw that the stone was rolled away: for it 
was very great. 

Compare the account of the resurrection in the Gospel of Peter. 


5. The ‘ Freer-logion’. 

At Mark xvi. 14, W, a fifth-century uncial Greek manuscript 
of Mark discovered in recent years in Egypt, and purchased by 
Mr. Freer of Detroit, has: (Afterward he appeared unto the eleven 
as they sat at meat and upbraided them with their unbelief 
and hardness of heart, because they believed not them which 
had seen him after he was risen) and they made excuse (defended 
themselves), saying: This age of wickedness and unbelief is 
under Satan who, by means of unclean spirits, permitteth not 
men to apprehend the true power of God: therefore do thou 
now reveal thy righteousness. They, then, said these things unto 
Christ. And Christ said unto them: The limit of the years of 
the power of Satan is fulfilled: but other fearful things draw 
near even upon them for whom, because they had sinned, I was 
delivered unto death that they may return unto the truth and 
sin no more: that they may inherit the spiritual and incor- 
ruptible glory of righteousness which is in heaven. But go ye 
into all the world, &c. 

Part of this remarkable addition was already known through 
St. Jerome, who in the Dialogue against Pelagtus, ii. 15, says that it 
was found in some copies, and especially Greek manuscripts. He has: 
And they excused themselves (lit. made satisfaction) saying: This 
age of iniquity and unbelief is under Satan who (which) by unclean 
spirits suffereth not the true power of God to be perceived: therefore 
now forthwith reveal thou thy righteousness. 

Dr. Swete observes: ‘It seems probable that almost from the 
beginning there were two recensions (of the Last Twelve Verses) of 
which one contained our passage and the other did not, and that the 
latter for some reason was commonly preferred.’ ... ‘The style of the 
addition does not differ markedly from the language of the rest of 
the Appendix.’ 

It is hardly necessary, perhaps, to observe that the Last Twelve 
Verses of St. Mark and the story of the woman taken in adultery 
(Jchn vii. 53-viii. 11) form no part of the original text of the Gospels. 

To discuss other small additions or supposed additions to the text 
would take us into the sphere of textual criticism. 

B 


Of sayings, &c., preserved in other sources the following are 
the most important: 


1. It is more blessed to give than to receive. 
Quoted by Paul at Miletus, Acts xx. 35. 


AGRAPHA 35 


2. Wherein I find you, there will I judge you. 

Quoted by Justin Martyr (Dialogue with Trypho, 47), by Clement of 
Alexandria, and by many others; one writer attributes it to the prophet 
Ezekiel. 

3. Ask ye for the greater things, and the small shall be added 
unto you: and ask for the heavenly things, and the earthly shall 
be added unto you. 

Origen (on prayer, 2) quotes both parts of this saying; Clement of 
Alexandria (Strom. i. 24. 158) the first part only. 

4. Be ye approved (or tried) money-changers (bankers). 

Quoted by Clement of Alexandria (Strom. i. 28. 177) and many others. 
Paul’s words in 1 Thess. v. 21, ‘Prove all things, hold fast that which 
is good’, are really a comment on the saying, and show its meaning. 

5. The ‘Second Epistle of Clement’, v. 2-4 has: For the Lord 
saith: Ye shall be as lambs in the midst of wolves. And Peter 
answering saith unto him: If then the wolves tear the lambs 
in pieces? Jesus said unto Peter: Let not the lambs fear the 
wolves, after they are dead. And do not ye fear them that kill 
you, and can do nothing unto you, but fear him who, after ye 
are dead, hath power over soul and body, to cast them into the 
hell of fire. 

6. CLEMENT oF ALEXANDRIA, Excerpts from Theodotus, 2: As 
the Valentinians say . . . on this account the Saviour saith: Be 
thou saved (or Save thyself, thou) and thy soul. 


7. TERTULLIAN on Baptism, 20. The disciples were tempted 
because they fell asleep, so that they forsook the Lord when he 
was taken, and even he who abode with him and used the sword, 
so that he even denied thrice: for the saying had gone before, 
that: No man that is not tempted shall obtain the kingdom of 
heaven. 

Didascalia, ii. 8. The scripture saith: A man that is not 
tempted is not approved. 

8. OriGEN on Jeremiah, hom. 8. 8 (Latin). I have read 
somewhere that the Saviour said—and I question whether some 
one has assumed the person of the Saviour, or called the words 
to memory, or whether it be true that is said—but at any rate 
the Saviour himself says: He that is near me is near the fire. 
He that is far from me is far from the kingdom. 

DipymMus on Ps. lxxxviii. 8, quotes the same in Greek. 


9. In the Apostolic Church Order is this curious passage. 
Peter said: We have gone too fast in making ordinances: let us 
signify accurately concerning the offering of the body and the blood. 

John said: Ye have forgotten, brethren, when the ‘Teacher 
asked for the bread and the cup, and blessed them, saying: 
This is my body and my blood, that he permitted not these 
women to be (stand) with us. Martha said: Jt was because of 


36 AGRAPHA 


Mary, because he saw her smiling. Mary said: I laughed not 
yet (or I laughed no more): for he said unto us before that: 
That which is weak shall be saved by means of that which is strong. 

(So the Greek and Latin texts. The Syriac, which seems 
better, has:) I did not verily laugh, but I remembered the words 
of our Lord, and was glad: for ye know that he said unto us 
aforetime, when he taught us, that, &c. 


10. CLEMENT oF ALEXANDRIA, Strom. v. 10. 63. For the 
prophet saith: Who shall understand a parable of the Lord 
save he that is wise and knowledgeable and loveth his Lord? 
For it is given to few to contain all things: for it is not as 
grudging (saith he) that the Lord commanded in a certain 
Gospel: My secret (mystery) for me and for the sons of mine house. 

Clementine Homilies, xix. 20. For we remember our Lord and 
Teacher, how he charged us saying: Ye shall keep my secrets 
(mysteries) for me and for the sons of mine house. 

The source of the words is Isa. xxiv. 16 (Greek). 


11. Justin, Dialogue with Trypho, 35. For he said: Many 
shall come in my name clad outwardly with sheep skins, but 
within they are ravening wolves. And: There shall be divisions 
(schisms) and heresies. 


12. Acts of Philip, 34. For the Lord said unto me: If ye make 
not that which is below in you to be above, and the left hand 
things to be right, ye shall not enter into my kingdom. 

Linus, Martyrdom of Peter, 17. The Lord said in a mystery: 
If ye make not the left hand as the right and the right as the 
left, and the things that are above as those that are below, and 
the things that are before as those that are behind, ye shall not 
know the kingdom of God. 


13. IRENAEUS against Heresies, v. 33. 8. As the elders remem- 
ber, which saw John the Lord’s disciple, that they heard from 
him how the Lord taught concerning those times, and said: The 
days shall come wherein vines shall grow each having ten 
thousand branches, and on one branch ten thousand shoots, 
and on every shoot ten thousand clusters, and in every cluster 
ten thousand grapes, and every grape when it is pressed shall 
yield five and twenty measures (metrétes) of wine. And when 
any of the saints taketh hold of one of the clusters, another will 
cry out: I am a better cluster, take me, through me bless thou 
the Lord. Likewise also he said that a grain of wheat shall 
bring forth ten thousand ears, and every ear shall have ten 
thousand grains, and every grain shall yield five double pounds 
of white clean flour; and all other fruits and seeds and plants 
according to the agreement that followeth with them (sc. in the 
same proportion): and all animals using those foods which are 
got from the earth shall be peaceable and in concord one with 


AGRAPHA 37 


another, subject unto men with all obedience. These things 
Papias also, a hearer of John, and an associate of Polycarp, an 
ancient man, testifies in writing in the fourth of his books—for 
he wrote five. And he adds, saying: But these things are 
credible unto believers. And, he says, when Judas the traitor 
believed not, and asked: How then shall these growths be accom- 
plished by the Lord? the Lord said: They shall see who shal} 
come thereto. 


Hrppotytvus on Daniel, 4. 60. So when the Lord was telling 
the disciples about the future kingdom of the saints, how glorious 
and wonderful it should be, Judas was struck by his words, and 
said: Who then shall see these things? And the Lord said: 
These things shall they see who are worthy. 

In the Jewish Apocalypse of Baruch (xxix. 5) is a passage describing 
the Messianic kingdom in similar terms: and other Rabbinic parallels 
are not uncommon. The words in Baruch are: 

The earth also will yield its fruit ten thousand fold, and on one vine 
there will be a thousand branches, and each branch will produce a 
thousand clusters, and each cluster will produce a thousand grapes, and 
each grape will produce a cor of wine. 

The Papias text is somewhat fuller. 

One more parallel may be quoted, from one of the writings which 
I have omitted from the collection. In an Encomium on John the 
Baptist attributed—absurdly—to Chrysostom (Budge, Coptic Apocry- 
pha, 1913, p. 848), an Apocalypse by James the Lord’s brother is 
quoted (pretended to have been found in a library at Jerusalem). 

(The Saviour tells the apostles of the glories of John Baptist, 
who lives in the third heaven and ferries those who honour him 
on earth in a golden boat over the river of fire. He then takes 
the apostles to Paradise, and Thomas asks him how much 
fruit the trees bear.) 

The Saviour said: I will hide nothing from you about the 
things concerning which ye have questioned me. As regardeth 
the vine, concerning the fruit of which ye have asked, there are 
ten thousand bunches of grapes upon it, and each bunch will 
produce six metrites (the same word as in Irenaeus) of wine. 
As regards the palm-trees in Paradise, each cluster yieldeth ten 
thousand dates, and each cluster is as long as a man is high. 
So likewise is it in the matter of the fig-trees: each shoot pro- 
duceth ten thousand figs, and if three men were to partake of 
one fig, each of them would be satisfied. On each ear of the 
wheat which is in Paradise there are ten thousand grains, and 
each grain produceth six measures of flour. And the cedars 
also are on the same scale: each tree produceth ten thousand 
cones and is of a very great height. And the apple-tree and the 
thourakion-tree are of the same height; there are ten thousand 
apples on each shoot, and if three men were to partake of one 
apple, each of them would be satisfied. 


INFANCY GOSPELS 


Unper this heading I have put together the narratives of the birth 
of the Virgin, and birth and childhood of our Lord. 

The texts which may be called ‘original’ are two, the Book of James 
(Protevangelium), and the Gospel of Thomas. 

The Book of James we have largely in its original form. The Gospel 
of Thomas seems to be the skeleton of the original, the stories retained, 
the speeches, which conveyed the doctrinal teaching of the book, 
almost entirely removed. It is in fact an expurgated edition. 

All the other texts are variants and embroideries upon these: some 
contain details which probably are derived from the original text of 
the Gospel of Thomas. 


BOOK OF JAMES, OR PROTEVANGELIUM 


The latter of these names is a modern one: it was given to the 
book by Guillaume Postel, who in the sixteenth century introduced it 
to Europe. 

Origen mentions the Book of James (and the Gospel of Peter) as 
stating that the ‘ brethren of the Lord’ were sons of Joseph by a former 
wife. This is the first mention of it, and shows us that the book is 
as old as the second century. ‘To collect later references to it is 
unnecessary. 

It is generally agreed that the story of the death of Zacharias 
(chs. xxii-xxiv) does not properly belong to the text. Origen and other 
early writers give a different account of the cause of his death: it 
was, they say, because, after the Nativity, he still allowed Mary to 
take her place among the virgins in the Temple. 

Difficulty is also caused by the sudden introduction of Joseph as 
the narrator in ch. xviii. 2 sqq. We cannot be sure whether this means 
that a fragment of a ‘Joseph-apocryphon’ has been introduced at this 
point; or, if so, how far it extends. We are sure, from a sentence of 
Clement of Alexandria,’ that some story of a midwife being present 
at the Nativity was current in the second century. 

We have the book in the original Greek and in several oriental 
versions, the oldest of which is the Syriac. But, oddly enough, there 
is no Latin version. The matter is found in an expanded and altered 
form in the ‘Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew’, but we have yet to find an 
old Latin translation of the present text. Such a thing seems to have 
eet for a book identifiable with ours is condemned in the Gelasian 

ecree. 

In the early chapters the Old Testament is extensively drawn upon, 
and imitated; but the author is not familiar with Jewish life or usages. 

The best recent edition of this book is a French one, by Amann. 
There is as yet no really critical edition of the text, in which all manu- 


* Strom. vii. 98, ‘for after she had brought forth some say that she 
was attended by a midwife, and was found to be a virgin’. 


BOOK OF JAMES, OR PROTEVANGELIUM 39 


scripts and versions are made use of. I follow Tischendorf’s in the 
main. 

I. 1 In the histories of the twelve tribes of Israel it is written 
that there was one Joacim, exceeding rich: and he offered his 
gifts twofold, saying: That which is of my superfluity shall be 
for the whole people, and that which is for my forgiveness shall 
be for the Lord, for a propitiation unto me. 

2 Now the great day of the Lord drew nigh and the children 
of Israel offered their gifts. And Reuben stood over against him 
saying: It is not lawful for thee to offer thy gifts first, forasmuch 
as thou hast gotten no seed in Israel. 3 And Ioacim was sore 
grieved, and went unto the record of the twelve tribes of the 
people, saying: I will look upon the record of the twelve tribes of 
Israel, whether I only have not gotten seed in Israel. And he 
searched, and found concerning all the righteous that they had 
raised up seed in Israel. And he remembered the patriarch Abra- 
ham, how in the last days God gave him a son, even Isaac. 
4, And Ioacim was sore grieved, and showed not himself to his wife, 
but betook himself into the wilderness, and pitched his tent there, 
and fasted forty days and forty nights, saying within himself: I 
will not go down either for meat or for drink until the Lord my 
God visit me, and my prayer shall be unto me meat and drink. 

II. 1 Now his wife Anna lamented with two lamentations, and 
bewailed herself with two bewailings, saying: I will bewail my 
widowhood, and I will bewail my childlessness. 

2 And the great day of the Lord drew nigh, and Judith her 
handmaid said unto her: How long humblest thou thy soul? 
The great day of the Lord hath come, and it is not lawful for 
thee to mourn: but take this headband, which the mistress of 
my work gave me, and it is not lawful for me to put it on, for- 
asmuch as I am an handmaid, and it hath a mark of royalty. 
And Anna said: Get thee from me. Lo! I have done nothing 
(or I will not do so) and the Lord hath greatly humbled me: 
peradventure one gave it to thee in subtilty, and thou art come 
to make me partaker in thy sin. And Judith said: How shall 
I curse thee, seeing the Lord hath shut up thy womb, to give 
thee no fruit in Israel? 

8 And Anna was sore grieved [and mourned with a great 
mourning because she was reproached by all the tribes of Israel. 
And coming to herself she said: What shall I do? I will pray 
with weeping unto the Lord my God that he visit me]. And she 
put off her mourning garments and cleansed (or adorned) her 
head and put on her bridal garments: and about the ninth hour 
she went down into the garden to walk there. And she saw 
a laurel-tree and sat down underneath it and besought the Lord 
saying: O God of our fathers, bless me, and hearken unto my 
prayer, as thou didst bless the womb of Sarah, and gavest her 
a son, even Isaac. 


40 INFANCY GOSPELS 


III. 1 And looking up to the heaven she espied a nest of 
sparrows in the laurel-tree, and made a lamentation within 
herself, saying: Woe unto me, who begat me? And what womb 
brought me forth, for I am become a curse before the children of 
Israel, and I am reproached, and they have mocked me forth out 
of the temple of the Lord? 2 Woe unto me, unto what am I 
likened? Iam not likened unto the fowls of the heaven, for even 
the fowls of the heaven are fruitful before thee, O Lord. Woe 
unto me, unto what am I likened? I am not likened unto the 
beasts of the earth, for even the beasts of the earth are fruitful 
before thee, O Lord. Woe unto me, unto what am I likened? 
I am not likened unto these waters, for even these waters are 
fruitful before thee, O Lord. 8 Woe unto me, unto what am 
I likened? I am not likened unto this earth, for even this earth 
bringeth forth her fruits in due season and blesseth thee, O 
Lord. 

IV. 1 And behold an angel of the Lord appeared, saying unto 
her: Anna, Anna, the Lord hath hearkened unto thy prayer, and 
thou shalt conceive and bear, and thy seed shall be spoken of in 
the whole world. And Anna said: As the Lord my God liveth, 
if I bring forth either male or female, I will bring it for a gift unto 
the Lord my God, and it shall be ministering unto him all the 
days of its life. 

2 And behold there came two messengers saying unto her: 
Behold Ioacim thy husband cometh with his flocks: for an angel 
of the Lord came down unto him saying: Ioacim, Ioacim, the 
Lord God hath hearkened unto thy prayer. Get thee down 
hence, for behold thy wife Anna hath conceived. 3 And Ioacim gat 
him down and called his herdsmen saying: Bring me hither ten 
lambs without blemish and without spot, and they shall be for 
the Lord my God; and bring me twelve tender calves, and they 
shall be for the priests and for the assembly of the elders; and 
an hundred kids for the whole people. 

4 And behold Ioacim came with his flocks, and Anna stood at 
the gate and saw Ioacim coming, and ran and hung upon his neck, 
saying: Now know I that the Lord God hath greatly blessed me: 
for behold the widow is no more a widow, and she that was 
enue shall conceive. And Ioacim rested the first day in his 

ouse. 

V.1_ And on the morrow he offered his gifts, saying in himself: 
If the Lord God be reconciled unto me, the plate that is upon the 
forehead of the priest will make it manifest unto me. And Ioacim 
offered his gifts and looked earnestly upon the plate of the priest 
when he went up unto the altar of the Lord, and he saw no sin 
in himself. And Ioacim said: Now know I that the Lord is 
become propitious unto me and hath forgiven all my sins. And 


he went down from the temple of the Lord justified, and went 
unto his house. 


BOOK OF JAMES, OR PROTEVANGELIUM 41 


2 And her months were fulfilled, and in the ninth month 
Anna brought forth. And she said unto the midwife: What 
have I brought forth? And she said: A female. And Anna 
said: My soul is magnified this day, and she laid herself down. 
And when the days were fulfilled, Anna purified herself and gave 
suck to the child and called her name Mary. 

VI. 1 And day by day the child waxed strong, and when she 
was six months old her mother stood her upon the ground to try 
if she would stand; and she walked seven steps and returned 
unto her bosom. And she caught her up, saying: As the Lord 
my God liveth, thou shalt walk no more upon this ground, until 
I bring thee into the temple of the Lord. And she made a 
sanctuary in her bedchamber and suffered nothing common or 
unclean to pass through it. And she called for the daughters of 
oe Hebrews that were undefiled, and they carried her hither and 
thither. 

2 And the first year of the child was fulfilled, and Ioacim made 
a great feast and bade the priests and the scribes and the assembly 
of the elders and the whole people of Israel. And Ioacim brought 
the child to the priests, and they blessed her, saying: O God of 
our fathers, bless this child and give her a name renowned for ever 
among all generations. And all the people said: So beit, so be it. 
Amen. And he brought her to the high priests, and they blessed 
her, saying: O God of the high places, look upon this child, and 
bless her with the last blessing which hath no successor. 

3 And her mother caught her up into the sanctuary of her 
bedchamber and gave her suck. 

And Anna made a song unto the Lord God, saying: 

I will sing an hymn unto the Lord my God, because he hath 
visited me and taken away from me the reproach of mine enemies, 
and the Lord hath given me a fruit of his righteousness, single 
and manifold before him. Who shall declare unto the sons of 
Reuben that Anna giveth suck? Hearken, hearken, ye twelve 
tribes of Israel, that Anna giveth suck. And she laid the child to 
rest in the bedchamber of her sanctuary, and went forth and 
ministered unto them. And when the feast was ended, they gat 
them down rejoicing, and glorifying the God of Israel. 

VII. 1 And unto the child her months were added: and the 
child became two years old. And Joacim said: Let us bring her 
up to the temple of the Lord that we may pay the promise which 
we promised; lest the Lord require it of us (lit. send unto us), 
and our gift become unacceptable. And Anna said: Let us wait 
until the third year, that the child may not long after her father 
or mother. And Ioacim said: Let us wait. 7 

2 And the child became three years old, and Ioacim said: 
Cali for the daughters of the Hebrews that are undefiled, and 
let them take every one a lamp, and let them be burning, that 
the child turn not backward and her heart be taken captive 


42 INFANCY GOSPELS 


away from the temple of the Lord. And they did so until they 
were gone up into the temple of the Lord. 

And the priest received her and kissed her and blessed her and 
said: The Lord hath magnified thy name among all generations: 
in thee in the latter days shall the Lord make manifest his 
redemption unto the children of Israel. And he made her to sit 
upon the third step of the altar. And the Lord put grace upon her 
and she danced with her feet and all the house of Israel loved her. 

VIII. 1 And her parents gat them down marvelling, and praising 
the Lord God because the child was not turned away backward. 

And Mary was in the temple of the Lord as a dove that is 
nurtured: and she received food from the hand of an angel. 

2 And when she was twelve years old, there was a council of 
the priests, saying: Behold Mary is become twelve years old in 
the temple of the Lord. What then shall we do with her? lest 
she pollute the sanctuary of the Lord. And they said unto the 
high priest: Thou standest over the altar of the Lord. Enter 
in and pray concerning her: And whatsoever the Lord shall 
reveal to thee, that let us do. 

3 And the high priest took the vestment with the twelve bells 
and went in unto the Holy of Holies and prayed concerning her. 
And lo, an angel of the Lord appeared saying unto him: Zacharias, 
Zacharias, go forth and assemble them that are widowers of the 
people, and let them bring every man a rod, and to whomsoever 
the Lord shall show a sign, his wife shall she be. And the heralds 
went forth over all the country round about Judaea, and the 
trumpet of the Lord sounded, and all men ran thereto. 

IX. 1 And Joseph cast down his adze and ran to meet them, and 
when they were gathered together they went to the high priest and 
took their rods with them. And he took the rods of them all and 
went into the temple and prayed. And when he had finished the 
prayer he took the rods and went forth and gave them back to 
them: and there was no sign upon them. But Joseph received 
the last rod: and lo, a dove came forth of the rod and flew upon 
the head of Joseph. And the priest said unto Joseph: Unto 
thee hath it fallen to take the virgin of the Lord and keep her 
for thyself. 2 And Joseph refused, saying: I have sons, and 
Iam an old man, but she is a girl: lest I became a laughing-stock 
to the children of Israel. And the priest said unto Joseph: Fear 
the Lord thy God, and remember what things God did unto 
Dathan and Abiram and Korah, how the earth clave and they 
were swallowed up because of their gainsaying. And now fear 
thou, Joseph, lest it beso in thine house. And J oseph was afraid, 
and took her to keep her for himself. And Joseph said unto 
Mary: Lo, I have received thee out of the temple of the Lord: 
and now do I leave thee in my house, and I go away to build my 


buildings and I will come again unto thee. The Lord shall watch 
over thee. 


BOOK OF JAMES, OR PROTEVANGELIUM 43 


X. 1 Now there was a council of the priests, and they said: 
Let us make a veil for the temple of the Lord. And the priest 
said: Call unto me pure virgins of the tribe of David. And the 
officers departed and sought and found seven virgins. And the 
priests called to mind the child Mary, that she was of the tribe of 
David and was undefiled before God: and the officers went and 
fetched her. And they brought them into the temple of the Lord, 
and the priest said: Cast me lots, which of you shall weave the 
gold and the undefiled (the white) and the fine linen and the 
silk and the hyacinthine, and the scarlet and the true purple. 
And the lot of the true purple and the scarlet fell unto Mary, 
and she took them and went unto her house. 

[And at that season Zacharias became dumb, and Samuel was 
in his stead until the time when Zacharias spake again.] 

But Mary took the scarlet and began to spin it. 

XI. 1 And she took the pitcher and went forth to fill it with 
water: and loa voice saying: Hail, thou that art highly favoured; 
the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women. 

And she looked about her upon the right hand and upon the 
left, to see whence this voice should be: and being filled with 
trembling she went to her house and set down the pitcher, and 
took the purple and sat down upon her seat and drew out the 
thread. 

2 And behold an angel of the Lord stood before her saying: 
Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found grace before the Lord of all 
things, and thou shalt conceive of his word. And she, when she 
heard it, questioned in herself, saying: Shall I verily conceive 
of the living God, and bring forth after the manner of all women? 
And the ange} of the Lord said: Not so, Mary, for a power of the 
Lord shall overshadow thee: wherefore also that holy thing 
which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of the Highest. 
And thou shalt call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people 
from their sins. And Mary said: Behold the handmaid of the 
Lord is before him: be it unto me according to thy word. 

XII. 1 And she made the purple and the scarlet and brought 
them unto the priest. And the priest blessed her and said: 
Mary, the Lord God hath magnified thy name, and thou shalt be 
blessed among all generations of the earth. 2 And Mary rejoiced 
and went away unto Elizabeth her kinswoman: and she knocked 
at the door. And Elizabeth when she heard it cast down the 
scarlet (al. the wool) and ran to the door and opened it, and 
when she saw Mary she blessed her and said: Whence is this to me 
that the mother of my Lord should come unto me? for behold 
that which is in me leaped and blessed thee. And Mary forgat 
the mysteries which Gabriel the archangel had told her, and she 
looked up unto the heaven and said: Who am I, Lord, that all 
the generations of the earth do bless me? 3 And she abode three 
months with Elizabeth, and day by day her womb grew: and 


44 INFANCY GOSPELS 


Mary was afraid and departed unto her house and hid herself 
from the children of Israel. Now she was sixteen years old when 
these mysteries came to pass. 

XIII. 1 Now it was the sixth month with her, and behold 
Joseph came from his building, and he entered into his house 
and found her great with child. And he smote his face, and cast 
himself down upon the ground on sackcloth and wept bitterly, 
saying: With what countenance shall I look unto the Lord my 
God? and what prayer shall I make concerning this maiden? 
for I received her out of the temple of the Lord my God a virgin, 
and have not kept her safe. Who is he that hath ensnared me? 
Who hath done this evil in mine house and hath defiled the 
virgin? Is not the story of Adam repeated in me? for as at the 
hour of his giving thanks the serpent came and found Eve alone 
and deceived her, so hath it befallen me also. 2 And Joseph 
arose from off the sackcloth and called Mary and said unto her 
O thou that wast cared for by God, why hast thou done this? 
thou hast forgotten the Lord thy God. Why hast thou humbled 
thy soul, thou that wast nourished up in the Holy of Holies and 
didst receive food at the hand of an angel? 3 But she wept 
bitterly, saying: I am pure and I know not aman. And Joseph 
said unto her: Whence then is that which is in thy womb? and 
she said: As the Lord my God liveth, I know not whence it is 
come unto me. 

XIV. 1 And Joseph was sore afraid and ceased from speaking 
unto her (or left her alone), and pondered what he should do with 
her. And Joseph said: If I hide her sin, I shall be found fighting 
against the law of the Lord: and if I manifest her unto the 
children of Israel, I fear lest that which is in her be the seed of 
an angel, and I shall be found delivering up innocent blood to 
the judgement of death. What then shall I do? I will let her 
go from me privily. And the night came upon him. 2 And 
behold an angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a dream, 
saying: Fear not this child, for that which is in her is of the Holy 
Ghost, and she shall bear a son and thou shalt call his name Jesus, 
for he shall save his people from their sins. And Joseph arose 
from sleep and glorified the God of Israel which had shown this 
favour unto her: and he watched over her. 

XV. 1 Now Annas the scribe came unto him and said to him: 
Wherefore didst thou not appear in our assembly? and Joseph 
said unto him: I was weary with the journey, and I rested the 
first day. And Annas turned him about and saw Mary great 
with child. 2 And he went hastily to the priest and said unto 
him: Joseph, to whom thou bearest witness [that he is righteous] 
hath sinned grievously. And the priest said: Wherein? And he 
said: The virgin whom he received out of the temple of the Lord, 
he hath defiled her, and married her by stealth (lit. stolen her 
marriage), and hath not declared it to the children of Israel. 


BOOK OF JAMES, OR PROTEVANGELIUM 45 


And the priest answered and said: Hath Joseph done this? And 
Annas the scribe said: Send officers, and thou shalt find the 
virgin great with child. And the officers went and found as he 
had said, and they brought her together with Joseph unto the 
place of judgement. 38 And the priest said: Mary, wherefore 
hast thou done this, and wherefore hast thou humbled thy soul 
and forgotten the Lord thy God, thou that wast nurtured in the 
Holy of Holies and didst receive food at the hand of an angel 
and didst hear the hymns and didst dance before the Lord, where- 
fore hast thou done this? 

But she wept bitterly, saying: As the Lord my God liveth 
I am pure before him and I know not aman. 4 And the priest 
said unto Joseph: Wherefore hast thou done this? And Joseph 
said: As the Lord my God liveth I am pure as concerning her. 
And the priest said: Bear no false witness but speak the truth: 
thou hast married her by stealth and hast not declared it unto 
the children of Israel, and hast not bowed thine head under the 
mighty hand that thy seed should be blessed. And Joseph held 
his peace. 

XVI. 1 And the priest said: Restore the virgin whom thou 
didst receive out of the temple of the Lord. And Joseph was full 
of weeping. And the priest said: I will give you to drink of the 
water of the conviction of the Lord, and it will make manifest 
your sins before your eyes. 2 And the priest took thereof and 
made Joseph drink and sent him into the hill-country. And he 
returned whole. He made Mary also drink and sent her into the 
hill-country. And she returned whole. And all the people mar- 
velled, because sin appeared not inthem. 3 And the priest said: 
If the Lord God hath not made your sin manifest, neither do I 
condemn you. And he let them go. And Joseph took Mary and 
departed unto his house rejoicing, and glorifying the God of Israel. 

XVII. 1 Now there went out a decree from Augustus the king 
that all that were in Bethlehem of Judaea should be recorded. 
And Joseph said: I will record my sons: but this child, what 
shall I do with her? how shall I record her? as my wife? nay, 
I am ashamed. Or as my daughter? but all the children of 
Israel know that she is not my daughter. This day of the Lord 
shall do as the Lord willeth. 2 And he saddled the she-ass, and 
set her upon it, and his son led it and Joseph followed after. 
And they drew near (unto Bethlehem) within three miles: and 
Joseph turned himself about and saw her of a sad countenance 
and said within himself: Peradventure that which is within her 
paineth her. And again Joseph turned himself about and saw 
her laughing, and said unto her: Mary, what aileth thee that 
I see thy face at one time laughing and at another time sad? 
And Mary said unto Joseph: It is because I behold two peoples 
with mine eyes, the one weeping and lamenting and the other 
rejoicing and exulting. 


46 INFANCY GOSPELS 


3 And they came to the midst of the way, and Mary said unto 
him: Take me down from the ass, for that which is within me 
presseth me, to come forth. And he took her down from the 
ass and said unto her: Whither shall I take thee to hide thy 
shame? for the place is desert. 

XVIII. 1 And he found a cave there and brought her into it, 
and set his sons by her: and he went forth and sought for a mid- 
wife of the Hebrews in the country of Bethlehem. 

2 Now I Joseph was walking, and I walked not. And I looked 
up to the air and saw the air in amazement. And I looked up 
unto the pole of the heaven and saw it standing still, and the 
fowls of the heaven without motion. And I looked upon the earth 
and saw a dish set, and workmen lying by it, and their hands 
were in the dish: and they that were chewing chewed not, and 
they that were lifting the food lifted it not, and they that put it 
to their mouth put it not thereto, but the faces of all of them 
were looking upward. And behold there were sheep being 
driven, and they went not forward but stood still; and the 
shepherd lifted his hand to smite them with his staff, and his 
hand remained up. And I looked upon the stream of the river 
and saw the mouths of the kids upon the water and they drank 
not. And of a sudden all things moved onward in their course. 

XIX. 1 And behold a woman coming down from the hill- 
country, and she said to me: Man, whither goest thou? And 
I said: I seek a midwife of the Hebrews. And she answered and 
said unto me: Art thou of Israel? And I said unto her: Yea. 
And she said: And who is she that bringeth forth in the cave? 
And I said: She that is betrothed unto me. And she said to me: 
Is she not thy wife? And I said to her: It is Mary that was 
nurtured up in the temple of the Lord: and I received her to 
wife by lot: and she is not my wife, but she hath conception 
by the Holy Ghost. 

And the midwife said unto him: Is this the truth? And 
Joseph said unto her: Come hither and see. And the midwife 
went with him. 

2 And they stood in the place of the cave: and behold a bright 
cloud overshadowing the cave. And the midwife said: My soul 
is magnified this day, because mine eyes have seen marvellous 
things: for salvation is born unto Israel. And immediately the 
cloud withdrew itself out of the cave, and a great light appeared 
in the cave so that our eyes could not endure it. And by little 
and little that light withdrew itself until the young child ap- 
peared: and it went and took the breast of its mother Mary. 

_ And the midwife cried aloud and said: Great unto me to-day 
is this day, in that I have seen this new sight. 3 And the midwife 
went forth of the cave and Salome met her. And she said to her: 
Salome, Salome, a new sight have I to tell thee. A virgin hath 
brought forth, which her nature alloweth not. And Salome said: 


BOOK OF JAMES, OR PROTEVANGELIUM 47 


As the Lord my God liveth, if I make not trial and prove her 
nature I will not believe that a virgin hath brought forth. 

XX. 1 And the midwife went in and said unto Mary: Order 
thyself, for there is no small contention arisen concerning thee.} 
And Salome made trial and cried out and said: Woe unto mine 
iniquity and mine unbelief, because I have tempted the living 
God, and lo, my hand falleth away from me in fire. And she 
bowed her knees unto the Lord, saying: O God of my fathers, 
remember that I am the seed of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob: 
make me not a public example unto the children of Israel, but 
restore me unto the poor, for thou knowest, Lord, that in thy 
name did I perform my cures, and did receive my hire of thee. 
3 And lo, an angel of the Lord appeared, saying unto her: Salome, 
Salome, the Lord hath hearkened to thee: bring thine hand near 
unto the young child and take him up, and there shall be unto 
thee salvation and joy. 4 And Salome came near and took him 
up, saying: I will do him worship, for a great king is born unto 
Israel. And behold immediately Salome was healed: and she 
went forth of the cave justified. And lo, a voice saying: Salome, 
Salome, tell none of the marvels which thou hast seen, until the 
child enter into Jerusalem. 

XXI. 1 And behold, Joseph made him ready to go forth into 
Judaea. And there came a great tumult in Bethlehem of Judaea; 
for there came wise men, saying: Where is he that is born king 
of the Jews? for we have seen his star in the east and are come 
to worship him. 2 And when Herod heard it he was troubled 
and sent officers unto the wise men. And he sent for the high 
priests and examined them, saying: How is it written concerning 
the Christ, where he is born? They say unto him: In Bethlehem 
of Judaea: for so it is written. And he let them go. And he 
examined the wise men, saying unto them: What sign saw ye 
concerning the king that is born? And the wise men said: We 
saw avery great star shining among those stars and dimming them 
so that the stars appeared not: and thereby knew we that a king 
was born unto Israel, and we came to worship him. And Herod 
said: Go and seek for him, and if ye find him, tell me, that I also 
may come and worship him. 3 And the wise men went forth. 
And lo, the star which they saw in the east went before them 
until they entered into the cave: and it stood over the head of 
the cave. And the wise men saw the young child with Mary his 
mother: and they brought out of their scrip gifts, gold and 
frankincense and myrrh. 4 And being warned by the angel that 
they should not enter into Judaea, they went into their own 
country by another way. 

1 The italicized words are from the LXX Greek version of Isa. vii, 
which we render, ‘Is it a small thing for you to weary men?’ Imme- 
diately after is the prophecy, ‘Behold, a virgin shall conceive,’ &e., 
which accounts for the employment of the phrase here. 


48 INFANCY GOSPELS 


XXII. 1 But when Herod perceived that he was mocked by 
the wise men, he was wroth, and sent murderers, saying unto 
them: Slay the children from two years old and under. 2 And 
when Mary heard that the children were being slain, she was 
afraid, and took the young child and wrapped him in swaddling 
clothes and laid him in an ox-manger. 

3 But Elizabeth when she heard that they sought for John, 
took him and went up into the hill-country and looked about her 
where she should hide him: and there was no hiding-place. And 
Elizabeth groaned and said with a loud voice: O mountain of 
God, receive thou a mother with a child. For Elizabeth was not 
able to go up. And immediately the mountain clave asunder 
and took her in. And there was a light shining alway for them: 
for an angel of the Lord was with them, keeping watch over them. 

XXIII. 1 Now Herod sought for John, and sent officers to 
Zacharias, saying: Where hast thou hidden thy son? And he 
answered and said unto them: I am a minister of God and attend 
continually upon the temple of the Lord: I know not where my 
son is. 2 And the officers departed and told Herod all these 
things. And Herod was wroth and said: His son is to be king 
over Israel. And he sent unto him again, saying: Say the truth: 
where is thy son? for thou knowest that thy blood is under my 
hand. And the officers departed and told him all these things. 
3 And Zacharias said: I am a martyr of God if thou sheddest 
my blood: for my spirit the Lord shall receive, because thou 
ee innocent blood in the fore-court of the temple of the 

ord. 

And about the dawning of the day Zacharias was slain. And 
the children of Israel knew not that he was slain. 

XXIV. 1 But the priests entered in at the hour of the saluta- 
tion, and the blessing of Zacharias met them not according to 
the manner. And the priests stood waiting for Zacharias, to 
salute him with the prayer, and to glorify the Most High. 
2 But as he delayed to come, they were all afraid: and one of 
them took courage and entered in: and he saw beside the altar 
congealed blood: and a voice saying: Zacharias hath been slain, 
and his blood shall not be wiped out until his avenger come. 
And when he heard that word he was afraid, and went forth and 
told the priests. 3 And they took courage and went in and saw 
that which was done: and the panels of the temple did wail: 
and they rent? their clothes from the top to the bottom. And his 
body they found not, but his blood they found turned into stone. 
And they feared, and went forth and told all the people that 
Zacharias was slain. And all the tribes of the people heard it, 
and they mourned for him and lamented him three days and 
three nights. And after the three days the priests took counsel 
whom they should Set in his stead: and the lot came up upon 
Symeon. Now he it was which was warned by the Holy Ghost 


* al. and (the panels) were split, &e. See Amos viii. 3 (Ixx). 


BOOK OF JAMES, OR PROTEVANGELIUM 49 


ia he should not see death until he should see the Christ in the 
esh. 

XXV.1 NowlI, James, which wrote this history in Jerusalem, 
when there arose a tumult when Herod died, withdrew myself 
into the wilderness until the tumult ceased in Jerusalem. 

Glorifying the Lord God which gave me the gift, and the 
wisdom to write this history. 

2 And grace shall be with those that fear our Lord Jesus 
Christ: to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 


GOSPEL OF THOMAS 


GREEK TEXT A 


The older testimonies about this book have been given already. 
I now present the three principal forms of it, as given by Tischendorf: 
two Greek texts, A and B, and one Latin. 

The few Greek manuscripts are all late. The earliest authorities are 
a much abbreviated Syriac? version of which the manuscript is of the 
sixth century, and a Latin palimpsest at Vienna of the fifth or sixth 
century, which has never been deciphered in full. 

The Latin version translated here is found in more manuscripts than 
the Greek; none of them, I think, is earlier than the thirteenth century. 


The stories of Thomas the Israelite, the Philosopher, concerning 
the works of the Childhood of the Lord. 

I. I, Thomas the Israelite, tell unto you, even all the brethren 
that are of the Gentiles, to make known unto you the works of 
the childhood of our Lord Jesus Christ and his mighty deeds, 
even all that he did when he was born in our land: whereof the 
beginning is thus: 

If. 1 This little child Jesus when he was five years old wes 
playing at the ford of a brook: and he gathered together the 
waters that flowed there into pools, and made them straightway 
clean, and commanded them by his word alone. 2 And having 
made soft clay, he fashioned thereof twelve sparrows. And 
it was the sabbath when he did these things (or made them), 
And there were also many other little children playing with him. 

8 And a certain Jew when he saw what Jesus did, playing 
upon the sabbath day, departed straightway and told his father 
Joseph: Lo, thy child is at the brook, and he hath taken clay 
and fashioned twelve little birds, and hath polluted the sabbath 
day. 4 And Joseph came to the place and saw: and cried out 
to him, saying: Wherefore doest thou these things on the 
sabbath, which it is not lawful to do? But Jesus clapped his 
hands together and cried out to the sparrows and said to them: 
Go! and the sparrows took their flight and went away chirping. 
5 And when the Jews saw it they were amazed, and departed 
and told their chief men that which they had seen Jesus do. 


1 Peeters is convinced that our Greek and Latin texts are all derived 
from Syriac. 


870 E 


50 INFANCY GOSPELS 


III. 1 But the son of Annas the scribe was standing there 
with Joseph; and he took a branch of a willow and dispersed 
the waters which Jesus had gathered together. 2 And when 
Jesus saw what was done, he was wroth and said unto him: 
O evil, ungodly, and foolish one, what hurt did the pools and the 
waters do thee? behold, now also thou shalt be withered like 
a tree, and shalt not bear leaves, neither root, nor fruit. 3 And 
straightway that lad withered up wholly, but Jesus departed 
and went unto Joseph’s house. But the parents of him that 
was withered took him up, bewailing his youth, and brought 
him to Joseph, and accused him ‘for that thou hast such a child 
which doeth such deeds’. 

IV. 1 After that again he went through the village, and a 
child ran and dashed against his shoulder. And Jesus was 
provoked and said unto him: Thou shalt not finish thy course 
(lit. go all thy way). And immediately he fell down and died. 
But certain when they saw what was done said: Whence was 
this young child born, for that every word of his is an accom- 
plished work? And the parents of him that was dead came 
unto Joseph, and blamed him, saying: Thou that hast such a 
child canst not dwell with us in the village: or do thou teach 
him to bless and not to curse: for he slayeth our children. 

V. 1 And Joseph called the young child apart and admonished 
him, saying: Wherefore doest thou such things, that these 
suffer and hate us and persecute us? But Jesus said: I know 
that these thy words are not thine: nevertheless for thy sake 
I will hold my peace: but they shall bear their punishment. 
And straightway they that accused him were smitten with 
blindness. 2 And they that saw it were sore afraid and per- 
plexed, and said concerning him that every word which he spake, 
whether it were good or bad, was a deed, and became a marvel. 
And when they (he ?) saw that Jesus had so done, Joseph arose and 
took hold upon his ear and wrung it sore. 8 And the young 
child was wroth and said unto him: It sufficeth thee (or them) 
to seek and not to find, and verily thou hast done unwisely: 
knowest thou not that Iam thine? vex me not. 

VI. 1 Now a certain teacher, Zacchaeus by name, stood there, 
and he heard in part when Jesus said these things to his father, 
and he marvelled greatly that being a young child he spake 
such matters. 2 And after a few days he came near unto 
Joseph and said unto him: Thou hast a wise child, and he hath 
understanding. Come, deliver him to me that he may learn 
letters. And I will teach him with the letters all knowledge, 
and that he salute all the elders and honour them as grand- 
fathers and fathers, and love them of his own years. 8 And he 
told him all the letters from Alpha even to Omega clearly, with 
much questioning. But Jesus looked upon Zacchaeus the 
teacher and saith unto him: Thou that knowest not the Alpha 


GOSPEL OF THOMAS 5] 


according to its nature, how canst thou teach others the Beta? 
thou hypocrite, first, if thou knowest it, teach the Alpha, and 
then will we believe thee concerning the Beta. Then began he 
to confound the mouth of the teacher concerning the first letter, 
and he could not prevail to answer him. 4 And in the hearing 
of many the young child saith to Zacchaeus: Hear, O teacher, 
the ordinance of the first letter and pay heed to this, how that 
it hath [what follows is really unintelligible in this and in all the 
parallel texts: a literal version would run somewhat thus: how 
that it hath lines, and a middle mark, which thou seest, common 
to both, going apart; coming together, raised up on high, 
dancing (a corrupt word), of three signs, like in kind (a corrupt word), 
balanced, equal in measure]: thou hast the rules of the Alpha. 
VII. 1 Now when Zacchaeus the teacher heard such and so 
many allegories of the first letter spoken by the young child, 
he was perplexed at his answer and his instruction being so great, 
and said to them that were there: Woe is me, wretch that 
I am, I am confounded: I have brought shame to myself by 
drawing to me this young child. 2 Take him away, therefore, 
I beseech thee, my brother Joseph: I cannot endure the severity 
of his look, I cannot once make clear my (or his) word. This 
young child is not earthly born: this is one that can tame even 
fire: belike this is one begotten before the making of the world. 
What belly bare this, what womb nurtured it? I know not. 
Woe is me, O my friend, he putteth me from my sense, I can- 
not follow his understanding. I have deceived myself, thrice 
wretched man that I am: I strove to get me a disciple and I am 
found to have a master. 8 I think, O my friends, upon my 
shame, for that being old I have been overcome by a young 
child; and I am even ready to faint and to die because of the 
boy, for I am not able at this present hour to look him in the 
face. And when all men say that I have been overcome by a 
little child, what have I to say? and what can I tell concerning 
the lines of the first letter whereof he spake to me? I am 
ignorant, O my friends, for neither beginning nor end of it (or 
him) do I know. 4 Wherefore I beseech thee, my brother 
Joseph, take him away unto thine house: for he is somewhat 
great, whether god or angel or what I should call him, I know not. 
VIII. 1 And as the Jews were counselling Zacchaeus, the 
young child laughed greatly and said: Now let those bear fruit 
that were barren (Gr. that are thine) and let them see that were 
blind in heart. I am come from above that I may curse them, 
and call them to the things that are above, even as he com- 
manded which hath sent me for your sakes. 2 And when the 
young child ceased speaking, immediately all they were made 
whole which had come under his curse. And no man after that 
durst provoke him, lest he should curse him, and he should be 


maimed. 


$2 INFANCY GOSPELS 


IX. 1 Now after certain days Jesus was playing in the upper 
story of a certain house, and one of the young children that 
played with him fell down from the house and died. And the 
other children when they saw it fled, and Jesus remained alone. 
2 And the parents of him that was dead came and accused him 
that he had cast him down. (And Jesus said: I did not cast 
him down) but they reviled him still. 8 Then Jesus leaped down 
from the roof and stood by the body of the child and cried with 
a loud voice and said: Zeno (for so was his name called), arise 
and tell me, did I cast thee down? And straightway he arose 
and said: Nay, Lord, thou didst not cast me down, but didst 
raise me up. And when they saw it they were amazed: and the 
parents of the child glorified God for the sign which had come to 
pass, and worshipped Jesus. ; 

X. 1 After a few days, a certain young man was cleaving 
wood in the neighbourhood (MSS. corner), and the axe fell and 
cut in sunder the sole of his foot, and losing much blood he was 
at the point to die. 2 And when there was a tumult and con- 
course, the young child Jesus also ran thither, and by force 
passed through the multitude, and took hold upon the foot of 
the young man that was smitten, and straightway it was healed. 
And he said unto the young man: Arise now and cleave the wood, 
and remember me. But when the multitude saw what was done 
they worshipped the young child, saying: Verily the spirit of 
God dwelleth in this young child. 

XI. 1 Now when he was six years old, his mother sendeth 
him to draw water and bear it into the house, and gave him a 
pitcher: but in the press he struck it against another and the 
pitcher was broken. 2 But Jesus spread out the garment which 
was upon him and filled it with water and brought it to his 
mother. And when his mother saw what was done she kissed 
him; and she kept within herself the mysteries which she saw 
him do. 

XII. 1 Again, in the time of sowing the young child went forth 
with his father to sow wheat in theirland: and as his father sowed, 
the young child Jesus sowed also one corn of wheat. 2 And he 
reaped it and threshed it and made thereof an hundred measures 
(cors): and he called all the poor of the village unto the threshing- 
floor and gave them the wheat. And Joseph took the residue 
of the wheat. And he was eight years old when he wrought 
this sign. 

XIII. 1 Now his father was a carpenter and made at that time 
ploughs and yokes. And there was required of him a bed by a 
certain rich man, that he should make it for him. And whereas 
one beam, that which is called the shifting one, was too short, 
and Joseph knew not what to do, the young child Jesus said to 
his father Joseph: Lay down the two pieces of wood and make 
them even at the end next unto thee (MSS. at the middle part). 


GOSPEL OF THOMAS 53 


And Joseph did as the young child said unto him. And Jesus 
stood at the other end and took hold upon the shorter beam 
and stretched it and made it equal with the other. And his 
father Joseph saw it and marvelled: and he embraced the young 
child and kissed him, saying: Happy am I for that God hath 
given me this young child. 

XIV. 1 But when Joseph saw the understanding of the child, 
and his age, that it was coming to the full, he thought with 
himself again that he should not be ignorant of letters; and he 
took him and delivered him to anotherteacher. And the teacher 
said unto Joseph: First will I teach him the Greek letters, and 
after that the Hebrew. For the teacher knew the skill of the 
child and was afraid of him: notwithstanding he wrote the 
alphabet and Jesus pondered thereon a long time 1 and answered 
him not. 2 And Jesus said to him: If thou be indeed a teacher, 
and if thou knowest letters well, tell me the power of the Alpha, 
and then will I tell thee the power of the Beta. And the teacher 
was provoked and smote him on the head. And the young 
child was hurt and cursed him, and straightway he fainted and 
fell to the ground on his face. 8 And the child returned unto the 
house of Joseph: and Joseph was grieved and commanded his 
mother, saying: Let him not forth without the door, for all they 
die that provoke him to wrath. 

XV. 1 And after some time yet another teacher which was a 
faithful friend of Joseph said to him: Bring the young child 
unto me to the school; peradventure I may be able by cockering 
him to teach him the letters. And Joseph said: If thou hast 
no fear, my brother, take him with thee. And he took him with 
him, in fear and much trouble of spirit, but the young child 
followed him gladly. 2 And going with boldness into the school 
he found a book lying upon the pulpit and he took it, and read 
not the letters that were therein, but opened his mouth and spake 
by the Holy Spirit, and taught the law to them that stood by. 
And a great multitude came together and stood there hearkening, 
and marvelled at the beauty of his teaching and the readiness of 
his words, in that being an infant he uttered such things. 3 But 
when Joseph heard it, he was afraid, and ran unto the school, 
thinking whether this teacher also were without skill (or smitten 
with infirmity): but the teacher said unto Joseph: Know, my 
brother, that I received this child for a disciple, but he is full of 
grace and wisdom; and now I beseech thee, brother, take him 
unto thine house. 4 And when the young child heard that, he 
smiled upon him and said: Forasmuch as thou hast said well, 
and hast borne right witness, for thy sake shall he also that was 
smitten be healed. And forthwith the other teacher was healed. 
And Joseph took the young child and departed unto his house. 

XVI. 1 And Joseph sent his son James to bind fuel and carry 


1 Probably ‘repeated it to him (Jesus) many times’, as Syr. 


54 INFANCY GOSPELS 


it into his house. And the young child Jesus also followed him. 
And as James was gathering of faggots, a viper bit the hand of 
James. 2 And as he was sore afflicted and ready to perish, 
Jesus came near and breathed upon the bite, and straightway 
the pain ceased, and the serpent burst, and forthwith James 
continued whole. 

XVII. 1 And after these things, in the neighbourhood of 
Joseph, a little child fell sick and died, and his mother wept sore. 
And Jesus heard that there was great mourning and trouble, 
and he ran quickly and found the child dead: and he touched his 
breast and said: I say unto thee, Child, die not, but live and be with 
thy mother. And straightway it looked up and laughed. And he 
said to the woman: Take him up and give him milk, and remember 
me. 2 And the multitude that stood by saw it and marvelled, 
and said: Of a truth this young child is either a god or an angel 
of God; for every word of his is a perfect work. And Jesus 
departed thence, and was playing with other children. 

XVIII. 1 And after some time there was work of building. 
And there came a great tumult, and Jesus arose and went thither: 
and he saw a man lying dead, and took hold of his hand and 
said: Man, I say unto thee, arise and do thy work. And imme- 
diately he arose and worshipped him. 2 And when the multitude 
saw it, they were astonished, and said: This young child is 
from heaven: for he hath saved many souls from death, and 
hath power to save them all his life long. 

XIX. 1 And when he was twelve years old his parents went 
according to the custom unto Jerusalem to the feast of the 
passover with their company: and after the passover they 
returned to go unto their house. And as they returned the 
child Jesus went back to Jerusalem; but his parents supposed 
that he was in their company. 2 And when they had gone 
a day’s journey, they sought him among their kinsfolk, and 
when they found him not, they were troubled, and returned 
again to the city seeking him. And after the third day they 
found him in the temple sitting in the midst of the doctors and 
hearing and asking them questions. And all men paid heed to 
him and marvelled how that being a young child he put to 
silence the elders and teachers of the people, expounding the 
heads of the law and the parables of the prophets. 38 And his 
mother Mary came near and said unto him: Child, wherefore 
hast thou so done unto us? behold we have sought thee sorrowing. 
And Jesus said unto them: Why seek ye me? know ye not 
that I must be in my Father’s house? 4 But the scribes and 
Pharisees said: Art thou the mother of this child? and she said: 
Iam. And they said unto her: Blessed art thou among women, 
because God hath blessed the fruit of thy womb. For such 
glory and such excellence and wisdom we have neither seen nor 
heard at any time. 


GOSPEL OF THOMAS 55 


5 And Jesus arose and followed his mother and was subject 
unto his parents: but his mother kept in mind all that came 
to pass. And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature and grace. 
Unto him be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 


GREEK TEXT B 


The Writing of the holy Apostle Thomas concerning the con- 
versation of the Lord in his childhood. 


I. I, Thomas the Israelite, have thought it needful to make 
known unto all the brethren that are of the Gentiles the mighty 
works of childhood which our Lord Jesus Christ wrought when 
he was conversant in the body, and came unto the city of 
Nazareth in the fifth year of his age. 

II. 1 Ona certain day when there had fallen a shower of rain 
he went forth of the house where his mother was and played 
upon the ground where the waters were running: and he made 
pools, and the waters flowed down, and the pools were filled with 
water. Then saith he: I will that ye become clean and whole- 
some waters. And straightway they did so. 2 But a certain 
son of Annas the scribe passed by bearing a branch of willow, 
and he overthrew the pools with the branch, and the waters 
were poured out. And Jesus turned about and said unto him: 
O ungodly and disobedient one, what hurt have the pools done 
thee that thou hast emptied them? Thou shalt not finish thy 
course, and thou shalt be withered up even as the branch which 
thou hast in hand. 3 And he went on, and after a little he fell 
and gave up the ghost. And when the young children that 
played with him saw it, they marvelled and departed and told 
the father of him that was dead. And he ran and found the 
child dead, and went and accused Joseph. 

Ill. 1 Now Jesus made of that clay twelve sparrows: and it 
was the sabbath day. And a child ran and told Joseph, saying: 
Behold, thy child playeth about the brook, and hath made 
sparrows of the clay, which is not lawful. 2 And he when he 
heard it went and said to the child: Wherefore doest thou so 
and profaneth the sabbath? But Jesus answered him not, but 
looked upon the sparrows and said: Go ye, take your flight, 
and remember me in your life. And at the word they took 
flight and went up into the air. And when Joseph saw it he was 
astonished. 

IV. 1 And after certain days, as Jesus passed through the 
midst of the city, a certain child cast a stone at him and smote 
his shoulder. And Jesus said unto him: Thou shalt not finish 
thy course. And straightway he also fell down and died. And 
they that were there were amazed, saying: From whence is this 
child, that every word which he speaketh becometh a perfect 


56 INFANCY GOSPELS 


work? 2 But they also departed and accused Joseph, saying: 
Thou wilt not be able to dwell with us in this city: but if thou 
wilt, teach thy child to bless and not to curse: for verily he 
slayeth our children: and every thing that he saith becometh 
a perfect work. 

Vv. And as Joseph sat upon his seat, the child stood before 
him; and he took hold upon his ear and pinched it sore. But 
Jesus looked upon him earnestly and said: It sufficeth thee. 

VI. 1 And on the morrow he took him by the hand and led 
him to a certain teacher, Zacchaeus by name. and said unto him: 
Take this child, O master, and teach him letters. And the 
other said: Deliver him unto me, my brother, and I will teach 
him the scripture, and I will persuade him to bless all men and 
not to curse them. 2 And when Jesus heard that he laughed 
and said unto them: Ye speak that ye know, but I have know- 
ledge more than you, for I am before the worlds. And I know 
when the fathers of your fathers were begotten, and I know how 
many are the years of your life. And every one that heard it 
was amazed. 3 And again saith Jesus unto them: Marvel ye 
because I said unto you that I know how many are the years 
of your life? Of a truth I know when the world was created. 
Behold, now ye believe me not: when ye shall see my cross, 
then will ye believe that I speak truth. And they were astonied 
when they heard all these things. 

VII. 1 Now Zacchaeus wrote the alphabet in Hebrew, and 
saith unto him: Alpha. And the young child said: Alpha. 
And again the master said: Alpha, and the young child likewise. 
‘Then again the third time the master said: Alpha. Then Jesus 
looked upon the teacher and said: Thou that knowest not the 
Alpha, how canst thou teach another the Beta? And the child 
beginning at the Alpha said of his own accord the two and 
twenty letters. 2 And thereafter saith he: Hear, O master, 
the ordinance of the first letter, and know how many incomings 
and lines it hath, and marks, common, going apart, and coming 
together. And when Zacchaeus heard such designations of 
the one letter he was amazed and had nothing to answer; 
and turning about he said unto Joseph: My brother, this 
child is of a truth not earthly born: take him away therefore 
from me. 

VIII. 1 And after these things one day Jesus was playing 
with other boys upon the top of an house of two stories. And 
one child was pushed down by another and thrown down to the 
ground and died. And the boys which were playing with him, 
when they saw it, fled, and Jesus was left alone standing upon 
the roof whence the boy was thrown down. 2 And when the 
parents of the boy that was dead heard of it they ran weeping, 
and when they found the boy lying dead upon the earth and 
Jesus standing alone, they supposed that the boy had been 


GOSPEL OF THOMAS 57 


thrown down by him, and they looked upon him and reviled 
him. 3 But Jesus, seeing that, leaped down straightway from 
the upper story and stood at the head of him that was dead 
and saith to him: Zeno, did I cast thee down? Arise and tell. 
For so was the boy called. And with the word the boy rose up 
and worshipped Jesus and said: Lord, thou didst not cast me 
down, but when I was dead thou didst make me alive. 

IX. 1 And a few days after one of the neighbours was cleaving 
wood and did cut off the sole of his foot with the axe, and by 
loss of blood was at the point to die. 2 And much people ran 
together and Jesus came thither with them. 38 And he took 
hold on the foot of the young man that was smitten, and healed 
him forthwith, and saith unto him: Arise, cleave thy wood. 
And he arose and worshipped him, giving thanks, and cleft the 
wood. Likewise also all they that were there marvelled and 
gave thanks unto him. 

X. Now when he was six years old, Mary his mother sent him 
to fetch water from the spring: and as he went his pitcher was 
broken. And he went to the spring and spread out his upper 
garment and drew water out of the spring and filled it and 
took it and brought back the water to his mother. And she, 
when she saw it, was amazed and embraced him and kissed 
him. 

XI. 1 And when he came to the eighth year of his age Joseph 
was required by a certain rich man to build him a bed, for he 
was a carpenter. And he went forth into the field to gather 
wood, and Jesus also went with him. And he cut two beams 
of wood and wrought them with the axe, and set one beside 
the other and measured and found it too short; and when he 
saw that he was vexed and sought to find another. 2 But Jesus 
seeing it saith unto him: Set these two together so that the ends 
of both be even. And Joseph, though he was perplexed con- 
cerning this, what the child should mean, did that which was 
commanded. And he saith again unto him: Take firm hold 
of the short beam. And Joseph took hold on it, marvelling. 
Then Jesus also took hold of the other end and pulled the [other] 
end thereof and made it also equal to the other beam, and saith 
unto Joseph: Be no more vexed, but do thy work without 
hindrance. And he when he saw it was exceedingly amazed, 
and said within himself: Blessed am I for that God hath given 
me such ason. 8 And when they departed into the city Joseph 
told it to Mary, and she when she heard and saw the wonderful 
mighty works of her son rejoiced, glorifying him. 

with the Father and the Holy Spirit now and for ever and 
world without end. Amen. 


58 INFANCY GOSPELS 


LATIN TEXT 


Here beginneth a treatise of the Boyhood of Jesus according 
to Thomas. 


I. How Mary and Joseph fled with him into Egypt. 


When there was a tumult because search was made by Herod 
for our Lord Jesus Christ, that he might slay him, then said an 
angel unto Joseph: Take Mary and her child and flee into Egypt 
from the face of them that seek to slay him. Now Jesus was two 
years old when he entered into Egypt. ; 

And as he walked through a sown field he put forth his hand 
and took of the ears and put them upon the fire and ground them 
and began to eat. [And he gave such favour unto that field 
that year by year when it was sown it yielded unto the lord of it 
so many measures of wheat as the number of the grains which 
he had taken from it.] 

Now when they had entered into Egypt they took lodging in 
the house of a certain widow, and abode in the same place one 

ear. 

! And Jesus became three years old. And seeing boys playing 
he began to play with them. And he took a dried fish and put 
it into a bason and commanded it to move to and fro, and it began 
to move. And again he said to the fish: Cast out thy salt that 
is in thee and go into the water. And it came to pass. But when 
the neighbours saw what was done they told it to the widow 
woman in whose house his mother Mary dwelt. And she when 
she heard it hasted and cast them out of her house. 


Ii. How a Master cast him out of the city. 


1 And as Jesus walked with Mary his mother through the 
midst of the market-place of the city, he looked about and saw 
a master teaching his pupils. And behold twelve sparrows which 
were quarrelling one with another fell from the wall into the lap 
of the master who taught the boys. And when Jesus saw it he 
laughed and stood still. 2 Now when that teacher saw him 
laughing, he said to his pupils in great anger: Go, bring him 
hither unto me. And when they had brought him, the master 
took hold on his ear and said: What sawest thou that thou didst 
laugh? And he said unto him: Master, see, my hand is full of 
corn, and I shewed it unto them, and scattered the corn, which 
they are carrying away } indangerf: for for this cause they fought 
with one another that they might partake of the corn. 38 And 
Jesus left not the place until it was accomplished. 

And for this cause the master laboured to cast him out of the 
city together with his mother. 


GOSPEL OF THOMAS 59 


III. How Jesus came out of Egypt. 


1 And behold, an angel of the Lord met with Mary and said 
unto her: Take the child and return into the land of the Jews: 
for they are dead which sought his life. So Mary arose with 
Jesus, and they went into the city Nazareth, which is in the 
inheritance of his (her?) father. 2 But when Joseph departed 
out of Egypt after the death of Herod, he took Jesus into the 
wilderness until there was quiet in Jerusalem from them that 
sought the life of the child. 

And he gave thanks to God for that he had given him under- 
standing, and because he had found grace before the Lord God. 
Amen. 

or, And Mary arose with Jesus, and they went unto the city 
of Capernaum which is of Tiberias, unto the inheritance of her 
father. 2 But when Joseph heard that Jesus was come out of 
Egypt after the death of Herod, he took him, &c. 

or, After these things an angel of the Lord came unto Joseph 
and unto Mary the mother of Jesus and said unto them: Take 
the child, return into the land of Israel, for they are dead that 
sought the life of the child. And they arose and went to Nazareth 
where Joseph possessed the goods of his father. 2 And when 
Jesus was seven years old, there was quiet in the realm of Herod 
from all them that sought the life of the child. And they returned 
unto Bethlehem and abode there. 


IV. What Jesus did in the city of Nazareth. 


It is a glorious work for Thomas the Israelite (Ismaelite) the 
apostle of the Lord to tell of the works of Jesus after he came out 
of Egypt unto Nazareth. Hear (understand) therefore all of you, 
beloved brethren, the signs which the Lord Jesus did when he 
was in the city of Nazareth: as it is said in the first chapter. 

1 Now when Jesus was five years old there was a great rain upon 
the earth, and the child Jesus walked about therein. And the 
rain was very terrible: and he gathered the water together into 
a pool and commanded with a word that it should become clear: 
and forthwith it did so. 

2 Again, he took of the clay which came of that pool and made 
thereof to the number of twelve sparrows. Now it was the 
sabbath day when Jesus did this among the children of the 
Hebrews: and the children of the Hebrews went and said unto 
Joseph his father: Lo, thy son was playing with us and he took 
clay and made sparrows which it was not right to do upon 
the sabbath, and he hath broken it. And Joseph went to the 
child Jesus, and said unto him: Wherefore hast thou done this 
which it was not right to do on the sabbath? But Jesus spread 
forth (opened) his hands and commanded the sparrows, saying: 
Go forth into the height and fly: ye shall not meet death at any 


60 INFANCY GOSPELS 


man’s hands. And they flew and began to cry out and praise 
almighty God. But when the Jews saw what was done they 
marvelled and departed, proclaiming the signs which Jesus did. 

3 But a Pharisee which was with Jesus took a branch of an 
olive tree and began to empty the pool which Jesus had made. 
And when Jesus saw it he was vexed and said to him: O thou 
of Sodom, ungodly and ignorant, what hurt did the fountain of 
water do thee, which I made? Lo, thou shalt become like a dry 
tree which hath neither roots nor leaf nor fruit. And straightway 
he was dried up and fell to the earth and died: but his parents 
carried him away dead and reviled Joseph, saying: Behold what 
thy son hath done: teach thou him to pray and not to blaspheme. 


V. How the people of the city were grieved against Joseph because 
of that which Jesus did. 


1 And after some days as Jesus walked with Joseph through 
the city, there ran one of the children and smote Jesus on the 
arms: but Jesus said unto him: So finish thou thy course. And 
immediately he fell to the earth and died. But they when they 
saw this wonder, cried out saying: From whence cometh this 
child? And they said unto Joseph: It is not right that such 
a child should be among us. And he departed and took him with 
him. And they said to him: Depart out of this place; and if 
thou must be with us, teach him to pray and not to blaspheme: 
for our sons are put to death by him (lit. lose their senses). 2 And 
Joseph called Jesus and began to admonish him, saying: Where- 
fore blasphemest thou? They that dwell in this place conceive 
hatred against us. But Jesus said: I know that these words are 
not mine but thine: yet for thy sake I will hold my peace: but 
let them see (? bear) their own foolishness. And straightway they 
that spake against Jesus were made blind, and as they walked 
to and fro they said: Every word that cometh out of his mouth 
hath fulfilment. 3 And when Joseph saw what Jesus had done 
he took hold on him by his ear in anger: but Jesus was vexed 
and said unto Joseph: It sufficeth thee to see me and not to 
touch me. For thou knowest not who I am, which if thou 
knewest, thou wouldest not grieve me. And albeit I am with 
thee now, yet was I made before thee. 


VI. How Jesus was treated by the Master. 


1 There was therefore a man named Zacheus who heard all that 
Jesus said unto Joseph, and he marvelled in himself and said: 
I have never beheld such a child that spake so. And he came 
near unto Joseph and said to him: Thou hast a wise child: 
deliver him to me to learn letters, and when he is learned in the 
study of the letters, I will teach him reverently that he become 
not foolish. Joseph answered and said unto him: No man is 


GOSPEL OF THOMAS 61 


able to teach him but God only. Think you that this young child 
will be the occasion unto us of little torment, my brother? 
[There should be mention of a cross in this sentence. Syriac has, 
Bion le thou that he is worthy to receive a little cross? See 
elow. 

2 But when Jesus heard Joseph saying these things, he said 
unto Zacheus: Verily, O master, all things that proceed out of 
my mouth are true. And I am before all men, and I am Lord, 
but ye are the children of strangers: for unto me is given the 
glory of them (or of the worlds) but unto you nothing is given: 
for I am before all worlds. And I know how many are the years 
of thy life, and when thou shalt raise that standard (i.e. the 
cross) whereof my father spake, then shalt thow understand that 
all things that proceed out of my mouth are true. 

3 But the Jews which stood by and heard the words which 
Jesus spake, marvelled and said: Now have we seen such wonders 
and heard such words from this child, as we have never heard 
neither shall hear from any other man, neither from the chief 
priests nor the doctors nor the Pharisees. 4 Jesus answered and 
said unto them: Wherefore marvel ye? Do ye think it a thing 
incredible that I have told you the truth? I know when ye were 
born, and your fathers: and if I should say more unto you, 
I know when the world was created, and who sent me unto you. 

When the Jews heard the word which the child spake, they 
were wroth because they were not able to answer him. And the 
child turned himself about and rejoiced and said: I spake unto 
you a proverb; but I know that ye are weak and know not any 
thing. 

5 ow that master said unto Joseph: Bring him unto me and 
I will teach him letters. And Joseph took the child Jesus and 
brought him to the house [of a certain master] where other 
children also were taught. But the master began to teach him 
the letters with sweet speech, and wrote for him the first line 
which goeth from A unto T, and began to flatter him and to 
teach him (and commanded him to say the letters:) but the child 
held his peace. 6 Then that teacher smote the child on the head, 
and when the child received the blow, he said unto him: I ought to 
teach thee and not thou to teach me. I know the letters which 
thou wouldest teach me, and I know that ye are unto me as vessels 
out of which cometh nought but sound, and neither wisdom nor 
salvation of the soul. And beginning the line he spake all the 
letters from A even unto T fully with much quickness: and he 
looked upon the master and said: But thou knowest not how to 
interpret A and B: how wouldest thou teach others? Thou 
hypocrite, if thou knowest and canst tell me concerning A, then 
will I tell thee concerning B. But when the teacher began to 
expound concerning the first letter, he was not able to give any 
answer. 


62 INFANCY GOSPELS 


7 Then said Jesus unto Zacheus: Hearken unto me, O master, 
and understand the first letter. Give ear unto me, how that it 
hath two lines (eight quite unintelligible descriptive phrases follow). 

8 Now when Zacheus saw that he so divided the first letter, 
he was confounded at such names, and at his teaching, and cried 
out and said: Woe is me, for I am confounded: I have hired 
shame unto myself by means of this child. And he said unto 
Joseph: I beseech thee earnestly, my brother, take him away 
from me: for I cannot look upon his face nor hear his mighty 
words. For this child is able to subdue the fire and to restrain 
the sea, for he was born before the worlds. What womb bare 
him or what manner of mother brought him up I know not. 
10 O my friends, I am astray in my wits, I am mocked, wretched 
man that I am. I said that I had a disciple, but he is found to 
be my master. I cannot overcome my shame, for I am old, and 
I cannot find wherewithal to answer him, so that I am like to 
fall into heavy sickness and depart out of the world or go away 
from this city, for all men have seen my shame, that a child hath 
ensnared me. What can I answer any man, or what words can 
I speak, for he hath overcome me at the first letter! I am con- 
founded, O ye my friends and acquaintances, and I can find 
neither first nor last to answer him. 11 And now I beseech thee, 
brother Joseph, remove him from me and take him unto thine 
house, for either he is a sorcerer or a god (Lord) or an angel, and 
what to say I know not. 

12 And Jesus turned himself unto the Jews that were with 
Zacheus and said unto them: Now let all them that see not see, 
and let them understand which understand not, and let the deaf 
hear, and let them arise which have died by my means, and let 
me call them that are high unto that which is higher, even as he 
that sent me unto you hath commanded me. And when the 
child Jesus ceased speaking, all the afflicted were made whole, as 


many as had been afflicted at his word. And they durst not 
speak unto him. 


VII. How Jesus raised up a boy. 


1 Nowona day, when Jesus climbed up upon an house with the 
children, he began to play with them: but one of the boys fell 
down through the door out of the upper chamber and died 
straightway. And when the children saw it they fled all of them, 
but Jesus remained alone in the house. 2 And when the parents 
of the child which had died came they spake against Jesus 
saying: Of a truth thou madest him fall. But Jesus said: 
I never made him fall: nevertheless they accused him still 
Jesus therefore came down from the house and stood over the 
dead child and cried with a loud voice, calling him by his name: 
Zeno, Zeno, arise and say if I made thee fall. And ona sudden 


GOSPEL OF THOMAS 63 


he arose and said: Nay, Lord. And when his parents saw this 
pet miracle which Jesus did, they glorified God, and worshipped 
esus. 


VIII. How Jesus healed the foot of a boy. 


1 And after a few days a certain boy of that village was cleaving 
wood, and smote his foot. 2 And when much people came unto 
him, Jesus also came with them. And he touched the foot which 
was hurt, and forthwith it was made whole. And Jesus said unto 
him: Arise and cleave the wood and remember me. But when 
the multitude that were with him saw the signs which were done 
they worshipped Jesus and said: Of a truth we believe surely 
that thou art God. 


IX. How Jesus bare water in his cloak. 


1 And when Jesus was six years old, his mother sent him to 
draw water. And when Jesus was come unto the well there was 
much people there and they brake his pitcher. 2 But he took 
the cloak which he had upon him and filled it with water and 
brought it to Mary his mother. And when his mother saw the 
miracle that Jesus did she kissed him and said: Lord, hearken 
unto me and save my son. 


X. How Jesus sowed wheat. 


1 Now when it was seed-time, Joseph went forth to sow corn, 
and Jesus followed after him. And when Joseph began to sow, 
Jesus put forth his hand and took of the corn so much as he could 
hold in his hand, and scattered it. 2 Joseph therefore came at 
the time of harvest to reap his harvest. And Jesus also came and 
gathered the ears which he had sown, and they made an hundred 
measures of good corn: and he called the poor and the widows 
and fatherless and gave them the corn which he had gained, save 
that Joseph took a little thereof unto his house for a blessing 
[of Jesus]. 


XI. How Jesus made a short beam even with a long one. 


1 And Jesus came to be eight years old. Now Joseph was a 
builder and wrought ploughs and yokes for oxen. And on a day 
a certain rich man said unto Joseph: Sir, make me a bed service- 
able and comely. But Joseph was troubled because the beam 
which he had made ready for the work was short. 2 Jesus said 
unto him: Be not troubled, but take thou hold of this beam by 
the one end and I by the other, and let us draw it out. And so 
it came to pass, and forthwith Joseph found it serviceable for 
that which he desired. And he said unto Joseph: Behold, 
fashion that thou wilt. But Joseph when he saw what was done 
embraced him and said: Blessed am I for that God hath given 


me such a son. 


64 INFANCY GOSPELS 


XII. How Jesus was delivered over to learn letters. 


1 And when Joseph saw that he had so great grace and that he 
increased in stature, he thought to deliver him over to learn 
letters. And he delivered him to another doctor that he should 
teach him. Then said that doctor unto Joseph: What manner 
of letters wouldest thou teach this child? Joseph answered and 
said: Teach him first the letters of the Gentiles and after that 
the Hebrew. Now the doctor knew that he was of an excellent 
understanding, and received him gladly. And when he had 
written for him the first line, that is to say A and B, he taught 
him for the space of some hours: but Jesus held his peace and 
answered nothing. 2 At the last Jesus said unto the master: 
If thou be verily a master, and indeed knowest the letters, tell 
me the power of A and I will tell thee the power of B. Then was 
the master filled with indignation and smote him on the head. 
But Jesus was wroth and cursed him, and on a sudden he fell 
down and died. 8 But Jesus returned unto his own home. And 
Joseph enjoined Mary his mother that she should not let him go 
out of the court of the house. 


XIII. How he was delivered unto another master. 


1 After many days there came another doctor which was a friend 
of Joseph and said unto him: Deliver him to me and I will teach 
him letters with much gentleness. And Joseph said unto him: 
If thou art able, take him and teach him, and it shall be done 
gladly. And when the doctor received Jesus, he went with fear 
and great fboldnesst and took him rejoicing. 2 And when he was 
come unto the house of the doctor, he found a book lying in that 
place and took it and opened it, and read not those things which 
were written therein, but opened his mouth and spake by the 
Holy Ghost and taught the law: and all that stood by hearkened 
attentively, and the teacher sat by him and heard him gladly 
and entreated him to continue teaching. And much people 
gathered together and heard all the holy doctrine which he taught 
and the beloved words which proceeded out of his mouth, 
marvelling that he being a little child spake such things. 

3 But when Joseph heard, he was afraid and ran unto the 
place where Jesus was; and the master said unto Joseph: Know, 
my brother, that I received thy child to teach him and instruct 
him, but he is filled with great grace and wisdom. Therefore 
behold now, take him unto thy house with joy, because the grace 
which he hath is given him of the Lord. 4 And when Jesus heard 
the master speak thus he was joyful and said: Lo, now thou hast 
well said, O master: for thy sake shall he rise again who was 
dead. And Joseph took him unto his own home. 


GOSPEL OF THOMAS 65 


XIV. How Jesus made James whole of the bite of a serpent. 


Now Joseph sent James to gather straw, and Jesus followed 
after him. And as James gathered straw, a viper bit him and he 
fell to the earth as dead by means of the venom. But when Jesus 
saw that, he breathed upon his wound and forthwith James was 
made whole, and the viper died. 


XV. How Jesus raised up a boy. 


After a few days a child that was his neighbour died, and his 
mother mourned for him sore; and when Jesus heard, he went 
and stood over the child, and smote him on the breast and said: 
Child, I say unto thee, die not, but live. And immediately the 
child arose: and Jesus said unto the mother of the child: Take up 
thy son and give him suck, and remember me. 2 But the multi- 
tudes when they saw that miracle said: Of a truth this child is 
from heaven; for now hath he set free many souls from death 
and hath saved all them that hoped in him. 


[A gap in all the Latin MSS. filled by the Greek text A, cap. 19,1-8 
Jesus and the doctors in the Temple.] 


8 The Scribes and Pharisees said unto Mary: Art thou the 
mother of this child? and Mary said: Of a truth I am. And 
they said unto her: Blessed art thou among women, because 
God hath blessed the fruit of thy womb in that he hath given 
thee a child so glorious: for so great gifts of wisdom we have 
never seen nor heard in any. 

4 And Jesus arose and followed his mother. But Mary kept 
in her heart all the great signs which Jesus wrought among the 
people, in healing many that were sick. 

And Jesus increased in stature and wisdom, and all that saw 
him glorified God the Father Almighty: Who is blessed for ever 
and ever. Amen. 

All these things have I, Thomas the Israelite (Ismaelite), written 
and recorded for the Gentiles and for our brethren, and likewise 
many other things which Jesus did, which was born in the land 
of Juda. Behold, the house of Israel hath seen all these from 
the first even unto the last, even how great signs and wonders 
Jesus did among them, which were good exceedingly. And this 
is he which shall judge the world according to the will of his 
Father, immortal and invisible, as the holy Scripture declareth 
and as the prophets have testified of his works among all the 
peoples of Israel: for he is the Son of God throughout all the 
world. And unto him belongeth all glory and honour ever- 
lastingly, who liveth and reigneth God, world without end. Amen. 


1 The text is corrupt here: I have tried to mend it. 
870 F 


66 INFANCY GOSPELS 


APPENDIX I 
From the Pistis Sophia. 


The Gnostic book called Pistis Sophia (see Introd.) contains a charac- 
teristic account of an incident of the Infancy. It may be compared 
with the Hymn of the Soul in the Acts of Thomas. The book in 
which it occurs is of the third century. 


C. Schmidt’s version, p. 77. Mary answered and said:.. . 
Thy Power prophesied through David: Grace and Truth are 
met together, Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other. 
Truth hath flourished out of the earth, and Righteousness hath 
looked down from heaven. Thus did thy Power prophesy once 
concerning thee. When thou wast little, before the Spirit came 
upon thee, the Spirit came from the height whilst thou wast in 
a vineyard with Joseph, and came unto me in mine house in thy 
likeness, and I knew it not, and I thought that it was thou. And 
the Spirit said unto me: Where is Jesus my brother, that I may 
meet with him? And when it spake thus unto me, I was in 
perplexity, and thought that it was a phantom come to tempt 
me. I took it therefore and bound it to the foot of the bed that 
was in mine house, until I should go forth unto thee and Joseph 
in the field and find you in the vineyard, where Joseph was 
staking the vineyard. It came to pass then, that when thou 
heardest me tell the matter unto Joseph, thou understoodest the 
matter, and didst rejoice, and say: Where is he, that I may 
behold him? otherwise I will tarry for him in this place. And 
it came to pass, when Joseph heard thee speak these words, he 
was troubled: and we went together and entered into the house 
and found the Spirit bound to the bed. And we looked upon thee 
and upon it, and found that thou wert like unto him: and he 
that was bound to the bed was loosed, and embraced thee and 
kissed thee, and thou also kissedst him, and ye became one. 

Mary goes on to expound the application of the passage she 
had quoted from the Psalm. 


APPENDIX II 
I. Miracle of the Dyer. 


In a Paris manuscript (gr. 239) of the Gospel of Thomas a fragment 
of this story is contained in Greek (Tisch., p. 148 n.). It occurs in no 
other Greek or Latin manuscript of Thomas. But in the Milan 
Ambrosian MS. L. 58 sup., edited in facsimile by Ceriani for Gibson 
Craig (1878, Canonical Histories and Apocryphal Legends), it occurs 
in Latin on p. 12, being the first miracle after the Return from Egypt. 
It is also told in the Arabic Gospel, ch. 38, and, at great length, in 
the Armenian (ch. xxi, Peeters, p. 282-46). Thilo quotes a Moham- 
medan version (p. 150), and shows that the tale was current in Persia. 
There seems little doubt that it stood in the completer texts of the 


GOSPEL OF THOMAS 67 


Gospel of Thomas. It is found in the mediaeval French and English 
Histories of the Infancy, and doubtless in other vernacular versions. 
I give a rendering from the Milan MS. 

It came to pass on a day that the blessed Virgin Mary went 
unto the house of a certain neighbour of hers which was of the 
craft of a dyer. And the child Jesus, her glorious son, followed 
her as is the wont of boys to follow their mothers. Now while 
the Virgin Mary spake with the man unto whom she had come, 
the child Jesus went unto the place wherein that man was wont 
to practise his trade, and found there divers vessels containing 
several dyes; and likewise he found divers cloths belonging to 
many men, which those men had given to be dyed. All the 
which cloths the child took and wrapped them together and 
sunk all of them in a vessel wherein was only a black dye. 

Now when this thing which he had done came to the knowledge 
of that man, he began to be sore vexed and to complain greatly 
against the mother of Jesus. And he said to his mother: Alas! 
behold what thy son hath done: he hath brought all my labour 
to nought. But know thou this for certain, that the child shall 
not be let go by me till the damage that he hath done be made 
good. But the mother of Jesus when she heard these things 
from the man began to say unto her son: My beloved son, what 
hast thou done? wherefore hast thou done this? for I hoped 
that I should have great joy of thee: for I know how I had thee 
(=received thee?). But thou, whereas thou oughtest to make 
me glad in all things, as thou hast done alway, now contrariwise 
makest me sad. The child Jesus answered his mother <and said: 
Wherein have I grieved thee?>. The blessed virgin said unto 
him: See, thou hast destroyed all the labour of this man. But 
Jesus said unto her: How have I destroyed it? His mother 
answered and said unto him: Because, whereas he had the 
cloths from many men to give to each one of their cloths a several 
dye, thou hast made of all of them a dye of one colour. Now, 
therefore, I must amend that which thou hast done. But the 
beautiful child Jesus when he heard that came near to the 
vessel wherein he had cast the cloths, and according to the 
will of the master he drew thereout every cloth dyed of a several 
colour and gave them unto the man. 

And when that man saw it, together with the mother of the 
Lord, he glorified the child, and they had him in great admiration. 
But the virgin, the mother of the Lord, embraced her son in her 
arms and kissed him, and so being filled with great joy returned 
to her house with Christ her son. 


II. Miracle of the Children in the Oven. 


This does not occur in known Greek or Latin texts, but is in the 
Arabic Gospel (ch. 40), the Syriac History (Budge), and also in the 
French and English mediaeval versions (in which the children are 


68 INFANCY GOSPELS 


changed into pigs). Most probably the occurrence in both East and 
West means that the story formed part of the text that lies behind all 
the versions. I quote Sir E. A. Wallis Budge’s rendering of the Syriac 
(History of the Virgin, p. 76). 


And it came to pass that Jesus went out one day and saw 
a company of children playing together, and he went after 
them, but they fled before him and went into a furnace (al. 
cellar). And Jesus came after them and stood by the door 
and said unto the women who were sitting there: Where are 
the children who came in here before me? And the women 
said unto Jesus: No children came here. Then Jesus said unto 
them: Then what are the beings that are inside the house? 
And the women said unto him: They are goats. And Jesus said 
unto them: Let the goats which are in the furnace go out to 
their shepherds. And there came forth from the furnace goats 
which leaped round about Jesus and skipped joyfully. And 
when the women had seen what had taken place, they wondered, 
and great fear laid hold upon them. Then the women rose up 
and did homage unto Jesus, and they made supplication unto 
him, saying: O Jesus, thou son of Mary, thou good shepherd of 
Israel, have compassion upon thine handmaidens; for thou didst 
come to heal and not to destroy. And Jesus answered and said 
unto them: Verily the children of Israel are like unto the black 
folk among the natives, for the black ones seize the outer side of 
the flock and harass their shepherd: even thus are the people 
of Israel. Then the women said unto him: Thy disciples could 
never hide themselves away from thee, and they could never 
harass thee, for they perform thy will and they fulfil thy com- 
mandments. [Arab. Lord, thou knowest all things and nothing 
is hid from thee. Now we pray thee and ask of thy goodness 
that thou wouldest restore unto these children thy servants 
their former state.] And Jesus gave the word of command and 
said unto the goats: Come, O ye children, my playfellows, and 
let us play together. And straightway whilst these women were 
looking on, they were changed from the similitude of goats and 
became children again. And they went after Jesus. And from 
that day the children were not able to flee from Jesus; and their 
parents admonished them saying: See that ye do everything 
that Jesus the son of Mary commandeth you to do. 


WWI. The Boy in the Tower. 


It is more doubtful whether this story belongs to the old stock. 
It occurs in the mediaeval vernaculars, and may probably be discovered 
in some Latin text at least. I quote one of the English metrical versions 
(MS. Harley 8954, ed. Horstmann, Sammlung altenglischer Legenden 
1878, p. 108). The spelling is slightly simplified. ; 


GOSPEL OF THOMAS 69 


1.531. A Rych man was in that cete (city) 
That to Jhesu had envye, 
Josep fader, Braudyn hyth he, 
Ouer his sone he made maystrye. 
He seyd: my sone, thou were me dere, 
Now thou dost ayen my wylle 
To ben with Jhesu, of hym to lere— 
Thou were wel betre to ben stylle. 


For hys loue thou xalt (shalt) be kept 
In a tour of lym and stone, 

Hys loue thou xalt abyin (rue), Josep, 
Ne geynyt the no betre won. 

To the xal noman komyn ne lep: 
Ther myth thou cry & kalle alon 
That noman of the xal takyn kep, 
Ne for onys to her thi bon. 

I suere by God adonay 

Lyth ther thou xalt non haue: 

Lud thou cry wellaway, 

Non helpe geynyt the to craue. 


Jhesu, that hath the thus shent 
Out of presoun xal the not bryng 
Be (By) no maner of sharment (charm) 
That he kan of rede & synge. 
Josep seyd anon ryth: 

‘Fader, thou myth done thi wyl. 
Jhesu is ful of mekyl myth, 

He wyl] not suffre me to spyle.’ 
Josep left in that prisoun, 

The dorys weryn lokyn faste; 
Ther lay Josep al alon, 

To hym kam Jhesu ryth in haste 


‘Josep, felaw,’ qwath Jhesu, 
‘For my loue thou lyst here, 
Thou xalt se more of my vertu, 
For so I wyl, my leue fere.’ 
Jhesu fond a lytyl bore (hole) 
And bad Josep hys fynger take: 
Heyl & sond as he was core 
He kam out withoutyn wrake. 
Euer with Jhesu he wold be; 
Nothyng myth hym lette: 

Euer was Jhesu hym so fre, 
For hys felaw he hym fette. 


In some versions the father, returning and finding the tower empty, 
is struck blind. The names in the English version, Joseph and 


70 INFANCY GOSPELS 


Braudyn, are probably the versifier’s invention. Both the Infancies 
printed by Horstmann contain many such names, which do not occur 
elsewhere. , 

Other miracles which find a place in the vernacular versions or in the 
Vita Rhythmica (see p. 82) are: Jesus slides on a sunbeam, and other boys 
attempting this fall and are hurt, and cured; he hangs his pitcher on 
a sunbeam, other boys’ pitchers are (similarly) broken and mended; he 
brings bitter herbs to Mary and sweetens them by putting flour in the 
pot; a lion carries off a shepherd’s boy and is made to bring him back; 
he finds a hunter killed by a snake and raises him; he cures one who 
had swallowed a viper in his sleep. 


THE LIBER DE INFANTIA, OR GOSPEL OF 
PSEUDO-MATTHEW 


I do not propose to include a full version of this book in the present 
collection. Influential as it was in the later mediaeval period, all or 
nearly all the contents have already been given in the Protevangelium 
and Gospel of Thomas. But a full account and analysis will not be 
out of place. 

It is a Latin compilation, possibly as old as the eighth or ninth 
century, though no manuscript earlier than the eleventh has been 
hitherto brought to light. It was used by Hrosvita, Abbess of Ganders- 
heim, in her poems in the tenth century. 

The two main sources are the Protevangelium and the Gospel of 
Thomas, but some few episodes are not to be found in either. These 
will be pointed out in the analysis. 

By way of introducing it to the world under good auspices the 
compiler (probably) provided it with credentials in the shape of pre- 
tended letters to and from St. Jerome. These are also commonly 
found prefixed to the ‘Story of the Birth of Mary’ of which something 
will be said later. But as Dr. Amann, following Tischendorf, rightly 
says, the letters apply better to our present text than to the other. 


They allude to the ‘Infancy of Christ’, and the Birth of Mary stops 
short at the Nativity. 


The letters run as follows: 


To their most beloved brother Jerome the presbyter, Cromatius 
and Heliodorus, bishops, send greeting in the Lord. 

We have found in certain apocryphal books the birth of the 
Virgin Mary and the infancy of our Lord Jesus Christ. Wherein 
noticing many passages contrary to our faith, we judge that 
the whole should be rejected, lest on the pretext of Christ we 
should afford triumph to antichrist. So while we were considering 
the matter, there came to us the holy men Parmenius and 
Virinus, who told us that your holiness had found a Hebrew 
book written by the hand of the most blessed evangelist Matthew, 
in which both the birth of the Virgin mother and the infancy of 
our Saviour were recorded. And therefore we entreat your 


GOSPEL OF PSEUDO-MATTHEW vel 


charity, through the same our Lord Jesus Christ, and beg you 
to give it from the Hebrew to Latin ears, not so much in order 
to ascertain the wonderful works of Christ as to counteract the 
guile of heretics, who in order to establish their evil teaching 
have mingled their own lies with the wholesome nativity of 
Christ, so to disguise the bitterness of death under the sweetness 
of life. It will therefore be of the purest charity on your part 
either to hearken to us as brothers who beseech you, or to pay 
to us, as bishops who beg for it, that debt of charity which you 
shall think fit. Farewell in the Lord, and pray for us. 


To the holy and most blessed lords Cromatius and Heliodorus, 
bishops, Jerome the little servant of Christ sends greeting in 
the Lord. 

He who digs in earth which conceals gold does not at once 
snatch whatever the ragged trench may throw up: but before 
the stroke of the iron he wields brings up the shining mass, he 
ever and anon pauses in turning over the turfs, and feeds him- 
self with hope, while as yet he is not enriched with gain. It is 
a heavy task that you lay upon me when I am ordered by your 
blessedness to do what not even Saint Matthew the apostle 
and evangelist would have to be written openly. For had it 
not been somewhat secret, he would no doubt have added it 
to the Gospel which he published. But in fact he composed this 
book to be locked up in Hebrew letters, and so far refrained 
from publishing it that even now the book, written in Hebrew 
letters with his own hand, is kept by certain religious men who 
have received it from their predecessors through a long course 
of time. Now whereas they have never delivered this book to 
any one to be translated, but have revealed its contents (text) 
at various times, it has come about that the book, published by 
a disciple of Manichaeus named Leucius (who also composed the 
Acts of the Apostles in false words), has afforded matter not for 
edification but destruction, and has been proved in a synod to be 
such that the ears of the church should properly be closed to it. 

Now let there be an end to the bites of barking critics, for we 
are not adding this book to the canonical scriptures, but are 
translating the writing of an apostle and evangelist to unmask 
the deceit of heresy: and in so doing we are alike obeying the 
command of pious bishops and blocking the way of impious 
heretics. It is, then, the love of Christ to which we are rendering 
service, in the belief that they will help us with their prayers 
who by means of our compliance have been able to attain the 
knowledge of the holy infancy of our Saviour. 


A third letter, ostensibly from St. Jerome to the same bishops, is 
prefixed sometimes to the story of the Birth of Mary. 

You ask me to write you my opinion of a book which some 
have concerning the Birth of Saint Mary. So I would have you 


72 INFANCY GOSPELS 


know that much that is false is found in it. For a certain 
Seleucus (= Leucius above), who wrote the Passions of the 
Apostles, composed this book also. But just as he told the 
truth about their mighty deeds and the miracles done by them, 
but lied much concerning their doctrine, so here also he forged 
much that is untrue, of his own heart. On this account I shall 
be careful to translate it word for word as it is in the Hebrew, 
inasmuch as it appears that the holy evangelist Matthew composed 
this same book and prefixed it, concealed as it was in Hebrew 
letters, to his Gospel. The truth of this statement I leave to 
the author of the preface and the faith of the writer; for myself, 
while pronouncing it doubtful, I do not affirm that it is clearly 
false. This, however, I say boldly, that I believe none of the 
faithful will deny that, whether this story be true or invented by 
some one, great miracles preceded the holy birth of Mary, and 
yet greater ones followed upon it; and therefore this can be 
believed and read with intact faith and without peril to the 
soul, by those who believe that God is able to do such things. 
Finally, as far as my recollection serves me, following the sense, 
not the words, of the writer, and walking, now in the same path 
though not in the same footprints, now regaining the same road 
after some digressions, I shall so attempt (or temper) the style 
of the narrative, and shall not tell anything but what is either 
written therein or might reasonably have been written. 


A document so full of contradictions can seldom have been put 
together! ‘Seleucus composed the book—no, Matthew composed it: 
I shall translate it word for word—no, I shall follow the sense, not the 
words’, and so forth. 

Finally, some copies have a prologue attributing the writing not to 
Matthew but to James. Such a prologue was known to Hrosvita, who 
cites James as her authority. It is as follows: 


I, James the son of Joseph, walking in the fear of God, have 
written all things that I saw with mine own eyes come to pass 
at the time of the birth of Saint Mary the virgin or of the Lord 
the Saviour: giving thanks to God who gave me understanding 
in the histories of his coming, showing forth the fulness of time 
unto the twelve tribes of Israel. 

It is worthy of remark that the last sentence of this evidently late 
prologue contains the two expressions ‘histories’ and ‘twelve tribes of 
Israel’, which recall the opening words of the Protevangelium, but not 


of Ps.-Matthew. The clause ‘giving thanks to God’, &c., comes from 
Protev. xxv. l. 


GOSPEL OF PSEUDO-MATTHEW 7 


ANALYSIS OF THE GOSPEL OF PSEUDO-MATTHEW 


In chs. i-xvii the Protevangelium is used, and is in all likelihood 
the sole source: but there are many omissions and amplifications. 


I begins. In those days there was a man in Jerusalem, Joachim 
by name, of the tribe of Juda. 

His whole care was his flocks. He offered double offerings. 
He divided his substance into three parts, one for the poor, one 
for the pious, the third for himself. God increased his wealth. 
This charity he had practised since he was 15 years old. At 20 
he married Anna, daughter of Ysachar of his own tribe; they 
lived twenty years childless. 

II. Ruben rejects his offering. He goes to the mountains to 
his flocks for five months. 

Anna has no news of him. She complains to God. 

She sees a sparrow’s nest, and laments her childlessness, and 
vows if she has a child to dedicate it in the temple. An angel 
comes and promises her a daughter. In fear and sorrow she 
throws herself on her bed for a whole day and night. She 
reproaches her maid (not named) for not coming to her. The 
maid answers her sharply and she weeps yet more. 

III. A youth—an angel—comes to Joachim in the wilderness 
and promises him a daughter and predicts her glory. Joachim 
makes an offering: is urged by his servants to return. The angel 
comes again in a vision. They set off and journey thirty days. 

The angel comes to Anna and bids her meet Joachim at the 
Golden Gate of the Temple, which she does. 

IV. Mary is born. At three years old she is taken to the 
temple and walks up fifteen steps. 

V. Anna’s thanksgiving. 

VI. Mary’s beauty and chastity and wisdom and devoutness 
described at length. She is fed daily by angels. 

VII. Abiathar the priest offers many gifts that Mary may 
marry his son. She refuses, saying that she has vowed perpetual 
virginity. 

VIII. When she was 14, a council was held and Israel was 
summoned to the temple on the third day. The high priest 
addressed them and said that since Solomon’s time there had 
always been noble virgins brought up in the temple and married 
when they were of age. But Mary had vowed virginity and it 
must be ascertained who should take charge of her. Those who 
had no wives were to bring rods. There was no sign, so Abiathar 
went in and prayed, and an angel pointed out that one very 
small rod had not been returned to its owner. This was Joseph’s. 
The dove appeared. Joseph resisted, but was overcome: he 
stipulated that some virgins should accompany Mary. Rebecca, 
Sephora, Susanna, Abigea, and Zahel were chosen. They cast 


14 INFANCY GOSPELS 


lots for the colours of the veil. Mary had the purple: the others 
were jealous and called her in sport ‘Regina virginum’. An angel 
rebuked them and said it was a true prophecy. They were 
abashed and asked Mary to pray for them. 

IX. Mary at the fountain addressed by an angel. On the next 
day as she wove he appeared again and completed the Annun- 
ciation. 

X. Joseph returned from Capernaum and found Mary great 
with child. His lament. The virgins defended Mary, but Joseph 
lamented still. 

XI. The angel reassured him, and he asked pardon of Mary. 

XII. Rumour went forth, and Joseph and Mary were sum- 
moned by the priests. The water of jealousy administered by 
Abiathar. Joseph and Mary each went about the altar seven 
times and no sign appeared. All asked her pardon and took 
her home in triumph. 

XIII. Caesar’s decree. They went to Bethlehem. The two 
peoples—Jews and Gentiles—weeping and laughing. An angel 
made her dismount and enter a dark cave which began to shine. 
There Christ was born. Joseph was gone to find midwives and 
brought Zelomi and Salome. Zelomi believed, Salome was 
incredulous, and her hand withered and was healed by touching 
the swaddling cloth. The shepherds’ vision. The star shone. 

XIV. On the third day Mary left the cave and went to a stable 
and put the child in the manger, and the ox and ass adored him, 
fulfilling the prophecies of Isaiah and Habakkuk. There they 
stayed three days. 

XV. On the sixth day they went to Bethlehem, kept the 
sabbath, and circumcised the child on the eighth day. The 
Presentation: Symeon and Anna. 

XVI. After the second year came the magi: told as in the 
Gospel. 

XVII. Massacre of the Innocents; the warning to flee into 
Egypt. 


Here the use of the Protevangelium ends. It will be seen that it has 
been freely dealt with. Among the interesting things that have been 
left out is the standing still of all creation at the moment of the Birth. 
Nor is John the Baptist or Zacharias mentioned at all. 

Chapters XVIII-XXIV deal with the Flight into Egypt and the 
sojourn there. They may or may not be translated from a written 
source: on the whole I think they are not. Some tell of fulfilments 
of prophecy, others may depend on local legend. 


XVIII. They came to a cave and wished to rest there. Mary 
dismounted and sat with Jesus in her lap. There were three 
boys with Joseph and a girl with Mary. Suddenly a number of 
dragons came out of the cave, and all cried out in fear. Jesus 
got down from his mother’s lap and stood before the dragons, 


GOSPEL OF PSEUDO-MATTHEW 7% 


which worshipped him. Thus was fulfilled the word, ‘Praise 
the Lord out of the earth, ye dragons and all deeps’. Jesus 
walked before them and bade them hurt no one. Mary was 
alarmed for him, but he said, ‘Fear not, neither conceive that 
I am a child, for I always was and am a perfect man, and it is 
necessary that all the beasts of the forest should grow tame 
before me.’ 

XIX. In like manner lions and leopards adored him and 
accompanied them, showed them the way, and bowed their 
heads to Jesus. At first Mary was afraid, but Jesus smiled on her 
and reassured her. The lions never injured their oxen and 
asses or the sheep they had brought from Judaea. Wolves, too, 
came and were harmless. Thus was fulfilled the word, ‘The wolves 
shall feed with the lambs, the lion and ox shall eat straw together.’ 
They had with them two oxen anda cart to carry their necessaries. 

XX. On the third day Mary saw a palm and wished to rest 
under it. When she was seated there she saw fruit on it, and 
said to Joseph that she should like to have some. Joseph said 
he was surprised she should say that because the tree was so 
high: he himself was thinking more about water, of which they 
had very little left. Jesus sitting in Mary’s lap with a joyful 
countenance bade the palm give his mother of its fruit. The 
tree bent as low as her feet and she gathered what she would. 
He bade it rise again, and give them of the water concealed 
peley its roots. A spring came forth and all rejoiced and drank 
of it. 

XXI. Next day when they left the place Jesus said to the 
palm: I give thee this privilege, that one of thy branches shall 
be taken by my angels and planted in my Father’s garden. 
And henceforth all who win contests shall be told that they 
have won the palm of victory. An angel came and took a 
branch and flew away with it. All fell down in fear, but Jesus 
reassured them. 

XXII. As they went, Joseph said that as it was hot they might 
go by the sea coast. But Jesus said he would shorten the way— 
and even as he spoke they began to see the hills and cities of 
Eats Yee, : 

They arrived at Hermopolis and entered a city called Sotinen, 
and had to lodge in a temple where were 365 gods. ; 

XXIII. When Mary and the Child entered, all the idols feil, 
and Isaiah’s word was fulfilled. ‘Behold the Lord shall come 
upon a light cloud and enter into Egypt, and all the gods made 
by the hand of the Egyptians shall be moved before his face.’ 

XXIV. Affrodosius, governor of the city, heard of it and 
came with all his host. The priests thought he would punish 
those who had destroyed the gods: but when he saw them 
fallen he adored the child and said to those present that ‘unless 
this were the God of our gods they would not have fallen. If we 


76 INFANCY GOSPELS 


do not adore him, as they have done, we are in danger of such 
destruction as fell upon Pharaoh who was drowned with all 
his army.’ J 

Then all the people of the city believed in the Lord through 
Jesus Christ. 

Here begins the second part—the Infancy proper of our Lord. The 
source is the Gospel of Thomas: sometimes a better text of that work 
than we have elsewhere is represented, but there is also a good deal of 
late amplification. 


XXV. The angel bade Joseph return to Judaea. 

XXVI. When Jesus was in Galilee at the beginning of his 
fourth year he was playing by the Jordan, and made seven pools. 
A boy spoilt them, and was struck dead. The parents com- 
plained. Joseph asked Mary to admonish Jesus. She begged 
him not to dosuch things, and he, not willing to grieve her, ‘smote 
the back side of the dead boy with his foot and bade him rise: 
which he did, and Jesus went on with his pools’. 

XXVII. He took clay from the pools and made twelve 
sparrows, on the sabbath. A Jew saw it and spoke to Joseph, 
who spoke to Jesus. Jesus clapped his hands and bade the 
sparrows fly away. All marvelled, and some went and told the 
chief priests and Pharisees. 

XXVIII. The son of Annas the priest broke up the pools 
with a stick, and Jesus with a word withered him up. 

XXIX. Joseph was afraid and took Jesus home. On the way 
a boy ran against Jesus and got on his shoulder, meaning to hurt 
him. Jesus said: ‘Mayest thou not return whole from the way 
thou goest.” He fell dead. Complaints of the parents, as in 
Thomas. Joseph to Jesus: ‘Why doest thou such things? Many 
are now complaining against thee and hate us on thy account, 
and we suffer injuries through thee.’ Jesus: ‘No son is wise 
whom his father hath not taught according to the knowledge of 
this age, and the curse of his father hurteth no man save them 
that do ill.” All reviled Jesus to Joseph and he was much afraid. 
‘Then Jesus took the dead boy by the ear and held him up by 
it in the sight of all, and they saw Jesus speaking to him as a 
father to his son. And his spirit returned unto him and he lived 
again, and all marvelled.’ 


In Thomas Joseph takes Jesus by the ear. Our compiler found this 
offensive and changed it. Healso changed the speech of Jesus to Joseph 
and made it wholly pointless as far as I can see. 


XXX. Master Zachyas spoke reproachfully to Joseph: ‘You 
and Mary think more of your son than of the traditions of the 
elders.’ Joseph: But who can teach him? if you can do so, we 
are very willing. Jesus overhearing said: What you say is well 
for ordinary people: I have no earthly father. When I am lifted 
up from the earth I will make all mention of your descent to 


GOSPEL OF PSEUDO-MATTHEW 77 


cease. I know when you were born and how long you have to 
live. All cried out in wonder: We have never heard the like. 
Jesus: Does this surprise you? I will tell you more. I have 
seen Abraham and spoken with him, and he has seen me. None 
could answer. Jesus: I have been among you with the children, 
and ye have not known me. I have spoken with you as with the 
wise and ye have not understood my voice, for ye are less than 
me, and of little faith. 
I. Zachyas said: Give him to me and I will take him to 

Levi who shall teach him letters. Levi bade him answer to Aleph: 
he was silent. Levi smote him with a rod of storax on the head. 
Jesus: Why smitest thou me? Know of a truth that he which 
is smitten teacheth the smiter more than he is taught of him. 
For I can teach thee the things that thou thyself sayest. But 
all these which speak and hear are blind like sounding brass 
or a tinkling cymbal wherein is no perception of those things 
that are signified by their sound. Further he said to Zachyas(?): 
Every letter from Aleph to Thau is discerned by the arrangement 
of it. Do thou then first say what Thau is, and I will tell thee 
what Aleph is. And again he said: They that know not Aleph, 
how can they tell Thau, hypocrites that they are? Say ye what 
Aleph is first and then will I believe you when ye say Beth. 
(I quote this to show how the text is conflated out of various 
earlier forms.) He said to the master: Let the master of the law 
say what the first letter is, or why it hath many triangles (eight 
adjectives follow). Levi was stupefied and then began to lament: 
Ought he to live on the earth? Nay, rather is he worthy to be 
hung on a great cross. He can put out fire and escape all tor- 
ments by guile. I think he was born before the flood, before 
the deluge. What womb bare him? What mother gave him 
birth? What breasts suckled him? I fly before him, &c., &c. 

Jesus smiled and said with command to all the children of 
Israel that stood and heard him: Let the unfruitful bear fruit, 
and the blind see, and the lame walk straight, and the poor enjoy 
good things, and the dead revive, and every one return into a 
restored state, and abide in him who is the root of life and of 
everlasting sweetness. All were healed who had fallen into evil 
infirmities. No one thereafter dared to say aught to him or hear 
aught of him. 

(This speech is simplified from every trace of mystery.) 

XXXII. At Nazareth the boy Zeno fell from the soler and was 
raised. Joseph, Mary, and Jesus went thence to Jericho. 

XXXIII. Jesus’ pitcher was broken by a child, and he brought 
water in his cloak. 

XXXIV. He took a little corn out of his mother’s barn and 
sowed it. When reaped it made three cors, which he gave away. 

(Another manuscript has a form like that of the Latin Thomas.) 

XXXV-XXXVI do not occur in Thomas nor in the manuscript 
just mentioned. 


78 INFANCY GOSPELS 


XXXV. There is a road from Jericho to Jordan, at the place 
where Israel crossed and the ark rested. Jesus, eight years old, 
went from Jericho to Jordan. On the way there was a vault 
(crypta), where was a lioness with whelps. He went in and sat 
there, and the whelps played about him: the older lions stood 
at a distance and adored him, wagging their tails. The people 
who saw it said that he or his parents must have sinned or he 
would not have delivered himself to the lions. Then he came 
forth and the lions went before him, and the whelps played before 
his feet. His parents and the people looked on. Jesus said: 
How much better than you are the beasts which know me and 
are tame, while men know me not. 

XXXVI. Then he went over Jordan, whose waters were 
divided, with the lions: and told them in the hearing of all to 
go back home and hurt no one. And so they did. 

XXXVII-XXXIX are again from Thomas. 

XXXVII. A bed of six cubits was ordered of Joseph, and he told 
his lad to cut a beam of the right length, but he made it too short. 
Joseph was troubled. Jesus pulled it out to the right length. 

(The change is made in order to free Joseph from the charge 
of stupidity.) 

XXXVIII. He went to school the second time. ‘Say Alpha.’ 
Jesus: Tell thou me first what Beta is, and I will tell thee what 
Alpha is. The master smote him and died. 

Joseph said to Mary: Know verily that my soul is sorrowful 
even unto death because of this boy. It may chance that any 
one may smite him in malice and he may die. Mary said: O man 
of God, believe not that this can happen, but believe surely that 
he who sent him to be born among men will keep him from all 
malice and in his name preserve him from evil. 

XXXIX. For the third time they took him to school at the 
request of others, though they knew that it was not possible for 
aman to teach him. He entered the school, took the book from 
the master’s hand, and taught—not what was written in it—like 
a torrent of water flowing from a living fountain. All marvelled, 
and the master adored him. Joseph ran thither in fear. The 
master said: You have given me no scholar but a teacher! 
Who can ascertain his words? ‘Then was fulfilled the word: 
‘The river of God is full of water. Thou hast prepared their food, 
for thus is the preparation thereof.’ 

XL is not in Thomas. 

XL. They removed to Capernaum. A rich man named Joseph 
fell ill and died. Jesus heard the mourning and said to Joseph: 
Why dost thou not do him a service since he is of thy name? 
Joseph: What can I do? Jesus: Take the kerchief that is on 
thy head and go and put it on his face and say: Christ save thee. 


He did so and said: Jesus save thee. The dead man was raised 
and asked who Jesus was. 


GOSPEL OF PSEUDO-MATTHEW 78 


XLI. They moved from Bethlehem to Capernaum (perhaps 
it should be vice versa). Joseph sent his eldest son James into 
the garden to gather herbs for pottage. Story of the viper as in 
Thomas. 

XLII is a conclusion, not in Thomas. 

When Joseph came to a feast with his sons James, Joseph, 
Juda, and Simeon, and his two daughters, Jesus and Mary came 
with her sister Mary of Cleophas, whom the Lord gave to her 
father Cleophas and her mother Anna because they had offered 
Mary the mother of Jesus to the Lord, and this other was given 
for their consolation and called by the same name. When they 
were together Jesus blessed and sanctified them, and was the 
first to eat and drink, for no one ventured even to sit down until 
he had done so, and all waited for him if he was not there. And 
his brethren watched him ever and feared him. And when he 
slept by day or by night the light of God shone always over him. 

To whom be all praise and glory, world without end. Amen. 


The real importance of Pseudo-Matthew lies not so much in the 
stories which it preserves, as in the fact that it was the principal] 
vehicle by which they were known to the Middle Ages and the principal 
source of inspiration to the artists and poets of the centuries from the 
twelfth to the fifteenth. It is upon this text that the many vernacular 
versions for the most part depend; and by this that the pictures of the 
Rejection of Joachim’s offering, his meeting with Anne at the Golden 
Gate, the Presentation of the Virgin, the Repose in Egypt, and the 
few that we have of the Infancy Miracles, are inspired. 


THE GOSPEL OF THE BIRTH OF MARY, 


as it was called by Hone, demands but a short notice. It is attributed 
to St. Jerome and finds a place in the editions among the spurious 
works that bear his name. It has passed almost bodily into the 
Golden Legend of James de Voragine, and so has exercised an influence 
on art and literature. But in itself it is, compared even with Pseudo- 
Matthew, a very poor production; being no more than an amplification 
of the earlier chapters of that work in more elegant Latin, and with all 
the detail blurred and smoothed down. No source has been employed 
by the writer but Pseudo-Matthew and the canonical Gospels. A brief 
analysis may be given. 


I. Mary was born at Nazareth. Her parents. Ioachim’s charity. 

II. At the dedication feast his offering is rejected by Isachar. 
He retires to his flocks. 

III. The angel appears to him and bids him return to Anne; 

IV. And to Anne and bids her meet him at the Golden Gate. 

V. They meet. Mary is born. 

VI. Her presentation in the Temple at three years old. 

VII. Her life there. At 14 years old it is agreed to summon 
the single men. 


80 INFANCY GOSPELS 


VIII. Joseph’s rod. He takes her home with seven other 
virgins. 

IX. The Annunciation: mostly from the Gospels. — 

X. Joseph’s perplexity: the angel reassures him: Christ is born. 


THE ARABIC GOSPEL OF THE INFANCY 


Our present text of this book depends in the main upon a single 
Arabic manuscript, now lost, which was used by Sike, the first editor, 
in 1697. There are now known to be other manuscripts at Rome and 
Florence, but they have not been fully collated. The greater part of 
the book, however, is also embodied in a Syriac History of the Virgin 
which was edited and translated by Sir E. A. Wallis Budge in 1899. 

The Arabic Gospel is a late compilation, as has been shown most 
clearly by Father P. Peeters in his recent French edition (1914, 
Evangiles apocryphes, ii). 

The book falls into several divisions: 

I is a late note prefixed. 

II-IX. The Nativity to the Flight into Egypt. The Protevan- 
gelium is the ultimate source of some parts of this. 

X-XXV. Miracles in Egypt, some of which show influence of 
late local traditions. 

XXVI-XXXV. Return to Nazareth. Miracles done there, which 
do not occur in other texts. 

XXXVI-LIII. Further miracles, mostly derived from Thomas: 
ending with Jesus in the Temple. 

LIV. Baptism of Jesus. 

LV. Doxology. 

A briefer analysis of this book will suffice than in the case of Pseudo- 
Matthew. 


I. States that it is found in the book of Joseph the high- 
priest in the time of Christ, who some say is Caiaphas, that Jesus in 
the cradle proclaimed his Godhead. 

II. The decree of Augustus in the year 300 (or 304) of the era 
of Alexander. The Birth in a cave. An old Hebrew woman 
comes as midwife. III. Her hands are withered (?) because of her 
unbelief, and she is healed. (There is a gap in the text.) IV. The 
Shepherds. The midwife praises God. V. The Circumcision. 
V, VI. The Presentation. 

VII. The Magi. VIII. They bring back one of Jesus’ swaddling 
cloths which is proof against fire, and is preserved with veneration. 
IX. The Flight. 

X, XI. Arrival in Egypt. An idol announces the presence of 
a God, and falls. The demoniac son of a priest is healed. XII. 
Alarm of Joseph and Mary. 

XIII. Robbers hear a noise of an approaching host and flee, 
leaving their captives. Joseph and Mary arrive, and the captives 


5 who is the king who is coming. Answer: ‘He is coming on 
aiter us. 


THE ARABIC GOSPEL OF THE INFANCY 82 


XIV. A demoniac woman healed. XV. A dumb bride healed. 

XVI. A woman oppressed by a demon-serpent relieved. 

XVII. A leprous girl healed by water in which Jesus was 
washed. 

XVIII. A leprous child healed in like manner. XIX. A hus- 
band and wife released from a spell. XX, XXI. The brother of 
two women, who had been changed into a mule, restored by 
having Jesus placed on his back (Peeters points out the identity 
of this miracle with one told of St. Macarius in the Historia 
Lausiaca of Palladius). XXII. The leprous girl of XVII married 
to the brother. 

XXIII. The robbers Titus and Dumachus (the good and bad 
thieves of the Crucifixion) capture them. Titus redeems them: 
Jesus prophesies his end. 

XXIV. At Matarieh in Egypt a spring bursts forth and balm 
originates from the sweat of Jesus. XXV. They lived three 
years at Misr (Cairo) and saw Pharaoh. Many miracles were 
done which are not written in the Gospel of the Infancy or in 
the complete Gospel (probably the Canonical Gospels are meant). 
These chapters are an Egyptian interpolation not earlier than 
the twelfth century. 

XXVI. Return to Nazareth. XXVII. At Bethlehem a sick 
child healed. XXVIII. A child diseased in the eyes healed. 
X XIX. Two women, mothers of children. One child dies, the 
other, Cleopas, is healed. The mother of the dead throws Cleopas 
first into an oven, then into a well: he is uninjured: she herself 
falls into the well and is killed. XXX. One of two twin boys 
healed—the Bartholomew of the Gospels. XXXI. A leprous. 


1 The meeting with the good thief is told in other places: in the 
B Recension (Greek) of the Acts of Pilate; and by Aelred of Rievaulx 
(de Vita Eremitica ad Sororem, xlviii: printed with St. Augustine’s 
works, ed. Bened. I, App. 51: Migne P. L. xxxii). Aelred’s form is thus: 

Do not in thy meditation pass over the gifts of the Magi: nor leave 
him without company when he flees into Egypt. Think that to be 
true which is told, that he was captured by robbers in the way and 
saved by the kindness of a youth. This was, they say, the son of the 
chief of the robbers, and when he got possession of his prey, and found 
the child on his mother’s breast, such splendour of majesty appeared 
in his lovely face that the youth, not doubting that he was more than 
man, inflamed with love embraced him and said: O most blessed of 
children, if ever there come a time for having mercy on me, then 
remember me and forget not this hour. 

This they say was the robber who was crucified on Christ’s right 
hand, and when the other blasphemed, said: Dost thou not fear God 
(and the rest), and turning to the Lord and beholding him in that 
majesty which he had seen in him as a child, and not forgetful of his 
pact, said: Remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom. So 
as an incentive of love I think it not useless to hold this belief, though 
I would not rashly affirm its truth. 


870 G 


82 INFANCY GOSPELS 


woman healed. XXXII. A leprous bride healed. XXXIII, 
XXXIV. A woman haunted by a dragon freed by one of Christ’s 
swaddling cloths. XXXV. Judas, a child possessed by the 
devil, smites Jesus, and the devil leaves him in the form of 


a dog. 

XXXVI. Jesus (seven years old) makes figures of all sorts of 
animals of clay, and makes them walk, fly, and feed. XXXVIT. 
The story of the Dyer Salem (see above). XXXVIII. Jesus 
lengthens or shortens beams which Joseph had cut wrongly: for 
he was not clever at his trade. XXXIX. A bed made for the 
king of Jerusalem pulled out to the right size. XL. The children 
in the oven (see above). XLI. In the month of Adar the boys 
make Jesus their king, and passers by have to stop and salute 
him. XLII. The parents of a child bitten by a snake come, and 
are stopped: Jesus goes with them to the snake’s nest and makes 
it suck out the poison: it bursts: the child is healed: he was 
Simon Zelotes. XLIII. James bitten by the viper and healed. 
XLIV. Zeno falls from the house and ‘is raised. XLV. Jesus 
brings water in his cloak. 

XLVI. The pools and sparrows of clay. The son of Hanan 
spoils the pools and is palsied. XLVII. The child who ran 
against Jesus falls dead. XLVIII. Taught by Zacheus, who is 
confounded by his wisdom. XLIX. Taught by another master, 
who smites him and dies. 

L. With the doctors at Jerusalem: questioned about the Law. 
LI. Questioned about astronomy. LII. And by a philosopher 
about philosophy: he answers all perfectly. LIII. Is found by 
Mary and Joseph. Returns with them. LIV. He lived in 
obscurity until his baptism. LV. Doxology. 


The stories which this book has in common with Thomas are rather 
shortly told and do not help to solve difficulties in the older text. 
The long series of healings in Egypt and at Bethlehem is monotonous: 
for the most part the Virgin is the prominent figure in them. It is 
to her that the sufferers apply, and she gives them the water in which 
the child has been washed, or some of his linen, or allows them to 
touch him. 

There is an echo of the story in ch. xli in a Western book, the Vita 
Rhythmica of the Virgin and Christ, a long Latin rhyming composition 
of the thirteenth century, edited by Végtlin (Bibl. d. Litterar. Vereins 
in Stuttgart, no. 180, 1888). In Il. 2,564 sqq. it is said that the 
Egyptian boys crowned Jesus as king: and again in 2,612, after the 
return from Egypt, the boys made him their king and called him 
domicellus, ‘young Lord’. The sources of this Vita are enumerated 
by the compiler, and are ostensibly Greek to a large extent—Germanus, 
Theophilus, Epiphanius, Ignatius are named, as well as the Infantia 
Salvatoris. With it should be read the Latin stories printed from a 
Giessen manuscript by O. Schade, Kénigsberg, 1876, Narrationes de 


vita et conversatione B.V.M. &c. They follow the text of the Vita 
Rhythmica closely. 


83 


THE ARMENIAN GOSPEL OF THE INFANCY 


The only accessible edition of this is the excellent French one of 
P. Peeters in Evangiles apocryphes, ii, 1914 (Textes et Documents: 
Hemmer & Lejay). It is a very long text, occupying over 200 pages 
of print. Like the other secondary documents with which we have 
been dealing, it is ultimately dependent on the Protevangelium and 
the Gospel of Thomas, but the data of both are enormously amplified. 

It comes into Armenian from Syriac, but the date of the Syriac book 
from which it was translated is open to question. An Infancy Gospel 
was brought into Armenia by Nestorian missionaries in 590. This 
cannot be the present text: on the other hand, an Armenian writer of 
the twelfth century mentions a book of the Infancy which may be ours. 


I. ‘Récit de Saint Jacques, frére du Seigneur.’ Story of the 
birth of Mary. It begins abruptly with Joachim’s retirement to 
the desert, and follows the Protevangelium with some omissions 
and many expansions. In III is a long digression about Zacharias. 
In IV the marriage: Joseph’s protests are much lengthened. 
V has an immense dialogue between Gabriel and the Virgin. 
VI, another between the Virgin and Joseph. VII. The water of 
jealousy. 

VIII. The decree of Augustus and the Nativity: the silence 
of creation is related. Joseph in his search for a midwife meets 
first Eve, who comes to see the promise of redemption fulfilled: 
then Salome, whose unbelief and cure are told of. 

X. The Shepherds. XI. The Magi, Melkon, king of Persia, 
Gaspar, of India, Balthasar, of Arabia. This episode is very long. 
The Magi bring with them the testament which Adam delivered 
to Seth. XII. The Presentation. XIII. The Massacre of the 
Innocents. 

XIV. The death of Zacharias and escape of John (Protev.). 

XV. The Flight and Sojourn in Egypt. The fall of idols and 
temples is told at vast length. The Family dwell for a time with 
a prince called Eleazar (who appears under the name of Lazarus 
in Budge’s Syriac History). 

XVI. The beginning of the return. There is more destruction 
of temples and there are healings of children, and also the first 
of several scenes—protracted to great length—in which Jesus is 
accused of causing the death of a child and is summoned before 
a judge. Long dialogues take place, and finally the dead child 
is raised to exculpate Jesus; after which he sometimes dies again. 
XVIII. Continues these stories. XIX, XX. Jesus is sent at the 
suggestion of the King (of Bethlehem, Barjesus) to learn from 
Gamaliel, who is confounded by his wisdom: then follows the 
story of the throne made straight. XXI. The story of the dyer, 
Israel, at Tiberias. XXII. Another trial of Jesus. XXII. 
Miracles (or tricks) wrought on children on a mountain. XXIV. 


84 INFANCY GOSPELS 


Cure of a leper at Emmaus, with a very long dialogue. XXV. 
They go to Nazareth. Jesus arbitrates between two brothers, 
Malachias and Micheas. XXVI. Cure of aman, Hiram. XXVII. 
Cure of an old man, Balthasar: long dialogue. XXVIII. Jesus 
arbitrates between two soldiers. 


There is on the whole little of ancient flavour in the book, and it 
does not seem to preserve any details, which are not to be found else- 
where, of the old tradition. The diffuseness of the expansions reminds 
one of the Armenian version of 4 Esdras, which takes the most 
unwarrantable liberties with the text. 


HISTORY OF JOSEPH THE CARPENTER, OR 
DEATH OF JOSEPH 


This is an Egyptian book, not earlier than the fourth century in 
date, and very probably later: it exists in fragments in Sahidic, 
complete in Bohairic (the dialects of Upper and Lower Egypt respec- 
tively), and complete also in Arabic. A Latin version made in the 
fourteenth century from the Arabic exists, but has not been printed. 

The object of the book is the glorification of St. Joseph and his 
feast-day: his cult, so popular in the West, was long confined to Egypt. 
The interest of it lies in a few reminiscences of earlier books, and in 
the picturesque and highly Egyptian descriptions of death. The 
lamentations of Joseph and his prayers find many parallels in the 
literature of Christian Egypt, and especially in the Coptic accounts of 
the death of the Virgin. 

The order of the book is as follows (I use Forbes Robinson’s and 
Peeters’s versions) : 


Proem: ‘This is the going forth from the body of our father 
Joseph the carpenter, the father of Christ according to flesh, 
whose life was 111 years.’ It was told by Christ to the apostles 
on Mount Olivet, was written down by them, and laid up in the 
library at Jerusalem. The day of the death was the 26th of the 
month Epep. 

I. Christ on Mount Olivet addresses the apostles: on the 
certainty of death and the justice of God, &c. 

Il. Joseph was of Bethlehem: he was a carpenter, and married 
and had four sons, Judas, Josetos (Arab. Justus), James, Simon, 
and two daughters, Lysia (Arab. Asia) and Lydia. His wife died, 
leaving James still young. 

II. Mary was being brought up in the Temple till she was 
twelve years old. The priests decided to give her to a husband. 

IV. The lot fell on Joseph. Mary brought up James and was 
called Mary of James. Two years passed. 


V. ‘I came and dwelt in her.’ Joseph’s perplexity. VI. - 
assured by Gabriel. Une Eos Hs 


HISTORY OF JOSEPH THE CARPENTER 85 


VII. Decree of Caesar. The Birth ‘by the tomb of Rachel’. 

VIII. Herod sought to slay me. The Flight: Salome was 
with us. A year in Egypt. 

IX. Return to Nazareth. Joseph worked at his trade. 

X. His health and strength were unimpaired: he lived to be 111. 

XI. Josetos and Symeon married. Joseph dwelt with James. 
I was subject to Mary and to him. 

XII. Joseph’s death drew nigh. He went to the temple and 
prayed at the altar. 

XIII. His prayer to be saved from the terrors after death, ‘the 
river of fire wherein all souls are purified before they see the 
glory of God’. 

XIV. He returned to Nazareth and fell ill. The dates of his 
life: he was 40 when he married, and was married forty-nine 
years: a year alone after his wife’s death. Two years with Mary 
before the Nativity. 

XV. His strength gave way and he was troubled and uttered 
a lamentation (XVI) over all the parts of his body, for their 
several transgressions. 

XVII. I went to him. His greeting and address: he told of 
his doubt about Mary, and of another incident (a fusion of two 
stories in Thomas). The Sahidic tells it thus: I remember also 
the day that the horned serpent bit the lad on his foot and he 
died. His relations were gathered unto thee, wishing to take thee 
and deliver thee to Herod the lawless. And I found thee (Boh. 
Thy mercy found him), and thy godhead laid hold of him and 
he lived; and when thou didst raise him up to his parents there 
was great joy to them. But I requested thee, O my beloved son, 
saying: Be quiet in all things: and I took hold of thy right ear 
and pulled it. Thou didst answer, saying unto me: Unless thou 
wert my father according to the flesh, surely I would have warned 
thee because thou didst pull my right ear. (The Bohairic has 
slight variants, and the Arabic softens the incident by saying, 
*I took hold of thy hand’.) 

XVIII. I wept. My mother asked if Joseph must die, and 
I told her that it must be so. 

XIX. I sat at his head, Mary at his feet. I felt his heart and 
found that the soul was in his throat. 

XX. Mary felt his feet and legs and found them cold as ice. 
The brethren and sisters were summoned. Lysia the eldest 
daughter (‘who is the seller of purple’, Sahidic: cf. Acts xvi. 14) 
lamented: so did all. 

XXI. I looked at the south of the door and saw Death, and 
Amente following with their satellites ‘decani’ armed with fire. 
Joseph saw them and feared. I rebuked them and they fled. 
Death hid himself behind the door. I prayed. ioe 

XXII. Prayer for protection for the soul of Joseph ‘until it 
cross the seven aeons of darkness’. ‘Let the river of fire be as 


86 INFANCY GOSPELS 


water and the sea of demons cease vexing.’ Address to the 
apostles on the terrors of death. f i 

XXIII. When I had said Amen, my mother answering me In 
the language of the inhabitants of the heavens, Michael, Gabriel, 
and the choir of the angels came. Numbness and panting seized 
on Joseph. Death seeing me dared not enter. I arose and went 
outside and bade him go in and do his appointed work, but deal 
gently. Then Abbaton went in and took the soul, at sunrise on 
26th Epep. Michael and Gabriel put the soul into a precious 
silken napkin and the angels took it away, singing. (The passage 
about Death (Abbaton) is only in Sahidic: the Bohairic shortens 
the section.) 

XXIV. Isat down by the body and closed the eyes and mouth; 
and comforted Mary and the rest. 

XXV. The people of Nazareth came and mourned till the 
ninth hour. Then J put all forth, anointed and washed the body. 
‘I prayed to my Father with heavenly prayers which I wrote with 
my own fingers on the tables of heaven before I took flesh in the 
holy Virgin Mary.’ Angels came and shrouded the body. 

XXVI. I blessed it from all corruption ; pronounced blessings 
on all who celebrate his memory by good deeds or write the story 
of his death. 

XXVII. The chief men of the place came to prepare the body, 
and found it already shrouded. ‘The burial. I wept. 

XXVIII. The lament of Jesus. 

X XIX. The body was laid in the tomb beside Jacob his father. 

XXX. We the apostles rejoiced to hear all this. We asked 
why Joseph should not have been exempted from death like 
Enoch and Elias. 

XXXI. Jesus speaks of the inevitableness of death, and tells 
how Enoch and Elias still have to die, and are in trouble until 
their death is over. Antichrist will shed the blood of two men 
(Arab. four) like a cup of water, because of the reproaches they 
will heap upon him. 

XXXII. We asked: Who are the two whom he will slay? 
Answer: Enoch and Elias. (Arabic has, ‘Who are the Four whom 
he will slay? Answer: Enoch, Elias, Schila, and Tabitha.’ 
Mr. W. E. Crum has shown that for Schila we ought to read 
Sibylla. This gives two men and two women. Nothing is known 
of stories in which the Sibyl is killed by Antichrist, but in the 
Coptic Apocalypse of Elias, Tabitha figures prominently, with- 
standing Antichrist and being slain by him.) 

The book ends with a doxology of the apostles. 


87 


COPTIC LIVES, ETC., OF THE VIRGIN 


There are a number of Lives, Panegyrics, Discourses, &c., in Coptic, 
complete and fragmentary, which tell the story of the Virgin’s birth. 
In Forbes Robinson’s Coptic Apocryphal Gospels are: 


I. A Sahidic fragment of a homily, perhaps attributed to 
Evodius of Antioch, disciple of the apostles. 

This tells of Joakim—formerly called Cleopas—and Anna, and 
of the way in which they were taunted by the men and women 
they met when they went to Jerusalem, because they had no 
children: and of their grief in consequence. Each then had 
a vision of a white dove: it came and sat on Joakim’s head, and 
on Anna’s bosom. Anna had another vision with a prediction of 
Mary’s birth. Mary was born on the 15th of Hathor. Zacharias 
was warned by an angel to tell Anna and Joakim to dedicate 
Mary in three years’ time. 

Ila. (Sahidic.) Mary is brought to the Temple and lives 
there, fed by angels. Her chastity and sobriety of attire are 
described in terms which recur in other panegyrics, especially 
that of Demetrius: see below. 

IIs. The Annunciation. Decree of Augustus. Nativity. 
Before it, Mary’s face is radiant and then troubled, but her 
vision of two peoples is not mentioned. Joseph goes to find 
a midwife. 

There seem to be only rather faint memories of the Protevangelium 
in these fragments. 


In Budge’s Miscellaneous Coptic Texts, 1915, are some which 
bear on this subject, viz. 

1. p. 626. The Twentieth Discourse of Cyril of Jerusalem. 

In this Mary is represented as saying to Cyril: ‘I was a child 
promised to God, and my parents dedicated me to Him before 
I came into the world. My parents ... were of the tribe of 
Judah and house of David. My father was Joakim, which is 
being interpreted Kleopa. My mother was Anna... who was 
usually called Mariham. I am Mary Magdalene because the 
name of the village wherein I was born was Magdalia. My name 
is Mary of Cleopa. I am Mary of James the son of Joseph the 
carpenter.’ ie 

p. 631. We are told that in the village of Magdalia dwelt a 
rich and devout man David. A vision told him that the Redeemer 
should come out of his family. His wife Sara bore him a child 
whom the father called Joakim, and the mother Cleopa. He 
married Anna, daughter of Aminadab, David’s brother. They 
were childless. After many days they went to the Temple, 
prayed for a child, and promised to dedicate it to God. A voice 
came, saying that their prayer was heard. Mary was born, 


88 INFANCY GOSPELS 


dedicated in the Temple at three years old, and brought up there 
till she was fifteen. 


The reckless identification of the Virgin Mary with all the other 
Maries of the Gospels is characteristic of these Egyptian rhapsodies. 
In the Book of Bartholomew the appearance of Christ to Magdalene 
after the resurrection is turned into an appearance to his mother: and 
so too in another Coptic fragment on the Passion described later on. 


2. Discourse by Demetrius of Antioch. 

p- 653. There was a man in Jerusalem whose name was 
Joakim and he had a wife whose name was Susanna (sic. else- 
where in the discourse it is Anna). They were childless and 
prayed for a child. A man of light appeared and promised them 
a daughter whom they were to dedicate to God. She was born 
on 15th of Athor and dedicated. The description of her habits 
is almost identical with that in fragment II] a of Robinson. 
When she was twelve the priests decided to commit her to the 
care of a man. The lot fell on Joseph. She sat in his house 
and weaved the veil of the Temple. Angels ministered to her in 
the form of doves or some other kind of holy bird. ‘They flew 
about her in the place where she used to sit working at her 
handicraft, and they would alight upon the window of her room 
and they longed to hear her holy voice, which was sweet, and 
pretty, and holy.’ We then read of the Annunciation and the 
salutation of Gabriel—of great length—the Visitation, Decree 
of Caesar, journey to Bethlehem. Joseph looked at Mary and 
saw her whole body shining, and that she was greatly moved, 
for the time of the birth drew nigh. A great star appeared and 
excited much comment. At dawn on the 29th of Khoiak, Mary 
asked Joseph to seek a woman to help her. He found one on the 
roof of her house, and asked if she knew a midwife. She said: 
‘Thou art Joseph the husband of Mary,’ and came down, and put 
on her finest apparel. Before they reached the caravanserai the 
child was born. The woman’s name was Salome. When they 
entered the house they saw the Child in the manger and the ox 
and ass protecting him. Salome worshipped him. She was the 
first who recognized the Christ, and she followed him everywhere 
throughout his life. ‘I wish very much that I might describe 
unto you fully the life of that woman and her acts and deeds .. .’ 
but there is not time. 

The story is continued with some few non-Biblical details 
to the Flight into Egypt, on p. 682. The killing of Zacharias is 
shortly told in agreement with the account in the Protevangelium. 

3. The Discourse of Epiphanius. 


This has very few points of contact with the Apocrypha. It 
* There is, however, a Coptic text not yet printed in full, which 


does tell the whole story of Salome, and simply transfers to her a great 
part of the legend of Thais or of Mary the niece of the hermit Abraham. 


COPTIC LIVES, ETC., OF THE VIRGIN 89 


is mentioned that Mary was working when the Annunciation 
took place. 

4. The Discourse of Cyril of Alexandria. 

In this the care of Mary for her child, and her intercourse with 
him, is rather prettily described. ‘She used to take hold of his 
hand and lead him along the roads, saying, “ My sweet son, walk 
a little way’’, in the same manner as all other babes are taught 
to walk. And he, Jesus, the very God, followed after her 
untroubled. He clung to her with his little fingers, he stopped 
from time to time, and he hung on to the skirts of Mary his 
mother, he upon whom the whole universe hangeth. He would 
lift up his eyes to her face .. . and she would catch him up to 
herself and lift him up in her arms, and walk along with him.’ 

At p. 721 is essentially the same description of the Virgin’s 
habits that we have found in Robinson, II a, and Demetrius. 

These documents on the whole show great negligence in the use of 
ancient sources and great licence on the part of the writers; and I think 
this is rather characteristic of the Christian literature of Egypt. When 
we come to the Passion-narratives and the Acts and Apocalypses we 
shall encounter some striking instances of the taking of liberties with 
texts. 


A MODERN INFANCY GOSPEL 


By way of a curiosity, and to dispel illusions that may perhaps be 
entertained, I add a short note on a modern forgery, ‘The childhood 
of Christ—translated from the Latin by Henry Copley Greene, with 
original text of the manuscript at the monastery of St. Wolfgang. 
New York: Scott-Thaw Co. London: Burns & Oates. 1904.’ This 
is the form in which some readers may have met the book. The 
original is: ‘L’Evangile de la jeunesse de Notre-Seigneur Jésus-Christ 
d’aprés S. Pierre.’ Latin text and French version by Catulle Mendés: 
Paris, Armand Colin, 1894. All that we are told of the provenance of 
the Latin text is that it was ‘found some years ago in the ancient 
abbey of St. Wolfgang in the Salzkammergut’. The opening words 
of the prologue attribute the work to St. Peter. It is a sentimentalized 
compilation from Protevangelium, Pseudo-Matthew, the Latin Thomas, 
and the Arabic Gospel. It claims to be at least mediaeval in date, 
but the claim is made null by the simple fact that the Latin contains 
many phrases from Sike’s Latin version of the Arabic Gospel, which 
was written in 1697. Perhaps one specimen of the turn which is given 
to the original stories may be given. In the case of the boy who runs 
against Jesus, Jesus laments, saying, ‘Non ploro quia malum mihi 
inflixum est, sed quia malum altero inflixurus sum. Euh! frater mi,’ 
&c. He then puts his hand on the boy’s forehead, saying, ‘Quoniam 
pulsavisti, cade, et quoniam vitae in me currens offendisti, siste in 
morte’. (Because you have pushed me, fall; and because by running 
against me you have offended (or stumbled against) life, continue 
dead.) The boy dies and Jesus mourns for twelve days. _ 

Presumably the Latin text as well as the French version may be 
regarded as the work of Catulle Mendés. 


90 INFANCY GOSPELS 


Three other modern forgeries about the Life of Christ I will just 
name—more to show my consciousness of their existence than because 
they are at all interesting. One is a life said to have been found in 
a Buddhist monastery in Tibet, and connected with the name of 
Notovich as discoverer or translator. The second is a ridiculous and 
disgusting American book called ‘The Archko Volume’. The third is 
the Letter of Benan (an Egyptian physician), shown by Professor 
Carl Schmidt (Der Benanbrief, 1919) to have been forged by Ernst 
Edler von der Planitz. This, I believe, had a great vogue recently in 
Central Europe, but I have never heard of it in an English dress. 


PASSION GOSPELS 
GOSPEL OF PETER 


Tue early testimonies about this book have been set forth already. 
The present fragment was discovered in 1884 in a tomb at Akhmim 
in Egypt. The manuscript in which it is is a little book containing 
a portion of the Book of Enoch in Greek, this fragment on the Passion, 
and another, a description of Heaven and Hell, which is either (as 
I now think) a second fragment of the Gospel, or a piece of the 
Apocalypse of Peter. It will be given later under that head. 

We have seen that the Gospel of Peter is quoted by writers of the 
latter end of the second century. It has been contended that Justin 
Martyr also used it soon after the middle of that century, but the 
evidence is not demonstrative. I believe it is not safe to date the 
book much earlier than a.pD. 150. 

It uses all four canonical Gospels, and is the earliest uncanonical 
account of the Passion that exists. It is not wholly orthodox: for it 
throws doubt on the reality of the Lord’s sufferings, and by consequence 
upon the reality of his human body. In other words it is, as Serapion 
of Antioch indicated, of a Docetic character. 

Another characteristic of it is its extremely anti-Jewish attitude. 
Blame is thrown on the Jews wherever possible, and Pilate is white- 
washed. 

In this case I give, in Roman and Arabic figures respectively, a 
double division into sections and verses. The first is that of Armitage 
Robinson, the second that of Harnack. 


FRAGMENT I 


I. 1 But of the Jews no man washed his hands, neither did 
Herod nor any one of his judges: and whereas they would not 
2 wash, Pilate rose up. And then Herod the king commanded 
that the Lord should be taken into their hands, saying unto 
them: All that I commanded you to do unto him, do ye. 
II. 3 Now there stood there Joseph the friend of Pilate and 
of the Lord, and he, knowing that they were about to crucify 
him, came unto Pilate and begged the body of Jesus for 


GOSPEL OF PETER 91 


4 burial. And Pilate sending unto Herod, begged his body. 

5 And Herod said: Brother Pilate, even if none had begged 
for him, we should have buried him, since also the sabbath 
dawneth; for it is written in the law that the sun should 
not set upon one that hath been slain (murdered). 

III. 6 And he delivered him unto the people before the first 
day of (or on the day before the) unleavened bread, even 
their feast. And they having taken the Lord pushed him 
as they ran, and said: Let us hale the Son of God, now that 

7 we have gotten authority over him. And they put on him 
a purple robe, and made him sit upon the seat of judgement, 
8 saying: Give righteous judgement, thou King of Israel. And 
one of them brought a crown of thorns and set it upon the 
9 Lord’s head; and others stood and did spit in his eyes, and 
others buffeted his cheeks; and others did prick him with 
a reed, and some of them scourged him, saying: With this 
pe let us honour (or at this price let us value) the son of 
od. 

IV. 10 And they brought two malefactors, and crucified the 

11 Lord betwixt them. But he kept silence, as one feeling no 
pain. And when they set the cross upright, they wrote 

12 thereon: This is the King of Israel. And they laid his gar- 
ments before him, and divided them among themselves and 

13 cast the lot upon them. But one of those malefactors 
reproached them, saying: We have thus suffered for the evils 
which we have done; but this man which hath become the 

14 saviour of men, wherein hath he injured you? And they 
were wroth with him, and commanded that his legs should 
not be broken, that so he might die in torment. 

V. 15 Now it was noonday, and darkness prevailed over all 
Judaea: and they were troubled and in an agony lest the 
sun should have set, for that he yet lived: for it is written 
for them that the sun should not set upon him that hath been 

16 slain (murdered). And one of them said: Give ye him to 
drink gall with vinegar: and they mingled it and gave him 

17 to drink: and they fulfilled all things and accomplished 

18 their sins upon their own heads. And many went about with 

19 lamps, supposing that it was night: and some fell. And the 
Lord cried out aloud saying: My power, my power, thou hast 
forsaken me. And when he had so said, he was taken up. 

20 And in the same hour was the veil of the temple of Jerusalem 
rent in two. 

VI. 21 And then they plucked the nails from the hands of the 
Lord and laid him upon the earth: and the whole earth was 
shaken, and there came a great fear on all. 

22 Then the sun shone forth, and it was found to be the ninth 
23 hour. And the Jews rejoiced, and gave his body unto Joseph 
to bury it, because he had beheld all the good things which 


92 PASSION GOSPELS 


24 he did. And he took the Lord and washed him and wrapped 
him in linen and brought him unto his own sepulchre, which 1s 
called the Garden of Joseph. 

VII. 25 Then the Jews and the elders and the priests, when 
they perceived how great evil they had done themselves, 
began to lament and to say: Woe unto our sins: the judgement 
and the end of Jerusalem is drawn nigh. 

26 But I with my fellows was in grief, and we were wounded 
in our minds and would have hid ourselves; for we were 
sought after by them as malefactors, and as thinking to set 

27 the temple on fire. And beside all these things we were 
fasting, and we sat mourning and weeping night and day 
until the sabbath. 

VIII. 28 But the scribes and Pharisees and elders gathered 
one with another, for they had heard that all the people were 
murmuring and beating their breasts, saying: If these very 
great signs have come to pass at his death, behold how 

29 righteous he was. And the elders were afraid and came unto 

80 Pilate, entreating him and saying: Give us soldiers that we 
(or they) may watch his sepulchre for three days, lest his 
disciples come and steal him away and the people suppose 

81 that he is risen from the dead, and do us hurt. And Pilate 
gave them Petronius the centurion with soldiers to watch the 
sepulchre; and the elders and scribes came with them unto 

82 the tomb, and when they had rolled a great stone to keep 
out (al. together with) the centurion and the soldiers, then all 

83 that were there together set it upon the door of the tomb ; and 
plastered thereon seven seals ; and they pitched a tent there 
and kept watch. 

IX. 384 And early in the morning as the sabbath dawned, 
there came a multitude from Jerusalem and the region round 
about to see the sepulchre that had been sealed. 

85 Now in the night whereon the Lord’s day dawned, as the 
soldiers were keeping guard two by two in every watch, 

36 there came a great sound in the heaven, and they saw the 
heavens opened and two men descend thence, shining with 
(lit. having) a great light, and drawing near unto the sepulchre. 

87 And that stone which had been set on the door rolled away 
of itself and went back to the side, and the sepulchre was 

X. 38 opened and both of the young men entered in. When 
therefore those soldiers saw that, they waked up the cen- 
turion and the elders (for they also were there keeping 

89 watch); and while they were yet telling them the things 
which they had seen, they saw again three men come out of 
the sepulchre, and two of them sustaining the other (lit. the 

40 one), and a cross following after them. And of the two they 
saw that their heads reached unto heaven, but of him that 

41 was led by them that it overpassed the heavens. And they 


GOSPEL OF PETER 93 


42 heard a voice out of the heavens saying: Hast thou (or Thou 
hast) preached unto them that sleep? And an answer was 
heard from the cross, saying: Yea. 

XI. 43 Those men therefore took counsel one with another to 

44 go and report these things unto Pilate. And while they yet 
thought thereabout, again the heavens were opened and a 

45 man descended and entered into the tomb. And they that 
were with the centurion (or the centurion and they that were 
with him) when they saw that, hasted to go by night unto 
Pilate and left the sepulchre whereon they were keeping 
watch, and told all that they had seen, and were in great 
agony, saying: Of a truth he was the son of God. 

46 Pilate answered and said: I am clear from the blood of 

47 the son of God, but thus it seemed good unto you. Then 
all they came and besought him and exhorted him to charge 
the centurion and the soldiers to tell nothing of that they had 

48 seen: For, said they, it is expedient for us to incur the 
greatest sin before God, rather than to (and not to) fall into 

49 the hands of the people of the Jews and to be stoned. Pilate 
therefore charged the centurion and the soldiers that they 
should say nothing. 

XII. 50 Now early on the Lord’s day Mary Magdalene, a 
disciple (fem.) of the Lord—which, being afraid because of 
the Jews, for they were inflamed with anger, had not per- 
formed at the sepulchre of the Lord those things which 
women are accustomed to do unto them that die and are 

51 beloved of them—took with her the women her friends and 

52 came unto the tomb where he was laid. And they feared lest 
the Jews should see them, and said: Even if we were not 
able to weep and lament him on that day whereon he was 

58 crucified, yet let us now do so at his tomb. But who will 
roli away for us the stone also that is set upon the door of 
the tomb, that we may enter in and sit beside him and perform 

54 that which is due? for the stone was great, and we fear lest 

‘ any man see us. And if we cannot do so, yet let us cast down 
at the door these things which we bring for a memorial of 
him, and we will weep and lament until we come unto our 
house. 

XIII. 55 And they went and found the sepulchre open: and 
they drew near and looked in there, and saw there a young man 
sitting in the midst of the sepulchre, of a fair countenance 
and clad in very bright raiment, which said unto them: 

56 Wherefore are ye come? whom seek ye? not him that was 
crucified? He is risen and is departed; but if ye believe it 
not, look in and see the place where he lay, that he is not here: 
for he is risen and is departed thither whence he was sent. 

57 Then the women were affrighted and fled. 

XIV. 58 Now it was the last day of unleavened bread, and 


94 PASSION GOSPELS 


many were coming forth of the city and returning unto their 
59 own homes because the feast was at an end. But we, the 

twelve disciples of the Lord, were weeping and were in 

sorrow, and each one being grieved for that which had befallen 
60 departed unto his own house. But I, Simon Peter, and Andrew 

my brother, took our nets and went unto the sea: and there 

was with us Levi the son of Alphaeus, whom the Lord 

(For Fragment II see Apocalypse of Peter.) 


THE GOSPEL OF NICODEMUS, OR ACTS OF 
PILATE 


We have as yet no true critical edition of this book: one is in pre- 
paration, by E. von Dobschiitz, to be included in the Berlin corpus of 
Greek Ante-Nicene Christian writers. A short statement of the 
authorities available at this moment is therefore necessary. 

Tischendorf in his Evangelia Apocrypha divides the whole writing 
into two parts: (1) the story of the Passion; (2) the Descent into 
Hell; and prints the fellowing forms of each: six in all: 

1. Part I, Recension A in Greek from eight manuscripts, and a Latin 
translation of the Coptic version in the notes. 

2. Part I, Recension B in Greek from three late manuscripts. 

8. Part II (Descent into Hell) in Greek from three manuscripts. 

4. Part Lin Latin, using twelve manuscripts, and some old editions. 

5. Part II in Latin (A) from four manuscripts. 

6. Part II in Latin (B) from three manuscripts. 

Tischendorf’s must be described as an eclectic text not representing, 
probably, any one single line of transmission: but it presents the book 
in a readable, and doubtless, on the whole, correct form. 

There are, besides the Latin, three ancient versions of Part I of 
considerable importance, viz.: 

Coptic, preserved in an early papyrus at Turin, and in some frag- 
ments at Paris. Last edited by Revillout in Patrologia orientalis, ix. 2. 

Syriac, edited by Rahmani in Studia Syriaca, Il. 

Armenian, edited by F. C. Conybeare in Studia Biblica, IV (Oxford, 
1896): he gives a Greek rendering of one manuscript and a Latin one 
of another. 

All of these conform to Tischendorf’s Recension A of Part I: and 
this must be regarded as the most original form of the Acta which we 
have. Recension B is a late and diffuse working-over of the same 
matter: it will not be translated here in full. 

The first part of the book, containing the story of the Passion and 
Resurrection, is not earlier than the fourth century. Its object in 
the main is to furnish irrefragable testimony to the resurrection. 
Attempts have been made to show that it is of early date—that it is, 
for instance, the writing which Justin Martyr meant when in his 
Apology he referred his heathen readers to the ‘Acts’ of Christ’s trial 
preserved among the archives of Rome. The truth of that matter is 


ACTS OF PILATE 95 


that he simply assumed that such records must exist. False ‘acts’ of 
the trial were written in the Pagan interest under Maximin, and intro- 
duced into schools early in the fourth century. Itis imagined by some 
that our book was a counterblast to these. 

The account of the Descent into Hell (Part II) is an addition to the 
Acta. It does not appear in any Oriental version, and the Greek 
copies are rare. It is in Latin that it has chiefly flourished, and has 
been the parent of versions in every European language. 

The central idea, the delivery of the righteous Fathers from Hades, 
is exceedingly ancient. Second-century writers are full of it. The 
embellishments, the dialogues of Satan with Hades, which are so 
dramatic, come in later, perhaps with the development of pulpit 
oratory among Christians. We find them in fourth-century homilies 
attributed to Eusebius of Emesa. 

This second part used to be called Gnostic, but there is nothing 
unorthodox about it, save the choice of the names of the two men who 
are supposed to tell the story, viz. Leucius and Karinus. lLeucius 
Charinus is the name given by church writers to the supposed 
author of the Apocryphal Acts of John, Paul, Peter, Andrew, and 
Thomas. In reality Leucius was the soi-disant author of the Acts of 
John only. His name was transferred to the other Acts in process of 
time, and also (sometimes disguised as Seleucus) to Gospels of the 
Infancy and narratives of the Assumption of the Virgin. With all 
these the original Leucius had nothing to do. When his name came to 
be attached to the Descent into Hell we do not yet know: nor do we 
know when the Descent was first appended to the Acts of Pilate. Not, 
I should conjecture, before the fifth century. 


MEMORIALS OF OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST DONE IN 
THE TIME OF PONTIUS PILATE 


PROLOGUE 
(Absent from some manuscripts and versions). 

I Ananias (Aeneas Copt., Emaus Laitt.), the Protector, of 
practorian rank, learned in the law, did from the divine scriptures 
recognize our Lord Jesus Christ and came near to him by faith, 
and was accounted worthy of holy baptism: and I sought out 
the memorials that were made at that season in the time of our 
master Jesus Christ, which the Jews deposited with Pontius 
Pilate, and found the memorials in Hebrew (letters), and by the 
good pleasure of God I translated them into Greek (letters) for 
the informing of all them that call upon the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ: in the reign of our Lord Flavius Theodosius, in the 
seventeenth year, and of Flavius Valentinianus the sixth, in the 
ninth indiction [corrupt : Lat. has the eighteenth year of Theo- 
dosius, when Valentinian was proclaimed Augustus, 1. €. A. D. 425]. 

All ye therefore that read this and translate (or copy) it into 
other books, remember me and pray for me that God will be 
gracious unto me and be merciful unto my sins which I have 
sinned against him. 


96 PASSION GOSPELS 


Peace be to them that read and that hear these things and to 
their servants. Amen. 

In the fifteenth (al. nineteenth) year of the governance of 
Tiberius Caesar, emperor of the Romans, and of Herod, king of 
Galilee, in the nineteenth year of his rule, on the eighth of the 
Kalends of April, which is the 25th of March, in the consulate of 
Rufus and Rubellio, in the fourth year of the two hundred and 
second Olympiad, Joseph who is Caiaphas being high priest of 
the Jews: 

These be the things which after the cross and passion of the 
Lord Nicodemus recorded and delivered unto the high priest 
and the rest of the Jews: and the same Nicodemus set them forth 
in Hebrew (letters). 


I 


1 For the chief priests and scribes assembled in council, even 
Annas and Caiaphas and Somne (Senes) and Dothaim (Dothael, 
Dathaés, Datam) and Gamaliel, Judas, Levi and Nepthalim, 
Alexander and Jairus and the rest of the Jews, and came unto 
Pilate accusing Jesus for many deeds, saying: We know this 
man, that he is the son of Joseph the carpenter, begotten of 
Mary, and he saith that he is the Son of God and a king; more- 
over he doth pollute the sabbaths and he would destroy the law 
of our fathers. 

Pilate saith: And what things are they that he doeth, and 
would destroy the law? 

The Jews say: We have a law that we should not heal any 
man on the sabbath: but this man of his evil deeds hath healed 
the lame and the bent, the withered and the blind and the 
paralyne, the dumb and them that were possessed, on the sabbath 

ay! 

Pilate saith unto them: By what evil deeds? 

They say unto him: He is a sorcerer, and by Beelzebub the 
prince of the devils he casteth out devils, and they are all subject 
unto him. 

Pilate saith unto them: This is not to cast out devils by an 
unclean spirit, but by the god Asclepius. 

2 The Jews say unto Pilate: We beseech thy majesty that he 
appear before thy judgement-seat and be heard. And Pilate 
called them unto him and said: Tell me, how can I that am 
a governor examine a king? They say unto him: We say not 
that he is a king, but he saith it of himself. 

And Pilate called the messenger (cursor) and said unto him: 
Let Jesus be brought hither, but with gentleness. And the 
messenger went forth, and when he perceived Jesus he worshipped 


‘ For ‘recorded’, &c., other manuscripts and Coptic and Latin 


have ‘recorded those things that : ; 
the Jews’, g were done by the high priests and 


ACTS OF PILATE 97 


him and took the kerchief that was on his hand and spread it upon 
the earth and saith unto him: Lord, walk hereon and enter in, 
for the governor calleth thee. And when the Jews saw what the 
messenger had done, they cried out against Pilate saying: 
Wherefore didst thou not summon him by an herald to enter in, 
but by a messenger? for the messenger when he saw him wor- 
shipped him and spread out his kerchief upon the ground and 
hath made him walk upon it like a king! 

3 Then Pilate called for the messenger and said unto him: 
Wherefore hast thou done this, and hast spread thy kerchief 
upon the ground and made Jesus to walk upon it? The messenger 
saith unto him: Lord governor, when thou sentest me to Jeru- 
salem unto Alexander, I saw Jesus sitting upon an ass, and the 
children of the Hebrews held branches in their hands and cried 
out, and others spread their garments beneath him, saying: Save 
now, thou that art in the highest: blessed is he that cometh in 
the name of the Lord. 

4 The Jews cried out and said unto the messenger: The 
children of the Hebrews cried out in Hebrew: how then hast 
thou it in the Greek? The messenger saith to them: I did ask 
one of the Jews and said: What is it that they cry out in 
Hebrew? and he interpreted it unto me. 

Pilate saith unto them: And how cried they in Hebrew? The 
Jews say unto him: Hosanna membrome barouchamma adonai. 
Pilate saith unto them: And the Hosanna and the rest, how is it. 
interpreted? The Jews say unto him: Save now, thou that art 
in the highest: blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. 
Pilate saith unto them: If you yourselves bear witness of the 
words which were said of the children, wherein hath the messenger 
sinned? and they held their peace. 

The governor saith unto the messenger: Go forth and bring 
him in after what manner thou wilt. And the messenger went 
forth and did after the former manner and said unto Jesus: 
Lord, enter in: the governor calleth thee. 

5 Now when Jesus entered in, and the ensigns were holding: 
the standards, the images (busts) of the standards bowed and 
did reverence to Jesus. And when the Jews saw the carriage of 
the standards, how they bowed themselves and did reverence 
unto Jesus, they cried out above measure against the ensigns. 
But Pilate said unto the Jews: Marvel ye not that the images. 
bowed themselves and did reverence unto Jesus? The Jews say 
unto Pilate: We saw how the ensigns made them to bow and 
did reverence to him. And the governor called for the ensigns 
and saith unto them: Wherefore did ye so? ‘They say unto 
Pilate: We are Greeks and servers of temples, and how could we 
do him reverence? for indeed, whilst we held the images they 
bowed of themselves and did reverence unto him. 

6 Then saith Pilate unto the rulers of the synagogue and the: 


870 H 


98 PASSION GOSPELS 


elders of the people: Choose you out able and strong men and 
let them hold the standards, and let us see if they bow of them- 
selves. And the elders of the Jews took twelve men strong and 
able and made them to hold the standards by sixes, and _ they 
were set before the judgement-seat of the governor; and Pilate 
said to the messenger: Take him out of the judgement hall 
(praetorium) and bring him in again after what manner thou wilt. 
And Jesus went out of the judgement hall, he and the messenger. 
And Pilate called unto him them that before held the images, 
and said unto them: I have sworn by the safety of Caesar that 
if the standards bow not when Jesus entereth in, I will cut off 
your heads. 

And the governor commanded Jesus to enter in the second 
time. And the messenger did after the former manner and 
besought Jesus much that he would walk upon his kerchief; and 
he walked upon it and entered in. And when he had entered, the 
standards bowed themselves again and did reverence unto Jesus. 

II 

1 Now when Pilate saw it he was afraid, and sought to rise up 
from the judgement-seat. And while he yet thought to rise up, 
his wife sent unto him, saying: Have thou nothing to do with 
this just man, for I have suffered many things because of him by 
night. And Pilate called unto him all the Jews, and said unto 
them: Ye know that my wife feareth God and favoureth rather 
the customs of the Jews, with you? They say unto him: Yea, 
we know it. Pilate saith unto them: Lo, my wife hath sent unto 
me, saying: Have thou nothing to do with this just man: for I 
have suffered many things because of him by night. But the Jews 
answered and said unto Pilate: Said we not unto thee that he is 
asorcerer? behold, he hath sent a vision of a dream unto thy wife. 

2 And Pilate called Jesus unto him and said to him: What 
is it that these witness against thee? speakest thou nothing? But 
Jesus said: If they had not had power they would have spoken 
nothing; for every man hath power over his own mouth, to 
speak good or evil: they shall see to it. 

3 The elders of the Jews answered and said unto Jesus: What 
shall we see? Firstly, that thou wast born of fornication; 
secondly, that thy birth in Bethlehem was the cause of the slaying 
of children; thirdly, that thy father Joseph and thy mother Mary 
fled into Egypt because they had no confidence before the people. 

4 Then said certain of them that stood by, devout men of 
the Jews: We say not that he came of fornication; but we know 
that Joseph was betrothed unto Mary, and he was not born of 
fornication. Pilate saith unto those Jews which said that he 
came of fornication: This your saying is not true, for there were 
espousals, as these also say which are of your nation. Annas and 
Caiaphas say unto Pilate: The whole multitude of us cry out 


ACTS OF PILATE 99 


that he was born of fornication, and we are not believed: but 
these are proselytes and disciples of his. And Pilate called 
Annas and Caiaphas unto him and said to them: What be 
proselytes? They say unto him: They were born children of 
Greeks, and now are they become Jews. Then said they which 
said that he was not born of fornication, even Lazarus, Asterius, 
Antonius, Jacob, Amnes, Zenas, Samuel, Isaac, Phinees, Crispus, 
Agrippa, and Judas : We were not born proselytes (are not Greeks, 
Copt.), but we are children of Jews and we speak the truth; for 
verily we were present at the espousals of Joseph and Mary. 

5 And Pilate called unto him those twelve men which said 
that he was not born of fornication, and saith unto them: 
I adjure you by the safety of Caesar, are these things true which 
ye have said, that he was not born of fornication? They say 
unto Pilate: We have a law that we swear not, because it is sin: 
but let them swear by the safety of Caesar that it is not as we 
have said, and we will be guilty of death. Pilate saith to Annas 
and Caiaphas: Answer ye nothing to these things? Annas and 
Caiaphas say unto Pilate: These twelve men are believed which 
say that he was not born of fornication, but the whole multitude 
of us cry out that he was born of fornication, and is a sorcerer, 
and saith that he is the Son of God and a king, and we are not 
believed. 

6 And Pilate commanded the whole multitude to go out, 
saving the twelve men which said that he was not born of forni- 
cation, and he commanded Jesus to be set apart: and Pilate 
saith unto them: For what cause do they desire to put him to 
death? They say unto Pilate: They have jealousy, because he 
healeth on the sabbath day. Pilate saith: For a good work do 
they desire to put him to death? They say unto him: Yea. 


Iil 


1 And Pilate was filled with indignation and went forth 
without the judgement hall and saith unto them: I call the Sun 
to witness that I find no fault in this man. The Jews answered 
and said to the governor: If this man were not a malefactor we 
would not have delivered him unto thee. And Pilate said: Take 
ye him and judge him according to your law. The Jews said unto 
Pilate: It is not lawful for us to put any man to death. Pilate 
said: Hath God forbidden you to slay, and allowed me? 

2 And Pilate went in again into the judgement hall and called 
Jesus apart and said unto him: Art thou the King of the Jews? 
Jesus answered and said to Pilate: Sayest thou this thing of 
thyself, or did others tell it thee of me? Pilate answered Jesus: 
Am I also a Jew? thine own nation and the chief priests have 
delivered thee unto me: what hast thou done? Jesus answered : 
My kingdom is not of this world; for if my kingdom were of this 


100 PASSION GOSPELS 


world, my servants would have striven that I should not be 
delivered to the Jews: but now is my kingdom not from hence. 
Pilate said unto him: Art thou a king, then? Jesus answered 
him: Thou sayest that Iam aking; for for this cause was I born 
and am come, that every one that is of the truth should hear my 
voice. Pilate saith unto him: What is truth? Jesus saith unto 
him: Truth is of heaven. Pilate saith: Is there not truth upon 
earth? Jesus saith unto Pilate: Thou seest how that they which 
speak the truth are judged of them that have authority upon 
earth. 


IV 


1 And Pilate left Jesus in the judgement hall and went forth to 
the Jews and said unto them: I find no fault in him. The Jews 
say unto him: This man said: I am able to destroy this temple 
and in three days to build it up. Pilate saith: What temple? 
The Jews say: That which Solomon built in forty and six years, 
but which this man saith he will destroy and build it in three 
days. Pilate saith unto them: I am guiltless of the blood of this 
just man: see ye toit. The Jews say: His blood be upon us and 
on our children. 

2 And Pilate called the elders and the priests and Levites unto 
him and said to them secretly: Do not so: for there is nothing 
worthy of death whereof ye have accused him, for your accusation 
is concerning healing and profaning of the sabbath. The elders 
and the priests and Levites say: If a man blaspheme against 
Caesar, is he worthy of death or no? Pilate saith: He is worthy 
of death. The Jews say unto Pilate: If a man be worthy of 
death if he blaspheme against Caesar, this man hath blasphemed 
against God. 

3 Then the governor commanded all the Jews to go out from 
the judgement hall, and he called Jesus to him and saith unto 
him: What shall I do with thee? Jesus saith unto Pilate: Do 
as it hath been given thee. Pilate saith: How hath it been 
given? Jesus saith: Moses and the prophets did foretell concern- 
ing my death and rising again. Now the Jews inquired by stealth 
and heard, and they say unto Pilate: What needest thou to hear 
further of this blasphemy? Pilate saith unto the Jews: If this 
word be of blasphemy, take ye him for his blasphemy, and bring 
him into your synagogue and judge him according to your law. 
The Jews say unto Pilate: It is contained in our law, that if 
a man sin against a man, he is worthy to receive forty stripes 
save one: but he that blasphemeth against God, that he should 
be stoned with stoning. 

4 Pilate saith unto them: Take ye him and avenge yourselves 
of him in what manner ye will. The Jews say unto Pilate: We 
will ey he be crucified. Pilate saith: He deserveth not to be 
crucified. 


ACTS OF PILATE 102 


5 Now as the governor looked round about upon the multitude 
of the Jews which stood by, he beheld many of the Jews weeping, 
and said: Not all the multitude desire that he should be put to 
death. The elder of the Jews said: To this end have the whole 
multitude of us come hither, that he should be put to death. 
Pilate saith to the Jews: Wherefore should he die? The Jews 
said : Because he called himself the Son of God, and a king. 


Vv 


1 But a certain man, Nicodemus, a Jew, came and stood before 
the governor and said: I beseech thee, good (pious) lord, bid me 
speak a few words. Pilate saith: Say on. Nicodemus saith: 
I said unto the elders and the priests and Levites and unto all 
the multitude of the Jews in the synagogue: Wherefore contend 
ye with this man? This man doeth many and wonderful signs, 
which no man hath done, neither will do: let him alone and 
contrive not any evil against him: if the signs which he doeth 
are of God, they will stand, but if they be of men, they will come 
to nought. For verily Moses, when he was sent of God into 
Egypt did many signs, which God commanded him to do before 
Pharaoh, king of Egypt; and there were there certain men, 
servants of Pharaoh, Jannes and Jambres, and they also did 
signs not a few, of them which Moses did, and the Egyptians held 
them as gods, even Jannes and Jambres: and whereas the signs 
which they did were not of God, they perished and those also 
that believed on them. And now let this man go, for he is not 
worthy of death. 

2 The Jews say unto Nicodemus: Thou didst become his 
disciple and thou speakest on his behalf. Nicodemus saith unto 
them: Is the governor also become his disciple, that he speaketh 
on his behalf? did not Caesar appoint him unto this dignity ? 
And the Jews were raging and gnashing their teeth against 
Nicodemus. Pilate saith unto them: Wherefore gnash ye your 
teeth against him, whereas ye have heard the truth? The Jews 
say unto Nicodemus: Mayest thou receive his truth and his 
portion. Nicodemus saith: Amen, Amen: may I receive it as 
ye have said. 


VI 
1 Now one of the Jews came forward! and besought the 
governor that he might speak a word. The governor saith: If 
thou wilt say aught, speak on. And the Jew said: Thirty and 
eight years lay I on a bed in suffering of pains, and at the coming 
of Jesus many that were possessed and laid with divers diseases 


? ‘Came forward’, lit. ‘leaped’. The word is said to be technically 
used for the coming forward of a witness, 


102 PASSION GOSPELS 


were healed by him, and certain (faithful) young men took 
pity on me and carried me with my bed and brought me unto 
him; and when Jesus saw me he had compassion, and spake 
a word unto me: Take up thy bed and walk. And I took up 
my bed and walked. The Jews say unto Pilate: Ask of him what 
day it was whereon he was healed? <Pilate said unto him that 
was healed of his sickness: Tell me truly what day it was whereon 
he healed thee. Copt. only.» He that was healed saith: On the 
sabbath. The Jews say: Did we not inform thee so, that upon 
the sabbath he healeth and casteth out devils? 

2 And another Jew came forward and said:! I was born blind: 
I heard words but I saw no man’s face: and as Jesus passed by 
I cried with a loud voice: Have mercy on me, O son of David. 
And he took pity on me and put his hands upon mine eyes and 
I received sight immediately.” 

And another Jew came forward and said: I was bowed and 
he made me straight with a word. And another said: I was 
a leper, and he healed me with a word. 


Vil 


And a certain woman named Bernice (Beronice Copt., Veronica 
Lat.) crying out from afar off said: I had an issue of blood and 
{ touched the hem of his garment, and the flowing of my blood 
was stayed which I had twelve years. The Jews say: We have 
a law that a woman shall not come to give testimony. 


VItl 


And certain others, even a multitude both of men and women, 
cried out, saying: This man is a prophet and the devils are 
subject unto him. Pilate saith to them which said: The devils 
are subject unto him: Wherefore were not your teachers also 
subject unto him? They say unto Pilate: We know not. Others 
also said: He raised up Lazarus which was dead out of his tomb 
after four days. And the governor was afraid and said unto all 


ie Shen es of the Jews: Wherefore will ye shed innocent 
ood ? 


IX 


1 And he called unto him Nicodemus and those twelve men 
which said that he was not born of fornication, and said unto 
them: What shall I do, for there riseth sedition among the 


+ MS. J has, ‘Another said with tears’. 
* After the blind man, MS. J has, ‘Another, a dumb man, said: 


I was without speech and he touched my tongue and immediately 
I was bealed.’ 


ACTS OF PILATE 108 


people? They say unto him: We know not; let them see to it. 
Again Pilate called for all the multitude of the Jews and saith: 
Ye know that ye have a custom that at the feast of unleavened 
bread I should release unto you a prisoner. Now I have a 
prisoner under condemnation in the prison, a murderer, Barabbas 
by name, and this Jesus also which standeth before you, in whom 
I find no fault: Whom will ye that I release unto you? But 
they cried out: Barabbas. Pilate saith: What shall I do then 
with Jesus who is called Christ? The Jews say: Let him be 
crucified. But certain of the Jews answered: Thou art not a 
friend of Caesar’s if thou let this man go; for he called himself 
the Son of God and a king: thou wilt therefore have him for 
king and not Caesar. 

2 And Pilate was wroth and said unto the Jews: Your nation 
is alway seditious and ye rebel against your benefactors. The 
Jews say: Against what benefactors? Pilate saith: According 
as I have heard, your God brought you out of Egypt out of hard 
bondage, and led you safe through the sea as by dry land, and 
in the wilderness he nourished you with manna and gave you 
quails, and gave you water to drink out of a rock, and gave 
unto you a law. And in all these things ye provoked your 
God to anger, and sought out a molten calf, and angered your 
God and he sought to slay you: and Moses made supplication 
for you and ye were not put to death. And now ye do accuse 
me that I hate the king (emperor). 8 And he rose up from the 
judgment-seat and sought to go forth. And the Jews cried out, 
saying: We know our king, even Caesar and not Jesus. For 
indeed the wise men brought gifts from the east unto him as 
unto a king, and when Herod heard from the wise men that 
a king was born, he sought to slay him; and when his father 
Joseph knew that, he took him and his mother and they fled 
into Egypt. And when Herod heard it he destroyed the children 
of the Hebrews that were born in Bethlehem. 

4 And when Pilate heard these words he was afraid. And 
Pilate silenced the multitude, because they cried still, and said 
unto them: So, then, this is he whom Herod sought? The Jews 
say: Yea, this is he. And Pilate took water and washed his 
hands before the sun, saying: I am innocent of the blood of this 
just man: see ye to it. Again the Jews cried out: His blood 
be upon us and upon our children. 

5 Then Pilate commanded the veil to be drawn before the 
judgement-seat whereon he sat, and saith unto Jesus: Thy nation 
hath convicted thee (accused thee) as being a king: therefore 
have I decreed that thou shouldest first be scourged according to 
the law of the pious emperors, and thereafter hanged upon the 
cross in the garden wherein thou wast taken: and let Dysmas and 
Gestas the two malefactors be crucified with thee. 


104 PASSION GOSPELS 


x 


1 And Jesus went forth of the judgement hall and the two 
malefactors with him. And when they were come to the place 
they stripped him of his garments and girt him with a linen cloth 
and put a crown of thorns about his head: likewise also they 
hanged up the two malefactors.1_ But Jesus said: Father, for- 
give them, for they know not what they do. And the soldiers 
divided his garments among them. 7 

And the people stood looking upon him, and the chief priests 
and the rulers with them derided him, saying: He saved others, 
let him save himself: if he be the son of God [let him come 
down from the cross]. And the soldiers also mocked him, coming 
and offering him vinegar with gall; and they said: If thou be 
the King of the Jews, save thyself. 

And Pilate after the sentence commanded his accusation to 
be written for a title in letters of Greek and Latin and Hebrew, 
according to the saying of the Jews: that he was the King of the 
Jews. 

2 And one of the malefactors that were hanged [by name 
Gestas] spake unto him, saying: If thou be the Christ, save 
thyself, and us. But Dysmas answering rebuked him, saying: 
Dost thou not at all fear God, seeing thou art in the same con- 
demnation? and we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward 
of our deeds; but this man hath done nothing amiss. And he 
said unto Jesus: Remember me, Lord, in thy kingdom. And 
Jesus said unto him: Verily, verily, I say unto thee, that to-day 
thou shalt be (art) with me in paradise. 


XI 


1 And it was about the sixth hour, and there was darkness 
over the land until the ninth hour, for the sun was darkened: 
and the veil of the temple was rent asunder in the midst. And 
Jesus called with a loud voice and said: Father, baddach ephkid 
rouel,* which is interpreted: Into thy hands I commend my 
spirit. And having thus said he gave up the ghost. And when 
the centurion saw what was done, he glorified God, saying: 
This man was righteous. And all the multitudes that had come 


* Coptic, Latin, and others have, ‘Dysmas on the right and Gestas 
on the left’. MS. J has, ‘Gestas on the right and Dysmas on the 
left’, and makes Gestas the penitent thief. There is some evidence 
supporting this in the original story: Dumachus in the Arabic gospel 
is the bad thief, Titus the good one. But the view that Dysmas was 
the good one has prevailed. 

* A Coptic fragment has: ‘Father, Abi (= my Father), Adach 
Ephkidrou, Adonai Aroa, Sabel, Louel, Eloei, Elemas, Abakdanei 
(Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani), Orioth, Mioth, Ouaath, Soun, Perineth, 
Tothat. The prayer of the Saviour upon the cross concerning Adam,’ 


ACTS OF PILATE 105 


to the sight, when they beheld what was done smote their 
breasts and returned. 

2 But the centurion reported unto the governor the things 
that had come to pass: and when the governor and his wife 
heard, they were sore vexed, and neither ate nor drank that 
day. And Pilate sent for the Jews and said unto them: Did ye 
see that which came to pass? But they said: There was an 
eclipse of the sun after the accustomed sort. 

3 And his acquaintance had stood afar off, and the women 
which came with him from Galilee, beholding these things. But 
a certain man named Joseph, being a counsellor, of the city of 
Arimathaea, who also himself looked for the kingdom of God, 
this man went to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus. And he 
took it down and wrapped it in a clean linen cloth and laid it 
in a hewn sepulchre wherein was never man yet laid. 


XII 

1 Now when the Jews heard that Joseph had begged the 
body of Jesus, they sought for him and for the twelve men 
which said that Jesus was not born of fornication, and for 
Nicodemus and many others which had come forth before Pilate 
and declared his good works. But all they hid themselves, and 
Nicodemus only was seen of them, for he was a ruler of the Jews. 
And Nicodemus said unto them: How came ye into the syna- 
gogue? The Jews say unto him: How didst thou come into 
the synagogue? for thou art confederate with him, and his 
portion shall be with thee in the life to come. Nicodemus saith: 
Amen, Amen. Likewise Joseph also came forth and said unto 
them: Why is it that ye are vexed against me, for that I begged 
the body of Jesus? behold I have laid it in my new tomb, having 
wrapped it in clean linen, and I rolled a stone over the door of 
the cave. And ye have not dealt well with the just one, for ye 
repented not when ye had crucified him, but ye also pierced him 
with a spear. 

But the Jews took hold on Joseph and commanded him to 
be put in safeguard until the first day of the week: and they 
said unto him: Know thou that the time alloweth us not to 
do anything against thee, because the sabbath dawneth: but 
know that thou shalt not obtain burial, but we will give thy 
flesh unto the fowls of the heaven. Joseph saith unto them: 
This is the word of Goliath the boastful which reproached the 
living God and the holy David. For God said by the prophet: 
Vengeance is mine, and I will recompense, saith the Lord. And 
now, lo, one that was uncircumcised, but circumcised in heart, 
took water and washed his hands before the sun, saying: I am 
innocent of the blood of this just person: see ye to it. And ye 
answered Pilate and said: His blood be upon us and upon our 


106 PASSION GOSPELS 


children. And now I fear lest the wrath of the Lord come upon 
you and upon your children, as ye have said. But when the 
Jews heard these words they waxed bitter in soul, and caught 
hold on Joseph and took him and shut him up in an house wherein 
was no window, and guards were set at the door: and they sealed 
the door of the place where Joseph was shut up.* 

2 And upon the sabbath day the rulers of the synagogue and 
the priests and the Levites made an ordinance that all men 
should appear in the synagogue on the first day of the week. 
And all the multitude rose up early and took council in the 
synagogue by what death they should kill him. And when the 
council was set they commanded him to be brought with great 
dishonour. And when they had opened the door they found 
him not. And all the people were beside themselves and 
amazed, because they found the seals closed, and Caiaphas had 
the key. And they durst not any more lay hands upon them 
that had spoken in the behalf of Jesus before Pilate. 


XII 

1 And while they yet sat in the synagogue and marvelled 
because of Joseph, there came certain of the guard which the 
Jews had asked of Pilate to keep the sepulchre of Jesus lest 
peradventure his disciples should come and steal him away. 
And they spake and declared unto the rulers of the synagogue 
and the priests and the Levites that which had come to pass: 
how that there was a great earthquake, and we saw an angel 
descend from heaven, and he rolled away the stone from the 
mouth of the cave, and sat upon it. And he did shine like snow 
and like lightning, and we were sore afraid and lay as dead men. 
And we heard the voice of the angel speaking with the women 
which waited at the sepulchre, saying: Fear ye not: for I know 
that ye seek Jesus which was crucified. He is not here: he is 
risen, as he said. Come, see the place where the Lord lay, and 
go quickly and say unto his disciples that he is risen from the 
dead, and is in Galilee. 

2 The Jews say: With what women spake he? They of the 
guard say: We know not who they were. The Jews say: At 
what hour was it? They of the guard say: At midnight. The 
Jews say: And wherefore did ye not take the women? They of 
the guard say: We were become as dead men through fear, and 
we looked not to see the light of the day; how then could we 
take them? The Jews say: As the Lord liveth, we believe you 
not. They of the guard say unto the Jews: So many signs saw 
ye in that man, and ye believed not, how then should ye believe 
us? verily ye sware rightly ‘as the Lord liveth’, for he liveth 


* MS. J alone adds: ‘and sealed the door with the finger-ring of 
Caiaphas,’ 


ACTS OF PILATE 107 


indeed. Again they of the guard say: We have heard that ye 
shut up him that begged the body of Jesus, and that ye sealed 
the door; and when ye had opened it ye found him not. Give 
ye therefore Joseph and we will give you Jesus. The Jews say: 
Joseph is departed unto his own city. They of the guard say 
unto the Jews: Jesus also is risen, as we have heard of the 
angel, and he is in Galilee. 

38 And when the Jews heard these words they were sore 
afraid, saying: Take heed lest this report be heard and all 
men incline unto Jesus. And the Jews took counsel and laid 
down much money and gave it to the soldiers, saying: Say 
ye: While we slept his disciples came by night and stole him 
away. And if this come to the governor’s hearing we will per- 
suade him and secure you. And they took the money and did as 
they were instructed. [And this their saying was published 
abroad among all men. Lat.] 


XIV 


1 Now a certain priest named Phineés and Addas a teacher 
and Aggaeus (Ogias Copt., Egias Lat.) a Levite came down from 
Galilee unto Jerusalem and told the rulers of the synagogue and 
the priests and the Levites, saying: We saw Jesus and his 
disciples sitting upon the mountain which is called Mamilch 
(Mambre or Malech Lat., Mabrech Copt.), and he said unto his 
disciples: Go into all the world and preach unto every creature 
(the whole creation): he that believeth and is baptized shall be 
saved, but he that disbelieveth shall be condemned. [And 
these signs shall follow upon them that believe: in my name they 
shall cast out devils, they shall speak with new tongues, they 
shall take up serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing it shall 
not hurt them: they shall lay hands upon the sick and they 
shall recover.] And while Jesus yet spake unto his disciples we 
saw him taken up into heaven. 

2 The elders and the priests and Levites say: Give glory to 
the God of Israel and make confession unto him: did ye indeed 
(or that ye did) hear and see those things which ye have told 
us? They that told them say: As the Lord God of our fathers 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob liveth, we did hear these things 
and we saw him taken up into heaven. The elders and the priests 
and the Levites say unto them: Came ye for this end, that ye 
might tell us, or came ye to pay your vows unto God? And they 
say: To pay our vows unto God. The elders and the chief priests 
and the Levites say unto them: If ye came to pay your vows 
unto God, to what purpose is this idle tale which ye have babbled 
before all the people? Phineés the priest and Addas the teacher 
and Aggaeus the Levite say unto the rulers of the synagogue 


108 PASSION GOSPELS 


and priests and Levites: If these words which we have spoken 
and seen be sin, lo, we are before you: do unto us as seemeth 
good in your eyes. And they took the book of the law and 
adjured them that they should no more tell any man these 
words: and they gave them to eat and to drink, and put them 
out of the city: moreover they gave them money, and three 
men to go with them, and they set them on their way as far as 
Galilee, and they departed in peace. ; 

3 Now when these men were departed into Galilee, the chief 
priests and the rulers of the synagogue and the elders gathered 
together in the synagogue, and shut the gate, and lamented with 
a great lamentation, saying: What is this sign which is come to 
pass in Israel? But Annas and Caiaphas said: Wherefore are 
ye troubled? why weep ye? Know ye not that his disciples 
gave much gold unto them that kept the sepulchre and taught 
them to say that an angel came down and rolled away the stone 
from the door of the sepulchre? But the priests and the elders 
said : Be it so, that his disciples did steal away his body ; but how 
is his soul entered into his body, and how abideth he in Galilee ? 
But they could not answer these things, and hardly in the end 
said: It is not lawful for us to believe the uncircumcised. [Lat. 
(and Copt., and Arm.) : Ought we to believe the soldiers, that an 
angel came down from heaven and rolled away the stone from the 
door of the sepulchre? but in truth his disciples gave . . . sepulchre. 
Know ye not that it is not lawful for Jews to believe any word of 
the uncircumcised, knowing that they who received much gold 
from us have spoken according as we taught them.] 


XV 


1 And Nicodemus rose up and stood before the council, 
saying: Ye say well. Know ye not, O people of the Lord, the 
men that came down out of Galilee, that they fear God and are 
men of substance, hating covetousness (a lie, Lat.), men of peace? 
And they have told you with an oath, saying: We saw Jesus 
upon the mount Mamilch with his disciples and that he taught 
them all things that ye heard of them, and, say they, we saw him 
taken up into heaven. And no man asked them in what manner 
he was taken up. For like as the book of the holy scriptures 
hath taught us that Elias also was taken up into heaven, and 
Kliseus cried out with a loud voice, and Elias cast his hairy cloak 
upon Kliseus, and Eliseus cast the cloak upon Jordan and passed 
over and went unto Jericho. And the sons of the prophets met 
him and said: Eliseus, where is thy lord Elias? and he said that 
he was taken up into heaven. And they said unto Eliseus: Hath 
not a spirit caught him up and cast him upon one of the moun- 
tains? but let us take our servants with us and seek after him. 
And they persuaded Eliseus and he went with them, and they 


ACTS OF PILATE 109 


sought him three days and found him not: and they knew that 
he had been taken up. And now hearken unto me, and let us 
send into all the coasts (al. mountains) of Israel and see whether 
the Christ were not taken up by a spirit and cast upon one of 
the mountains. And this saying pleased them all: and they 
sent into all the coasts (mountains, Lat.) and sought Jesus and 
found him not. But they found Joseph in Arimathaea, and no 
man durst lay hands upon him. 

2 And they told the elders and the priests and the Levites, 
saying: We went about throughout all the coasts of Israel, and 
we found not Jesus; but Joseph we found in Arimathaea. 

And when they heard of Joseph they rejoiced and gave glory 
to the God of Israel. And the rulers of the synagogue and the 
priests and the Levites took counsel how they should meet with 
Joseph, and they took a volume of paper and wrote unto Joseph 
these words: 

Peace be unto thee. We know that we have sinned against 
God and against thee, and we have prayed unto the God of 
Israel that thou shouldest vouchsafe to come unto thy fathers 
and unto thy children (Lat. But thou didst pray unto the God 
of Israel, and he delivered thee out of our hands. Now therefore 
vouchsafe, &c.) for we are all troubled, because when we opened the 
door we found thee not: and we know that we devised an evil 
counsel against thee, but the Lord helped thee. And the Lord 
himself made of none effect (scattered) our counsel against thee, 
O father Joseph, thou that art honourable among all the people. 

8 And they chose out of all Israel seven men that were friends 
of Joseph, whom Joseph also himself accounted his friends, and 
the rulers of the synagogue and the priests and the Levites said 
unto them: See: if he receive our epistle and read it, know that 
he will come with you unto us: but if he read it not, know that 
he is vexed with us, and salute ye him in peace and return unto 
us. And they blessed the men and let them go. 

And the men came unto Joseph and did him reverence, and 
said unto him: Peace be unto thee. And he said: Peace be 
unto you and unto all the people of Israel. And they gave him 
the book of the epistle, and Joseph received it and read it and 
embraced (or kissed) the epistle and blessed God and said: 
Blessed be the Lord God, which hath redeemed Israel from 
shedding innocent blood; and blessed be the Lord, which sent 
his angel and sheltered me under his wings. (And he kissed them) 
and set a table before them, and they did eat and drink and 
lay there. 

4 And they rose up early and prayed: and Joseph saddled 
his she-ass and went with the men, and they came unto the 
holy city, even Jerusalem. And all the people came to meet 
Joseph and cried: Peace be to thine entering-in. And he said 
unto all the people: Peace be unto you, and all the people 


110 PASSION GOSPELS 


kissed him. And the people prayed with Joseph, and they were 
astonished at the sight of him. 

And Nicodemus received him into his house and made a great 
feast, and called Annas and Caiaphas and the elders and the 
priests and the Levites unto his house. And they made merry, 
eating and drinking with Joseph. And when they had sung an 
hymn (or blessed God) every man went unto his house. But 
Joseph abode in the house of Nicodemus. 

5 And on the morrow, which was the preparation, the rulers 
of the synagogue and the priests and the Levites rose up early 
and came to the house of Nicodemus, and Nicodemus met them 
and said: Peace be unto you. And they said: Peace be unto thee 
and to Joseph and unto all thy house and to all the house of 
Joseph. And he brought them into his house. And the whole 
council was set, and Joseph sat between Annas and Caiaphas; 
and no man durst speak unto him a word. And Joseph said: 
Why is it that ye have called me? And they beckoned unto 
Nicodemus that he should speak unto Joseph. And Nicodemus 
opened his mouth and said unto Joseph: Father, thou knowest 
that the reverend doctors and the priests and the Levites seek 
to learn a matter of thee. And Joseph said: Inquire ye. And 
Annas and Caiaphas took the book of the law and adjured Joseph, 
saying: Give glory to the God of Israel and make confession 
unto him: [for Achar, when he was adjured of the prophet Jesus 
(Joshua), forsware not himself but declared unto him all things, 
and hid not a word from him: thou therefore also hide not from 
us so much as a word. And Joseph: I will not hide one word 
from you.|! And they said unto him: We were greatly vexed 
because thou didst beg the body of Jesus and wrappedst it in 
a clean linen cloth and didst lay him in a tomb. And for this 
cause we put thee in safeguard in an house wherein was no 
window, and we put keys and seals upon the doors, and guards 
did keep the place wherein thou wast shut up. And on the 
first day of the week we opened it and found thee not, and we 
were sore troubled, and amazement fell upon all the people of 
the Lord until yesterday. Now, therefore, declare unto us what 
befell thee. 

6 And Joseph said: On the preparation day about the tenth 
hour ye did shut me up, and I continued there the whole sabbath. 
And at midnight as I stood and prayed the house wherein ye 
shut me up was taken up by the four corners, and I saw as it 
were a flashing of light in mine eyes, and being filled with fear 
I fell to the earth. And one took me by the hand and removed 
me from the place whereon I had fallen; and moisture of water 
was shed on me from my head unto my feet, and an odour of 
ointment came about my nostrils. And he wiped my face and 
kissed me and said unto me: Fear not, Joseph: open thine eyes 


2 om. Latt., Arm. 


ACTS OF PILATE lll 


and see who it is that speaketh with thee. And I looked up and 
saw Jesus and I trembled, and supposed that it was a spirit: and 
I said the commandments: and he said them with me. And 
{as}? ye are not ignorant that a spirit, if it meet any man and 
hear the commandments, straightway fleeth. And when I per- 
ceived that he said them with me, I said unto him: Rabbi Elias? 
And he said unto me: I am not Elias. And I said unto him: 
Who art thou, Lord? And he said unto me: I am Jesus, whose 
body thou didst beg of Pilate, and didst clothe me in clean linen 
and cover my face with a napkin, and lay me in thy new cave 
and roll a great stone upon the door of the cave. And I said to 
him that spake with me: Show me the place where I laid thee. 
And he brought me and showed me the place where I laid him, 
and the linen cloth lay therein, and the napkin that was upon his 
face. And I knew that it was Jesus. And he took me by the 
hand and set me in the midst of mine house, the doors being 
shut, and laid me upon my bed and said unto me: Peace be unto 
thee. And he kissed me and said unto me: Until forty days 
be ended go not out of thine house: for behold I go unto my 
brethren into Galilee. 


XVI 


1 And when the rulers of the synagogue and the priests and 
the Levites heard these words of Joseph they became as dead 
men and fell to the ground, and they fasted until the ninth hour. 
And Nicodemus with Joseph comforted Annas and Caiaphas and 
the priests and the Levites, saying: Rise up and stand on your 
feet and taste bread and strengthen your souls, for to-morrow 
is the sabbath of the Lord. And they rose up and prayed unto 
God and did eat and drink, and departed every man to his house. 

2 And on the sabbath the (al. our) teachers and the priests 
and Levites sat and questioned one another and said: What is 
this wrath that is come upon us? for we know his father and his 
mother. Levi the teacher saith: I know that his parents feared 
God and kept not back their vows and paid tithes three times a 
year. And when Jesus was born, his parents brought him up 
unto this place and gave sacrifices and burnt-offerings to God. 
And [when] the great teacher Symeon took him into his arms 
and said: Now lettest thou thy servant, Lord, depart in peace, 
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation which thou hast prepared 
before the face of all peoples, a light to lighten the Gentiles and 
the glory of thy people Israel. And Symeon blessed them and 
said unto Mary his mother: I give thee good tidings concerning 
this child. And Mary said: Good, my lord? And Symeon said 
to her: Good. Behold, he is set for the fall and rising again of 
many in Israel, and for a sign spoken against: and a sword shall 


1 om. Lait. 


112 PASSION GOSPELS 


pierce through thine own heart also, that the thoughts of many 
hearts may be revealed. 

3 They say unto Levi the teacher: How knowest thou these 
things? Levi saith unto them: Know ye not that from him 
I did learn the law? The council say unto him: We would see 
thy father: And they sent after his father, and asked of him, 
and he said to them: Why believed ye not my son? the blessed 
and righteous Symeon, he did teach him the law. The council 
saith: Rabbi Levi, is the word true which thou hast spoken? 
And he said: It is true. 

Then the rulers of the synagogue and the priests and the 
Levites said among themselves: Come, let us send into Galilee 
unto the three men which came and told us of his teaching and 
his taking-up, and let them tell us how they saw him taken up. 
And this word pleased them all, and they sent the three men 
which before had gone with them into Galilee and said to them: 
Say unto Rabbi Addas and Rabbi Phineés and Rabbi Aggaeus: 
peace be to you and to all that are with you. Inasmuch as 
great questioning hath arisen in the council, we have sent unto 
you to call you unto this holy place of Jerusalem. 

4 And the men went into Galilee and found them sitting and 
meditating upon the law, and saluted them in peace. And the 
men that were in Galilee said unto them that were come to them: 
Peace be upon all Israel. And they said: Peace be unto you. 
Again they said unto them: Wherefore are ye come? And they 
that were sent said: The council calleth you unto the holy city 
Jerusalem. And when the men heard that they were bidden by 
the council, they prayed to God and sat down to meat with the 
men and did eat and drink, and rose up and came in peace unto 
Jerusalem. 

5 And on the morrow the council was set in the synagogue, 
and they examined them, saying: Did ye in very deed see Jesus 
sitting upon the mount Mamilch, as he taught his eleven disciples, 
and saw ye him taken up? And the men answered them and 
said: Even as we saw him taken up, even so did we tell it unto you. 

6 Annas saith: Set them apart from one another, and let us 
see if their word agreeth. And they set them apart one from 
another, and they call Addas first and say unto him: How sawest 
thou Jesus taken up? Addas saith: While he yet sat upon the 
Mount Mamilch and taught his disciples, we saw a cloud that 
overshadowed him and his disciples: and the cloud carried him 
up into heaven, and his disciples lay (al. prayed, lying) on their 
faces upon the earth. And they called Phineés the priest, and 
questioned him also, saying: How sawest thou Jesus taken up? 
And he spake in like manner. And again they asked Aggaeus, 
and he also spake in like manner. And the council said: It is 


contained in the law of Moses: At the mouth of two or three 
shall every word be established. 


ACTS OF PILATE 113 


Abuthem (Bouthem Gr., Abudem Lat., Abuden, Abuthen 4rm., 
om. Copt.) the teacher saith: It is written in the law: Enoch 
walked with God and is not, because God took him. Jaeirus the 
teacher said: Also we have heard of the death of the holy Moses, 
and have not seen him; for it is written in the law of the Lord: 
And Moses died at the mouth of the Lord, and no man knew of 
his sepulchre unto this day. And Rabbi Levi said: Wherefore 
was it that Rabbi Symeon said when he saw Jesus: Behold, this 
child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel and for 
a sign spoken against? And Rabbi Isaac said: It is written in 
the law: Behold I send my messenger before thy face, which 
shall go before thee to keep thee in every good way, for my 
name is named thereon.! 

7 Then said Annas and Caiaphas: Ye have well said those 
things which are written in the law of Moses, that no man saw 
the death of Enoch, and no man hath named the death of Moses. 
But Jesus spake before Pilate, and we know that we saw him 
receive buffets and spittings upon his face, and that the soldiers 
put on him a crown of thorns, and that he was scourged and 
received condemnation from Pilate, and that he was crucified at 
the place of a skull and two thieves with him, and that they gave 
him vinegar to drink with gall, and that Longinus the soldier 
pierced his side with a spear, and that Joseph our honourable 
father begged his body, and that, as he saith, he rose again, and 
that (lit. as) the three teachers say : We saw him taken up into 
heaven, and that Rabbi Levi spake and testified to the things 
which were spoken by Rabbi Symeon, and that he said: Behold 
this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel and 
for a sign spoken against. 

And all the teachers said unto all the people of the Lord: If 
this hath come to pass from the Lord, and it is marvellous in our 
eyes, ye shall surely know, O house of Jacob, that it is written: 
Cursed is every one that hangeth upon a tree. And another 
scripture teacheth: The gods which made not the heaven and 
the earth shall perish. 

And the priests and the Levites said one to another: If his 
memorial endure until the Sommos (Copt. Soum) which is called 
Jobel (i. e. the Jubilee), know ye that he will prevail for ever and 
raise up for himself a new people. 

Then the rulers of the synagogue and the priests and the 
Levites admonished all Israel, saying: Cursed is that man who 
shall worship that which man’s hand hath made, and cursed is 
the man who shall worship creatures beside the Creator. And 
all the people said: Amen, Amen. . 

And ail the people sang an hymn unto the Lord and said: 
Blessed be the Lord who hath given rest unto the people of 

1 Copt. for my name is in thee. Lat. for I have brought the (a) 
new name thereof, (or his new name): corrupt. 


870 I 


114 PASSION GOSPELS 


Israel according to all that he spake. There hath not one word 
fallen to the ground of all his good saying which he spake unto 
his servant Moses. The Lord our God be with us as he was with 
our fathers: let him not forsake us. And let him not destroy us 
from turning our heart unto him, from walking in all his ways 
and keeping his statutes and his judgements which he commanded 
our fathers. And the Lord shall be King over all the earth in 
that day. And there shall be one Lord and his name one, even 
the Lord our King: he shall save us. 

There is none like unto thee, O Lord. Great art thou, O Lord, 
and great is thy name. 

Heal us, O Lord, by thy power, and we shall be healed: save 
us, Lord, and we shall be saved: for we are thy portion and 
thine inheritance. 

And the Lord will not forsake his people for his great name’s 
sake, for the Lord hath begun to make us to be his people. 

And when they had all sung this hymn they departed every 
man to his house, glorifying God. [For his is the glory, world 
without end. Amen.] 

There is a considerable divergence of the versions in the concluding 
sections. 


The Coptic agrees substantially with the Greek A as translated 
above. 


The Armenian 6 (rendered into Latin by Conybeare) has only two 
clauses of the final hymn, thus: 

Blessed be the Lord God who hath given rest unto all the 
people of Israel according as he hath said. And let the Lord our 
God be with us, as he was with our fathers. 

And they went every man to his house praising God. 

The Armenian a has (after ‘the people said Amen (thrice) ’). 

And all the people sang an hymn unto the Lord and departed 
every man to his house. 

The Syriac ends at: the people said Amen (thrice). 

The Latin, after ‘a sign spoken against’ has: 

Then the teacher (Addas) said unto all the congregation: 
If all the things which these have testified came to pass in 
Jerusalem (al. Jesus), they are of God, and let them not be 
marvellous in our eyes. The rulers of the synagogue and the 
priests and the Levites said one to another: It is contained in 
our law: His name shall be blessed for ever: his place shall 
endure before the sun and his seat before the moon: and in him 
shall all the tribes of the earth be blessed, and all nations shall 
serve him: and kings shall come from afar worshipping and 
magnifying him. 

The Greek recension B, which abridges the latter part of th 
(after the Crucifixion) very erences has this for its last eee 


Then Annas and Caiaphas separated the three by one and 


ACTS OF PILATE 118 


one, and questioned them in private singly. And they agreed, 
and the three of them told one tale. The chief priests answered 
and said: Our scripture saith that every word shall be established 
by two or three witnesses. Joseph therefore confessed that he 
tended him and buried him, with Nicodemus; and how it is true 
that he rose again. 

This leads on to the opening words of Part II: 

Joseph saith: And why marvel ye that Jesus is risen? &c. 

The fact is that the two forms (Greek B and Latin) which have the 
Second Part—the Descent into Hell—attached to them, have been 
obliged on that account to modify the end of the First Part, so as to 
manage a plausible transition. 


ACTS OF PILATE 
PART I. RECENSION B OF THE GREEK 


It has been said that this is a later working-over of the original 
text. No known copy of it is earlier than the fifteenth century, and 
the language in some of them is very mediaeval. A short review only 
of the principal additions to the story will be given here. 

The title runs thus: 

A narrative concerning the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
and his holy Resurrection. Written by a Jew named Aeneas, 
which Nicodemus, a Roman toparch, translated out of the Hebrew 
tongue into the Roman speech. 

In two copies there is this prologue: 

After the kingdom of the Hebrews was dissolved, and four 
hundred years had gone by, and the Hebrews also were subject 
to the empire of the Romans, the Emperor of the Romans 
appointing them aking: afterward, when Tiberius Caesar wielded 
the sceptre of the Romans, in the eighteenth year of his reign, 
when he had appointed Herod king in Judaea, the son of that 
Herod who aforetime killed the children in Bethlehem: and 
when he had Pilate as governor in Jerusalem, and Annas and 
Caiaphas had the high-priesthood of Jerusalem; Nicodemus, 
a Roman toparch, called unto him a Jew named Aeneas, and 
sought to record the things that were done in Jerusalem in the 
days of Annas and Caiaphas concerning Christ: which also the 
Jew having done and delivered it to Nicodemus, he translated 
these things from the Hebrew writing into the Roman speech: 
and the matter of this history is thus: 

(Where it will be noted that Nicodemus is no longer the Biblical 
personage, but a Roman official. Roman (Romaic) speech means here 
not Latin but Greek, and the term is an indication of very late date.) 

Cap. i begins: 

When our Lord Jesus Christ had wrought many and great and 
unwonted wonders in Judaea, and for that cause was envied by 


116 PASSION GOSPELS 


the Hebrews: Pilate being governor in Jerusalem, and Annas 
and Caiaphas being high priests: there came certain of the Jews 
unto the same high priests, even Judas, Levi, Nephthalim, Alex- 
ander, Syrus, and many others, speaking against Christ; whom 
also those high priests sent to tell Pilate also these things. 


The story follows the same lines as A, naturally, but with differences 
great and small; and the individual manuscripts often make large 
insertions. 

Pilate gives his own mantle (uavdvAvov) to the messenger, whom one 
manuscript calls Rachaab. 

The Hebrew words except Hosanna are eliminated: one manuscript 
then interpolates a notice of the call of the apostles and a great many 
of the miracles of the ministry, and brings the narrative down to the 
denial of Peter. Malchus, it says, was the one who buffeted Jesus. 

Another manuscript, omitting all that has preceded, begins the story 
with the repentance of Judas. He brings the money back to the priests, 
and they abuse him at some length for his treachery. Then he casts 
‘down the money and leaves them. 


And departing to his house to make a halter of rope to hang 
himself, he found his wife sitting and roasting a cock on a fire 
of coals or in a pan before eating it: and saith to her: Rise up, 
wife, and provide me a rope, for I would hang myself, as I deserve. 
But his wife said to him: Why sayest thou such things? And 
Judas saith to her: Know of a truth that I have wickedly 
betrayed my master Jesus to the evil-doers for Pilate to put him 
to death: but he will rise again on the third day, and woe unto 
us! And his wife said to him: Say not nor think not so: for as 
well as this cock that is roasting on the fire of coals can crow, 
just so well shall Jesus rise again, as thou sayest. And imme- 
diately at her word that cock spread his wings and crowed thrice. 
Then was Judas yet more convinced, and straightway made the 
halter of rope and hanged himself. 


The rest of the story is as we know it. 

This story of the cock has made its way into Latin and thence into 
many mediaeval vernacular legends. The Latin copies say that it is 
found ‘in the books of the Greeks’. 

In cap. ix the sending of Jesus to Herod is inserted: one of many 
harmonistic changes which this text makes, to include all that is told 
in the canonical Gospels. 

In cap. x the Bearing of the Cross is greatly amplified. We have 
first of all Simon of Cyrene: ‘They gave the cross unto him, not 
because they had compassion on Jesus and would lighten him of his 
burden, but desiring, as has been said, to kill him more quickly.’ John 
followed with them, and then fled and went to the Mother of God 
{always called the Theotokos here) and told her. Her lament is given— 
and she and Martha and Mary Magdalene and Salome and the other 
women go to the place. John points out Jesus and the Virgin swoons 
and laments again, These lamentations are greatly expanded in one 
or other of the manuscripts. Dysmas is crucified on the right hand 


ACTS OF PILATE ll? 


and Gestas on the left. At the end of cap. x, where the words of the 
thieves are narrated, two of the three manuscripts used by Tischendorf 
insert the story of the meeting with Dysmas in Egypt. First we have 
the incident of the palm-tree bowing to give its fruit. Then the Holy 
Family meet Dysmas, who is struck with the beauty of Mary and of 
the child in her arms, adores them, and says, ‘If God had a mother 
I would have said that thou art she’. He receives them into his house, 
and when he goes out hunting commends them to his wife’s care. 
He has a leprous child who is always crying, and is healed by the water 
in which Jesus was washed. Dysmas hearing of this on his return 
is moved to do all he can to help Mary: and on the return from Egypt 
he aids them again, and Mary promises him a reward for his goodness. 
‘Therefore was he accounted worthy through the grace of the merciful 
God and his Mother ... to bear witness upon the cross together with 
Christ.’ ? 

In cap. xi the episode of Joseph’s begging the body is expanded. 
The Virgin, in one copy, asks him to do this. In another he goes to 
Nicodemus, who will not accompany him to Pilate but is ready to help 
in the burial. There is a long address of Joseph to Pilate, every clause 
beginning with ‘Give me this stranger’. 

At the burial there is a final lamentation of the Virgin and one of 
Mary Magdalene, who says: ‘Who shall make this known unto all 
the world? I will go alone to Rome unto Caesar: I will show him 
what evil Pilate hath done, consenting unto the wicked Jews.’ This. 
story of Mary Magdalene’s going to Rome is one which appears in 
Byzantine chronicles and other late documents. 

In cap. xii two of the copies mark a conclusion after the sealing of 
the tomb. In fact one of them actually ends here: the other has a 
doxology and colophon, but continues with xii. 2, ‘When the Lord’s. 
day dawned the chief priests took counsel’, &c. 

The remaining chapters, xiii-xvi, are most drastically abridged, 
containing 147 lines of print as against 333 of recension A. The con- 
cluding paragraph has been translated above, and the text runs on, 
as is there shown, into Part II, the Descent into Hell. Among the 
variations from the A narrative, of which the object is not clear, is. 
this, that the three witnesses of the Ascension are here called ‘a priest 
named Phineés, a Levite named Aggaeus, and a soldier named Adas’. 


ACTS OF PILATE 
PART II. THE DESCENT INTO HELL 


This writing, or the nucleus of it, the story of the Descent into Hell, 
was not originally part of the Acts of Pilate. It is—apart from its. 
setting—probably an older document. When it was first attached to 
the Acts of Pilate is uncertain. The object of this prefatory note is 
to say that we have the text in three forms. 

1 See further on the Arabic Gospel, ch. xxiii, and note that the Vita 
Rhythmica (which draws on late Greek sources) has at 1. 2234 a story 
of the Holy Family being captured by robbers, one of whom treats 
them kindly. Wounded robbers are healed by the water in which 
Jesus was washed. 


118 


PASSION GOSPELS 


1. Greek, only in late manuscripts of Recension B. Tischendorf 
used three. 

2. Latin A, found in the majority, perhaps, of the Latin manuscripts. 
Be it noted that all the Latin manuscripts have both parts of the 
Acts of Pilate. 

3. Latin B, rather an abridged text in the account of the Descent, 
differing in order of contents and in setting from A. But the opening 
section is far longer than either of the others. 


There are no early versions except the Latin. 
and Armenian contain Part I only. 


The Coptic, Syriac, 


The order of the story in the three recensions demands a note. 
Latin A and Greek go together. 


iii. 


vii. 


Vili. 


Ale 


i. The story. 


. The two men (nameless in 
Greek) are found and in- 
duced to write their story. 

A light shines 

in Hell. Adam, Esaias, 

Simeon speak (not in B). 

(In Greek, Abraham and 


Ksaias.) John Baptist 
comes. 

Seth’s story of the oil of 
mercy. 


. Satan’s dialogue with Hell. 


. First cry: Lift up the gates. 


David and Isaiah speak. 
Second cry. David speaks. 
Christ enters. (Greek, 
David speaks only once.) 


i. Address of Hell to Christ 


(not in B). Satan bound. 
Hell derides Satan. 


Christ greets Adam and takes 
all saints out of hell. 
David, Habacuc, Micheas 
speak (not in B). (Greek 
omits the prophecies.) 

. They meet Enoch and Elias 

(not in B.). 
. They meet the thief. 


. Conclusion. 
The two men vanish, &c. 


i. 


ii. 


vii. 


viii. 


. Christ greets 


Latin B differs. 


The two men are found, 
write their story, and re- 
turn to their tombs. 

The story. A light shines. 
A voice: Lift up the gates. 
Satan has the doors se- 
cured. 


iii. Dialogue of Hell and Satan 


(A. iv). 

Seth’s story. 

Isaiah and John Baptist 
(A. ii). 


David and Jeremiah. Satan 
not allowed to leave hell. 
Cry: Lift up the gates. 
The good thief appears 
(A. x). Second cry. 

Doors broken. Christ enters. 
Satan bound. 


Adam 
Eve (not in A). 

Sets up his cross in hell (not 
in A). Leaves hell. Con- 
clusion. 


and 


In order to place the material fairly before readers it seems necessary 


to give all three texts. 


Here the Greek, which, like the rest of Recen- 


sion B, is of late type, shall be relegated to the second place, and 
preference given to Latin A, The chapter- and verse-numberings are 


tho 


se of 'Tischendorf. 


ACTS OF PILATE 119 


Latin A. 


[Part I, cap. xvi, ends with words of the rulers of the synagogue, 
&c. All nations shall serve him, and kings shall come from afar 
worshipping and magnifying him. Part II, cap. i, runs on 
from this.] 

I (XVII) 

1 And Joseph arose and said unto Annas and Caiaphas: Truly 
and of right do ye marvel because ye have heard that Jesus 
hath been seen alive after death, and that he hath ascended into. 
heaven. Nevertheless it is more marvellous that he rose not 
alone from the dead, but did raise up alive many other dead out 


Greek. I (XVII) 


[Part I ends in this text with words of the priests: Our scripture 
saith that every word shall be established at the mouths of two 
or three. Joseph therefore doth confess that he tended him 
and buried him, and how that it is true that he rose again.] 

(Part II.) 1 Joseph saith: And why marvel ye that Jesus rose 
again. This is not marvellous: but this is marvellous, that he 
rose not alone, but raised up many other dead men which appeared 


Latin B. I (XVII) 


1 Then Rabbi Addas and Rabbi Fineés and Rabbi Egias, even 
the three men which had come out of Galilee testifying that they 
had seen Jesus taken up into heaven, arose in the midst of the 
multitude of the chief men of the Jews, and said before the priests 
and Levites which were assembled unto the council of the Lord: 
As we came from Galilee unto Jordan, there met us a great 
multitude of men in white garments who had died aforetime. 
Among whom we beheld Karinus and Leucius to be present with 
them; and they came near unto us, and we kissed one another, 
for they were beloved friends of ours, and asked them, saying: 
Tell us, friends and brethren, what is this soul and flesh? and 
who are these with whom ye go? and how are ye which were 
dead remaining in the body. 

2 And they answered and said: We arose with Christ out of 
hell, and he raised us up from the dead. And hereby may ye 
_ know that the gates of death and darkness are destroyed, and 
the souls of the saints are taken out thence, and have ascended 
into heaven with Christ the Lord. But we also have been com- 
manded by the Lord himself that for a set time we should walk 
the banks of Jordan and the mountains, yet not being seen of 
all men, neither speaking with all men, but only with those with 
whom it shall please him. And even now we should not have 
been able to speak unto you or to be seen of you unless we had 
been suffered by the Holy Ghost. 

8 Now when all the multitude that were present in the council) 


120 PASSION GOSPELS 


Latin A. 


of their sepulchres, and they have been seen of many in Jeru 
salem. And now hearken unto me; for we all know the blessed 
Simeon, the high priest which received the child Jesus in his hands 
in the temple. And this Simeon had two sons, brothers in blood, 
and we all were at their falling asleep and at their burial. Go there- 
fore and look upon their sepulchres: for they are open, because 
they have risen, and behold they are in the city of Arimathaea 
dwelling together in prayer. And indeed men hear them crying 
out, yet they speak with no man, but are silent as dead men. 
But come, let us go unto them and with all honour and gentleness 


Greek. 


in Jerusalem unto many. And if ye know not the others, yet 
Simeon at least, which received Jesus, and his two sons, whom 
he hath raised up, these at least ye do know, for we buried them 
but a little while ago: and now their sepulchres are seen to be 
opened and empty, and they themselves are alive and dwelling 
in Arimathaea. They sent therefore men, and found their sepul- 


chres opened andempty. Joseph saith: Let us go unto Arimathaea 
and find them. 


Latin B. 


heard these things they were stricken with fear and trembling, 
and wondered, saying, Did these things truly come to pass which 
these men of Galilee testify? Then Caiaphas and Annas said 
unto the council: Now shall it be made plain concerning all the 
things which these have testified, both first and last: if it shall 
be found true that Karinus and Leucius do remain alive in the 
body, and if we are able to behold them with our eyes, then that 
is true in all points which these testify; and if we find them, they 
will assure us of all things: but if not, ye shall know that all are 
lying reports. 

4 Then they took counsel quickly, and it pleased them to 
choose out fit men fearing God, which knew when these men 
had died and the sepulchre where they were buried, and should 
inquire diligently and see if it were so as they had heard. There 
went therefore to the place fifteen men which had been present 
throughout at their falling asleep, and had stood on their feet in 
the place where they were buried, and had seen their sepulchres. 
And these came and found their sepulchres and many others 
open, and found not any sign of the bones or the dust of them: 
and they returned with all speed and reported the things which 
they had seen. 

5 Then was all their synagogue troubled with great sadness, 
and they said one to another: What shall we do? Annas and 
Caiaphas said: Let us send unto the place wherein we have 


ACTS OF PILATE 121 


Latin A. 


bring them unto us, and if we adjure them, perchance they will 
tell us concerning the mystery of their rising again. 

2 When they heard these things, they all rejoiced. And Annas 
and Caiaphas, Nicodemus and Joseph and Gamaliel went and 
found them not in their sepulchre, but they went unto the city 
of Arimathaea, and found them there, kneeling on their knees 
and giving themselves unto prayer. And they kissed them, and 
with all reverence and in the fear of God they brought them to 
Jerusalem into the synagogue. And they shut the doors and took 
the law of the Lord and put it into their hands, and adjured them 


Greek. 

2 Then rose up the chief priests Annas and Caiaphas, and 
Joseph and Nicodemus and Gamaliel and others with them, and 
went unto Arimathaea and found the men of whom Joseph spake. 
So they did offer prayer, and saluted one another: then they 
came with them to Jerusalem; and they brought them into the 
synagogue and made fast the doors, and set the Old Testament 


Latin B. 

heard that they are, and dispatch unto them men of the nobler 
sort, beseeching and supplicating them: peradventure they will 
vouchsafe to come unto us. Then they sent unto them Nicodemus 
and Joseph and the three men, the Rabbis of Galilee which had 
seen them, entreating them that they would vouchsafe to come 
to them. And these went and walked about all the region of 
Jordan and of the mountains and found them not, and returned 
back again. 

6 And behold on a sudden there appeared coming down from 
Mount Amalech a very great multitude, about twelve thousand 
men, which had risen with the Lord. And though the men 
recognized many in that place, they were not able to speak 
a word unto them because of their fear, and the vision of angels; 
and they stood afar off beholding them and hearkening to them, 
how they went singing and saying: The Lord is risen from the 
dead as he said: let us all rejoice and be glad, for he reigneth 
for ever. 

Then they that had been sent were amazed and fell down upon 
the earth for fear: and they were warned by an angel of the Lord 
which raised them up from the earth, that they should seek out 
Karinus and Leucius in their own house. 

7 They arose then and went to their house and found them 
iving themselves unto prayer: and entering in unto them they 
ell on their faces to the earth and greeted them, and arose and 

said: O ye friends of God, the whole multitude of the Jews hath 
sent us unto you, for they have heard that ye are risen from the 


122 PASSION GOSPELS 


Latin A. 


by the God Adonai and the God of Israel which spake unto our 
fathers by the prophets, saying: Believe ye that it is Jesus 
which raised you from the dead? Tell us how ye have arisen from 
the dead. 

3 And when Karinus and Leucius heard this adjuration, they 
trembled in their body and groaned, being troubled in heart. 
And looking up together unto heaven they made the seal of the 
cross with their fingers upon their tongues, and forthwith they 
spake both of them, saying: Give us each a volume of paper, 


Greek. 
of the Jews in the midst: and the high priests said unto them: 
We would have you swear by the God of Israel and by Adonai, 
and so speak the truth, how ye arose and who raised you from 
the dead. 

3 When the men that had arisen heard that, they made upon 


Latin B. 


dead, entreating and beseeching you to come unto them, that 
we may all know the wonderful works of God which have been 
wrought upon us (or you?) in our days. And they rose imme- 
diately by the bidding of God and went with them, and entered 
into their synagogue. And when the chief of the priests saw them 
they were greatly troubled and trembling took hold upon them: 
and finally Annas and Caiaphas took the books of the law of God 
and put them into their hands, and adjured them by the god 
Heloi and the god Adonai and by the law and the prophets, 
saying: Tell us how ye arose from the dead, and what are these 
wonders which have been wrought in our days, even such as we 
have never heard to be done at any time: for now all our bones 
are confounded and dried up for fear, and the earth moveth itself 
beneath our feet: for verily we have joined together all our hearts 
to shed righteous and holy blood. 

8 Then Karinus and Leucius beckoned to them with their 
hands that they should give them a volume of paper, and ink: 
and this they did because the Holy Ghost suffered them not to 
speak with them. And they gave unto each of them paper, and 
separated them one from the other in several chambers (cells). 
And they, making with their fingers the sign of the cross of 
Christ, began to write each his volume; and when they had 
ended, they cried out as it were with one voice out of their several 
chambers: Amen. And Karinus rose and gave his paper unto 
Annas and Leucius unto Caiaphas, and they saluted one another 
and went forth and returned unto their sepulchres. 

9 Then Annas and Caiaphas opened the roll of paper and began 
each of them to read to himself privily. But all the people took 


ACTS OF PILATE 123 


Latin A. 


and let us write that which we have seen and heard. And they 
gave them unto them, and each of them sat down and wrote, 


saying: 
II (XVIII) 

1 O Lord Jesu Christ, the life and resurrection of the dead 
(al. resurrection of the dead and the life of the living), suffer us 
to speak of the mysteries of thy majesty which thou didst perform 
after thy death upon the cross, inasmuch as we have been adjured 
by thy Name. For thou didst command us thy servants to tell 
no Suen the secrets of thy divine majesty which thou wroughtest 
in hell. 

Now when we were set together with all our fathers in the deep, 
in obscurity of darkness, on a sudden there came a golden heat 
of the sun and a purple and royal light shining upon us. And 
immediately the father of the whole race of men, together with 
all the patriarchs and prophets, rejoiced, saying: This light is 


Greek. 

their faces the sign of the cross, and said unto the chief priests: 
Give us paper and ink and pen. So they brought these things. 
And they sat down and wrote thus: 


II (XVIII) 

1 O Lord Jesu Christ, the resurrection and the life of the world, 
give us grace that we may tell of thy resurrection and of thy 
marvellous works which thou didst in Hell (Hades). 

We, then, were in hell together with all them that have fallen 


Latin B. 

it ill, and there was a cry from all of them: Read these writings 
unto us openly: and when they have been read, we will keep them, 
that this truth of God be not turned by blinding our eyes, unto 
deceit, by unclean and deceitful men. And thereupon Annas and 
Caiaphas, being seized with trembling, delivered the roll of paper 
unto Rabbi Addas and Rabbi Fineés and Rabbi Egias, which 
had come from Galilee and declared that Jesus was taken up 
into heaven: and unto them all the multitude of the Jews gave 
credence that they should read this writing. And they read the 
paper, wherein was contained this that followeth. 


II (XVIII) 
1 I Karinus. O Lord Jesu Christ, son of the living God, suffer 
me to speak of thy marvellous works which thou didst in hell. 
When therefore we were holden in hell in darkness and the 
shadow of death, suddenly there shone upon us a great light, 
and hell did tremble, and the gates of death. And there was 


124 PASSION GOSPELS 


Latin A. 

the beginning (author) of everlasting light which did promise to 
send unto us his co-eternal light. And Esaias cried out and said: 
This is the light of the Father, even the Son of God, according 
as I prophesied when I lived upon the earth: The land of 
Zabulon and the land of Nephthalim beyond Jordan, of Galilee 
of the Gentiles, the people that walked in darkness have seen 
a great light, and they that dwell in the land of the shadow of 
death, upon them did the light shine. And now hath it come and 
shone upon us that sit in death. ‘ ; 

2 And as we all rejoiced in the light which shined upon us, 
there came unto us our father Simeon, and he rejoicing said unto 
us: Glorify ye the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God; for I received 
him in my hands in the temple when he was born a child, and 
being moved of the Holy Ghost I made confession and said unto 
him: Now have mine eyes seen thy salvation which thou hast 
prepared before the face of all people, a light to lighten the 
Gentiles, and to be the glory of thy people Israel. And when 
they heard these things, the whole multitude of the saints 
rejoiced yet more. 


Greek. 


asleep since the beginning: and at the hour of midnight there 
rose upon those dark places as it were the light of the sun, and 
shined, and all we were enlightened and beheld one another. 
And straightway our father Abraham, together with the patri- 
archs and the prophets, were all at once filled with joy and said 
one to another: This light cometh of the great lightening. The 
prophet Esaias being there present said: This light is of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: concerning which 
I prophesied when I was yet alive, saying: The land of Zabulon 
and the land of Nephthalim, the people that sat in darkness, hath 
seen a great light. 


Latin B. 


heard the voice of the Son of the most high Father, as it were 
the voice of a great thundering, and it proclaimed aloud and 
began: Draw back, O princes, your gates, remove your everlasting 
doors: Christ the Lord the king of glory approacheth to enter in. 

2 Then came Satan the prince of death, fleeing in fear and 
saying to his ministers and unto the hells: O my ministers and 
all the hells, come together, and shut your gates, set in place the 
bars of iron, and fight boldly and withstand, that we that hold 
them be not made captive in bonds. Then were all his evil 
ministers troubled, and began to shut the gates of death with all 


ACTS OF PILATE 125 


Latin A. 

3 And after that there came one as it were a dweller in the 
wilderness, and he was inquired of by all: Who art thou? And 
he answered them and said: I am John, the voice and the 
prophet of the most High, which came before the face of his 
advent to prepare his ways, to give knowledge of salvation unto 
his people, for the remission of their sins. And when I saw him 
coming unto me, being moved of the Holy Ghost, I said: Behold 
the Lamb of God, behold him that taketh away the sins of the 
world. And I baptized him in the river of Jordan, and saw the 
Holy Ghost descending upon him in the likeness of a dove, and 
heard a voice out of heaven saying: This is my beloved Son, 
in whom I am well pleased. And now have I come before his 
face, and come down to declare unto you that he is at hand to 
visit us, even the dayspring, the Son of God, coming from on high 
unto us that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death. 


Greek. 

2 Then came there unto the midst another out of the wilderness, 
an anchorite (ascete), and the patriarchs said unto him: Who art 
thou? and he said: I am John, the end of the prophets, which 
made straight the ways of the Son of God, and preached repen- 
tance unto the people for the remission of sins. 

And the Son of God came unto me, and when I saw him afar 
off I said unto the people: Behold the Lamb of God which taketh 
away the sins of the world. And with mine hands I baptized him 
in the river Jordan, and saw as it were a dove, and the Holy 
Ghost coming upon him, and I heard also the voice of God and 
the Father thus speaking: This is my beloved Son, in whom 
I am well pleased. And for this cause sent he me unto you also, 


Latin B. 

diligence, and by little to make fast the locks and the bars of iron, 
and to take fast in hand all their instruments, and to utter howlings 
with dreadful and hideous voice. 


III (XIX) 

1 Then said Satan unto Hell: Make thee ready to receive him 
whom I shall bring down unto thee. Thereupon did Hell make 
answer unto Satan thus: This voice was nothing else but the cry 
of the Son of the most high Father, that the earth and all the 
places of hell did so quake at it: wherefore I think that I and 
all my bonds are now wide open. But I adjure thee, O Satan, 
head of all evil, by thy might and mine own, bring him not unto 
me lest when we would take him we be taken captive of him. 


126 PASSION GOSPELS 


Latin A. Ill (XIX) 


1 And when father Adam that was first created heard this, even 
that Jesus was baptized in Jordan, he cried out to Seth his son, 
saying: Declare unto thy sons the patriarchs and the prophets 
all that thou didst hear from Michael the archangel, when I sent 
thee unto the gates of paradise that thou mightest entreat God 
to send thee his angel to give thee the oil of the tree of mercy 
to anoint my body when I was sick. Then Seth drew near unto 
the holy patriarchs and prophets, and said: When I, Seth, was 
praying at the gates of paradise, behold Michael the angel of the 
Lord appeared unto me, saying: I am sent unto thee from the 
Lord: it is I that am set over the body of man. And I say unto 
thee, Seth, vex not thyself with tears, praying and entreating 


Greek. 


to proclaim that the only begotten Son of God cometh hither, 
that whosoever believeth on him may be saved, and whoso 
believeth not on him may be condemned. Therefore say I unto 
you all, that when ye behold him ye shall worship him, for now 
only is the time of repentance for you, for that ye did worship 
idols in the vain world that is above, and for the sins which ye 
have committed: but at another time it is impossible that this 
should come to pass. 


Latin B. 


For if by his voice only all my might hath been thus over- 
thrown, what, thinkest thou, will he do when his presence is come 
unto us? 

2 Unto whom Satan the prince of death answered thus: Why 
keepest thou this crying? Fear not, my friend of old time, thou 
most evil one, for I stirred up the people of the Jews against him, 
and commanded him to be smitten with buffets, and did contrive 
against him betrayal by his disciple: and he is a man that feareth 
death greatly, for he said in his fear: My soul is sorrowful even 
unto death: yet unto death have I brought him, for now he 
hangeth lifted up upon a cross. 

3 Then saith Hell unto him: If it be he that by the word of his 
command alone made Lazarus, which was four days dead, to fly 
out of my bosom like an eagle, then is he not aman in his manhood, 
but God in his majesty. I beseech thee, bring him not unto 
me. Satan saith to him: Notwithstanding, make thyself ready, 
fear not: for already he hangeth upon a cross, and I can do no 
other. Then Hell spake thus unto Satan: If, then, thou canst do 
no other, lo thy destruction draweth near, and I shall at last 
be cast down and remain without honour; but tbou wilt be 
tormented under my dominion. 


ACTS OF PILATE 127 


Latin A. 

for the oil of the tree of mercy, that thou mayest anoint thy 
father Adam for the pain of his body: for thou wilt not be able to 
receive it save in the last days and times, save when five thousand 
and five hundred (al. 5,952) years are accomplished: then shall 
the most beloved Son of God come upon the earth to raise up 
the body of Adam and the bodies of the dead, and he shall 
come and be baptized in Jordan. And when he is come forth 
of the water of Jordan, then shall he anoint with the oil of mercy 
all that believe on him, and that oil of mercy shall be unto all 
generations of them that shall be born of water and of the Holy 
Ghost, unto life eternal. Then shall the most beloved Son of 


Greek. III (XIX) 


And as John was thus teaching them that were in hell, the 
first-created Adam, the first father, also heard it, and said unto 
Seth his son: My son, I would have thee to tell the forefathers 
of the race of men, and the prophets; when I laid me down to 
die, whither I did send thee. And Seth said: Ye prophets and 
patriarchs, hearken: My father Adam, the first-created, laid him 
down on a time to die, and sent me to make supplication unto 
God hard by the gate of paradise, that he would lead me by his 
angel unto the tree of mercy, and I should take the oil and anoint 
my father, and he should arise from his sickness. Which also 
I did; and after my prayer an angel of the Lord came and said 
unto me: What askest thou, Seth? askest thou for the oil that 
raiseth up the sick, or for the tree that floweth with that oil, for 
the sickness of thy father? this cannot be found at this time. 
Depart therefore and say unto thy father, that after there are 
accomplished from the creation of the world five thousand five 
hundred years, then shall the only-begotten Son of God become 
man and come down upon the earth, and he shall anoint him 
with that oil, and he shall arise: and with water and the Holy 
Ghost shall he wash him and them that come of him. And then 


Latin B. IV (XX) 


1 Now the saints of God heard the contention between Satan 
and Hell: but as yet they knew not each other among themselves: 
nevertheless they were at the point to know. But our holy 
father Adam made answer unto Satan thus: O prince of death, 
wherefore fearest thou and tremblest? Behold the Lord cometh 
which shall destroy all thy creatures, and thou shalt be taken 
captive of him and be bound, world without end. 

2 Then all the saints, when they heard the voice of our father 
Adam, how valiantly he made answer unto Satan, were glad and 
were comforted: and all of them ran together unto father Adam 


128 PASSION GOSPELS 


Latin A. 

God, even Christ Jesus, come down upon the earth and shall 

bring in our father Adam into paradise unto the tree of mercy. 
And when they heard all these things of Seth, all the patriarchs 

and prophets rejoiced with a great rejoicing. 


IV (XX) 
1 And while all the saints were rejoicing, behold Satan the prince 


and chief of death said unto Hell: Make thyself ready to receive 
Jesus who boasteth himself that he is the Son of God, whereas 


Greek. 


shall he be healed of every disease: but now it is not possible 
that this should come to pass. 
And when the patriarchs and prophets heard these things, they 
rejoiced greatly. 
IV (XX) 
1 And while all of them were thus joyful, Satan the inheritor of 


darkness cometh and saith unto Hades: O thou that devourest 
all and art insatiable, hearken to my words. There is one of the 


Latin B. 


and were gathered about him in that place. Then our father 
Adam, looking earnestly upon all that multitude, marvelled if they 
all were begotten of him into the world. And he embraced them 
that stood near round about him, and shed exceeding bitter tears, 
and spake unto Seth his son: Declare, my son Seth, unto the 
holy patriarchs and prophets that which the keeper of paradise 
said unto thee when I sent thee to bring me of the very oil of 
mercy that thou mightest anoint my body when I was sick. 

8 Then he answered: I, when thou sentest me before the 
gates of paradise, prayed and besought the Lord with tears, and 
I called the keeper of paradise to give me thereof. Then Michael 
the archangel came forth and said unto me: Seth, wherefore 
mournest thou? know thou before, that thy father Adam shall 
not receive of this oil of mercy now, but after many generations 
of the world. For the most beloved Son of God shall come down 
from heaven into the world and shall be baptized of John in the 
river Jordan: and then shall thy father Adam receive of this 
oil of mercy, and all they that believe in him: and the kingdom 


of cree which have believed in him shall endure, world without 
end. 


V (XXI) 
1 Then all the saints when they heard these things rejoiced again 
with great joy, and one of them that stood by, Isaias by name, 
proclaimed with a loud voice, saying: Father Adam and all ye 


ACTS OF PILATE 129 


Latin A. 


he is a man that feareth death, and sayeth: My soul is sorrowful 
even unto death. And he hath been much mine enemy, doing 
me great hurt, and many that I had made blind, lame, dumb, 
leprous, and possessed he hath healed with a word: and some 
whom I have brought unto thee dead, them hath he taken 
away from thee. 

2 Hell answered and said unto Satan the prince: Who is he 
that is so mighty, if he be a man that feareth death? for all the 
mighty ones of the earth are held in subjection by my power, 
even they whom thou hast brought me subdued by thy power. 
If, then, thou art mighty, what manner of man is this Jesus who, 
though he fear death, resisteth thy power? If he be so mighty 
in his manhood, verily I say unto thee he is almighty in his god- 
head, and no man can withstand his power. And when he saith 
that he feareth death, he would ensnare thee, and woe shall be 


Greek. 
race of the Jews, Jesus, who calleth himself the Son of God; but 
he is a man, and by our contrivance the Jews have crucified him. 
And now that he hath died, be thou prepared that we may make 
him fast here. For I know that he is a man, and I have heard 
him saying: My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. 
And he hath done me much hurt in the world that is above while 
he walked among men. For wheresoever he found my servants 
he did persecute them, and as many as I caused to be maimed, or 
blind, or lame, or leprous, or any such thing, he healed them with 
a word only: and whereas I made ready many to be buried, them 
also he quickened again only with a word. 

2 Hades saith: And is he indeed so mighty that he can do 
such things with a word only? or, if he be such, art thou able to 
withstand him? it seemeth to me, no man will be able to with- 


Latin B. 

that stand by hearken unto my sayings. While I was upon earth, 
and the Holy Ghost taught me, I did sing in prophecy concerning 
this light, saying: The people which sat in darkness have seen 
a great light: unto them which dwell in the land of the shadow 
of death hath the light shined. And at his word Father Adam 
and they all turned unto him and asked him: Who art thou? 
for that which thou sayest is true. And he answered and said: 
I am named Isaias. 

2 Then appeared there another beside him, as it were a dweller 
in the wilderness, and they asked him and said: Who art thou 
that bearest in thy body such signs? and he answered stoutly: 
I am John the Baptist, the voice and the prophet of the Most 
High. I went before the face of the same Lord to make the 


870 K 


130 PASSION GOSPELS 


Latin A. 

unto thee for everlasting ages. But Satan the prince of Tartarus 
said: Why doubtest thou and fearest to receive this Jesus, 
which is thine adversary and mine? For I tempted him, and 
I have stirred up mine ancient people of the Jews with envy and 
wrath against him. I have sharpened a spear to thrust him 
through, gall and vinegar have I mingled to give him to drink, 
and I have prepared a cross to crucify him and nails to pierce 
him: and his death is nigh at hand, that I may bring him unto 
thee to be subject unto thee and me. 


Greek. 


stand him: but whereas thou sayest that thou hast heard him 
fearing death, this he said to mock thee and in sport, willing to 
seize on thee with a mighty hand: and woe, woe unto thee for 
everlasting! Satan saith: O thou Hades that devourest all and 
art insatiable, didst thou fear so much at that thou hast heard 
concerning our common adversary? I feared him not, but I did 
set on the Jews, and they crucified him and gave him also gall to 
drink mingled with vinegar. Prepare thyself, therefore, that 
when he cometh thou mayest hold him fast. 


Latin B. 


desert and rough ways into plain paths. I did show with my 
finger unto them of Jerusalem the lamb of the Lord and the Son 
of God, and glorified him. I baptized him in the river Jordan. 
I heard the voice of the Father out of heaven thundering upon 
him and proclaiming: This is my beloved Son in whom I am 
well pleased. I have received an answer from him that he 
would himself descend into hell. 

Then Father Adam, when he heard that, cried with a loud voice, 
and shouted again and again Alleluia, which is, being interpreted: 
The Lord cometh. 

VI (XXII) 

1 After this another that stood by and was adorned as it were 
with the marks of an emperor, by name David, cried out thus 
and said: When I was upon earth I did reveal unto the people 
concerning the mercy of God and his visitation, and prophesied 
joyful things to come throughout all ages, saying: Let them 
give thanks unto the Lord, even his mercies: and his wonders 
unto the children of men.t_ For he hath broken the gates of brass 
and smitten the bars of iron in sunder. 

Then did the holy patriarchs and prophets begin to recognize 
one another, and each one of them to speak words out of their 
prophecies. Then holy Jeremias, looking upon his prophecies, 
said to the patriarchs and prophets: When I was upon earth 


1 So the Latin Psalter has it. 


ACTS OF PILATE 13] 


Latin A. 


3 Hell answered and said: Thou hast told me that it is he that 
hath taken away dead men from me. For there be many which 
while they lived on the earth have taken dead men from me, 
yet not by their own power but by prayer to God, and their 
almighty God hath taken them from me. Who is this Jesus 
which by his own word without prayer hath drawn dead men 
from me? Perchance it is he which by the word of his command 
did restore to life Lazarus which was four days dead and stank 
and was corrupt, whom I held here dead. Satan the prince of 
death answered and said: It is that same Jesus. When Hell 
heard that he said unto him: I adjure thee by thy strength and 
mine own that thou bring him not unto me. For at that time 
I, when I heard the command of his word, did quake and was 
overwhelmed with fear, and all my ministries with me were 
troubled. Neither could we keep Lazarus, but he like an eagle 
shaking himself leaped forth with all agility and swiftness, and 
departed from us, and the earth also which held the dead body of 


Greek. 

38 Hades answered: O inheritor of darkness, son of perdition 
devil, thou saidst but now unto me that many of them whom 
thou hadst made ready to be buried he did quicken again with 
a word only: now if he hath set free many from burial, how and 
by what strength shall he be held by us? I indeed of late swallowed 
up a certain dead man named Lazarus, and after a little, one of 
the living by force snatched him up out of mine entrails by a 
word only: and I think this is he of whom thou speakest. If, 
then, we receive him here, I fear lest we be imperilled for the 
rest also; for I have swallowed up all men from the beginning: 
behold, I perceive that they are unquiet, and my belly paineth 
me, and this Lazarus that before was caught away from me I take 
to be no good sign, for he flew away from me, not like to a dead 
man but to an eagle, so instantly did the earth cast him out. 
Wherefore also I adjure thee by thy gifts and by mine own, that 


Latin B. 
I prophesied of the Son of God, saying that he was seen upon 
earth and conversed among men. 

2 Then all the saints rejoicing in the light of the Lord and at the 
sight of their father Adam, and at the answer of all the patriarchs 
and prophets, cried out, saying: Alleluia, blessed is he that cometh 
in the name of the Lord. So that at the cry of them Satan feared, 
and sought a way to flee by, and could not, for Hell and his 
ministers did hold him bound in hell and fenced in on every side. 
And they said unto him: Why fearest thou? we will in no wise 
suffer thee to go out hence; but thou must receive these things 


132 PASSION GOSPELS 


Latin A. 

Lazarus straightway gave him up alive. Wherefore now I know 
that that man which was able to do these things is a God strong 
in command and mighty in manhood, and that he is the saviour 
of mankind. And if thou bring him unto me he will set free all 
that are here shut up in the hard prison and bound in the chains 
of their sins that cannot be broken, and will bring them unto the 
life of his godhead for ever. 

V (XX) 

1 And as Satan the prince, and Hell, spoke thus together, 
suddenly there came a voice as of thunder and a spiritual cry: 
Remove, O princes, your gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting 
doors, and the King of glory shall come in. When Hell heard 
that he said unto Satan the prince: Depart from me and go out 
of mine abode: if thou be a mighty man of war, fight thou against 
the King of glory. But what hast thou to do with him? And 
Hell cast Satan forth out of his dwelling. Then said Hell unto 


Greek. 


thou bring him not to this place, for I believe that he cometh 
hither to raise up all the dead. And this I say unto thee: by 
the outer darkness, if thou bring him hither, not one of all the 
dead will be left in me. 

V (XXzI) 


1 And as Satan and Hades spake thus with one another, there 
came a great voice as of thunder, saying: Lift up, O princes, your 
gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory 
shall come in. When Hades heard, he said unto Satan: Go 
forth, if thou art able, and withstand him. So Satan went forth. 
Then said Hades unto his devils: Make fast the gates of brass 
well and strongly, and the bars of iron, and keep my locks, and 


Latin B. 


as thou art worthy, at his hands whom thou didst fight against 
every day: and if not, know thou that thou shalt be bound by 
him and committed unto my keeping for ever. 


VII (XXIII) 

1 And again there came the voice of the Son of the most high 
Father, as the voice of a great thunder, saying: Lift up, O princes, 
your gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of 
glory shall come in. Then Satan and Hell cried out, saying: Who 
is this King of glory? And it was answered them by the Lord’s 
voice: The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle. 

2 After that voice there came unto us a man whose appearance 
was as that of a robber, bearing a cross upon his shoulder, who 
cried without and said: Open unto me that I may enter in. And 
Satan opened the gate unto him a little way and brought him 


ACTS OF PILATE 183 


Latin A. 


his wicked ministers: Shut ye the hard gates of brass and put 
on them the bars of iron and withstand stoutly, lest we that hold 
captivity be taken captive. 

2 But when all the multitude of the saints heard it, they 
spake with a voice of rebuking unto Hell: Open thy gates, that 
the King of glory may come in. And David cried out, saying: 
Did I not when I was alive upon earth, foretell unto you: Let 
them give thanks unto the Lord, even his mercies and _ his 
wonders unto the children of men; who hath broken the gates 
of brass and smitten the bars of iron in sunder? he hath taken 
them out of the way of their iniquity. And thereafter in like 
manner Esaias said: Did not I when I was alive upon earth 
foretell unto you: The dead shall arise, and they that are in the 
tombs shall rise again, and they that are in the earth shall 
rejoice, for the dew which cometh of the Lord is their healing ? 
And again I said: O death, where is thy sting? O Hell, where 
is thy victory? 


Greek. 
stand upright, and beware at all points, for if he come in hither, 
woe will take hold on us. 

2 When the forefathers heard that, they began all of them to 
insult him, saying: Thou that devourest all and art insatiate, 
open, that the King of glory may come in. David the prophet 
said: Knowest thou not, blind one, that when I lived in the 
world I did prophesy that word, Lift up, O princes, your gates. 
HKsaias said: This I foresaw by the Holy Ghost and wrote: The 
dead shall arise, and they that are in the tombs shall awake, and 
they that are in the earth shall rejoice: and again: O death, 
where is thy sting? O Hell, where is thy victory? 


Latin B. 

within into the house, and shut the gate again after him. And 
all the saints saw him that he shone brightly, and said unto him 
straightway: Thine appearance is that of a robber: show us, 
what is that which thou bearest on thy back? And he answered 
humbly and said: Of a truth I was a robber altogether, and the 
Jews hanged me upon a cross with my Lord Jesus Christ, the Son 
of the most high Father. And at the last I have come hither 
before him; but himself cometh after me immediately. 

3 Then the holy David’s anger was kindled against Satan, and 
he cried aloud: Open, thou most foul one, thy gates, that the 
King of glory may come in. Likewise also all the saints of God 
rose up against Satan and would have laid hold on him and parted 
him among them. : ; 

And again there was acry without: Lift up, ye princes, your 


134 PASSION GOSPELS 


Latin A. 


3 When they heard that of Esaias, all the saints said unto 
Hell: Open thy gates: now shalt thou be overcome and weak 
and without strength. And there came a great voice as of thun- 
der, saying: Remove, O princes, your gates, and be ye lift up 
ye doors of hell, and the King of glory shall come in. And 
when Hell saw that they so cried out twice, he said, as if he knew 
it not: Who is the King of glory? And David answered Hell 
and said: The words of this cry do I know, for by his spirit 
I prophesied the same; and now I say unto thee that which 
I said before: The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in 
battle, he is the King of glory. And: The Lord looked down 
from heaven that he might hear the groanings of them that are 
in fetters and deliver the children of them that have been slain. 
And now, O thou most foul and stinking Hell, open thy gates, 
that the King of glory may come in. And as David spake thus 
unto Hell, the Lord of majesty appeared in the form of a man 
and lightened the eternal darkness and brake the bonds that 
could not be loosed: and the succour of his everlasting might 
visited us that sat in the deep darkness of our transgressions 
and in the shadow of death of our sins. 


Greek. 


3 Then came there again a voice, saying: Lift up the gates. 
And when Hades heard the voice the second time, he answered 
as if he knew it not, and said: Who is this King of glory? The 
angels of the Lord said: The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord 
mighty in battle. And straightway at the word the gates of 
brass were broken in pieces and the bars of iron were ground to 
powder, and all the dead that were bound were loosed from their 
chains, and we with them, and the King of glory entered in, in 
fashion as a man, and all the dark places of Hell were enlightened. 


Latin B. 


gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of 
glory shall come in. And again at that clear voice Hell and Satan 
inquired, saying: Who is this King of glory ? and it was said unto 
ey by that marvellous voice: The Lord of hosts, he is the King 
of glory. 


VIII (XXIV) 

And lo, suddenly Hell did quake, and the gates of death and 
the locks were broken small, and the bars of iron broken, and fell 
to the ground, and all things were laid open. And Satan re- 
mained in the midst and stood put to confusion and cast down, 


ACTS OF PILATE 135 


Latin A. VI (XXII) 


1 When Hell and death and their wicked ministers saw that, 
they were stricken with fear, they and their cruel officers, at the 
sight of the brightness of so great light in their own realm, 
seeing Christ of a sudden in their abode, and they cried out, 
saying: We are overcome by thee. Who art thou that art sent 
by the Lord for our confusion? Who art thou that without all 
damage of corruption, and with the signs(?) of thy majesty 
unblemished, dost in wrath condemn our power? Who art 
thou that art so great and so small, both humble and exalted, 
both soldier and commander, a marvellous warrior in the shape 
of a bondsman, and a King of glory dead and living, whom the 
cross bare slain upon it ? Thou that didst lie dead in the sepulchre 
hast come down unto us living: and at thy death all creation 
quaked and all the stars were shaken: and thou hast become 
free among the dead and dost rout our legions. Who art thou 
that settest free the prisoners that are held bound by original 
sin and restorest them into their former liberty? Who art thou 
that sheddest thy divine and bright light upon them that were 
blinded with the darkness of their sins? After the same manner 
all the legions of devils were stricken with like fear and cried out 
all together in the terror of their confusion, saying: Whence art 
thou, Jesus, a man so mighty and bright in majesty, so excellent, 
without spot and clean from sin? For that world of earth which 
hath been alway subject unto us until now, and did pay tribute 
to our profit, hath never sent unto us a dead man like thee, 


Greek. VI (XXII) 


1 Hades cried out straightway: We are overcome, woe unto 
us. But who art thou that hast so great authority and power? 
and what manner of man art thou that art come hither without 
sin? thou that appearest small and canst do great things, that 
art humble and exalted, a bondsman and a master, a soldier and 
a commander, that exercisest authority over the dead and the 
living? thou wast nailed to the cross, and laid in the sepulchre, 
and now art thou become free and hast destroyed our whole power. 

Art thou then that Jesus of whom the chief ruler Satan said 
unto us, that by thy cross and death thou shouldest inherit the 
whole world ? 


Latin B. 

and bound with a fetter about his feet. And behold, the Lord Jesus 
Christ coming in the glory of the light of the height, in meekness, 
great and yet humble, bearing a chain in his hands bound there- 
with the neck of Satan, and also, binding his hands behind his 
back, cast him backward into Tartarus, and set his holy foot upon 
his throat and said: Throughout all ages hast thou done much 


136 PASSION GOSPELS 


Latin A. 
nor ever dispatched such a gift unto Hell. Who then art thou 
that so fearlessly enterest our borders, and not only fearest not 
our torments, but besides essayest to bear away all men out of our 
bonds? Peradventure thou art that Jesus, of whom Satan our 
prince said that by thy death of the cross thou shouldest receive 
the dominion of the whole world. 

2 Then did the King of glory in his majesty trample upon 
death, and laid hold on Satan the prince and delivered him unto 
the power of Hell, and drew Adam to him unto his own brightness. 


VII (XXIII) 

Then Hell, receiving Satan the prince, with sore reproach 
said unto him: O prince of perdition and chief of destruction, 
Beelzebub, the scorn of the angels and spitting of the righteous, 
why wouldest thou do this? Thou wouldest crucify the King 
of glory, and at his decease didst promise us great spoils of his 
death: like a fool thou knewest not what thou didst. For behold, 
now, this Jesus putteth to flight by the brightness of his majesty 
all the darkness of death, and hath broken the strong depths of 
the prisons, and let out the prisoners, and loosed them that were 
bound. And all that were sighing in our torments do rejoice 
against us, and at their prayers our dominions are vanquished 


Greek. 


2 Then the King of glory took hold upon the head of the chief 
ruler Satan, and delivered him unto the angels and said: Bind 
down with irons his hands and his feet and his neck and his 
mouth. And then he delivered him unto Hades, saying: Take 
him and keep him safely until my second coming. 


VII (XXIII) 

Then Hades, when he had taken Satan, said unto him: O Beel- 
zebub, inheritor of fire and torment, adversary of the saints, 
what need hadst thou to provide that the King of glory should be 
crucified, so that he should come hither and strip us naked? 
Turn thee and see that not one dead man is left in me, but all 
whatsoever thou didst gain by the tree of knowledge thou hast 
lost by the tree of the cross, and all thy joy is turned into sorrow, 
and when thou wouldest slay the King of glory thou hast slain 
thyself: for since I have received thee to keep thee safely, thou 


Latin B. 


evil and hast never been quiet at any time. To-day do I deliver 
thee unto eternal fire. And he called Hell quickly and gave him 
commandment, saying: Take this most evil and wicked one and 
hold him in thy keeping until that day when I shall command 
thee. And he took him from beneath the Lord’s feet, and he was 
cast down together with him into the depth of the bottomless pit. 


ACTS OF PILATE 137 


Latin A. 


and our realms conquered, and now no nation of men feareth 
us any more. And beside this, the dead which were never wont 
to be proud triumph over us, and the captives which never 
could be joyful do threaten us. O prince Satan, father of all the 
wicked and ungodly and renegades, wherefore wouldest thou do 
this? They that from the beginning until now have despaired 
of life and salvation—now is none of their wonted roarings heard, 
neither doth any groan from them sound in our ears, nor is there 
any sign of tears upon the face of any of them. O prince Satan, 
holder of the keys of hell, those thy riches which thou hadst 
gained by the tree of transgression and the losing of paradise, 
thou hast lost by the tree of the cross, and all thy gladness hath 
perished. When thou didst hang up Christ Jesus the King of 
glory thou wroughtest against thyself and against me. Hence- 
forth thou shalt know what eternal torments and infinite pains 
thou art to suffer in my keeping for ever. O prince Satan, author 
of death and head of all pride, thou oughtest first to have sought 
out matter of evil in this Jesus: Wherefore didst thou adventure 
without cause to crucify him unjustly against whom thou foundest 
no blame, and to bring into our realm the innocent and righteous 
one, and to lose the guilty and the ungodly and unrighteous of 
the whole world ? 

And when Hell had spoken thus unto Satan the prince, then 
said the King of glory unto Hell: Satan the prince shall be in 
thy power unto all ages in the stead of Adam and his children, 
even those that are my righteous ones. 


VIII (XXIV) 


1 And the Lord stretching forth his hand, said: Come unto me, 
all ye my saints which bear mine image and my likeness, Ye 


Greek. 

shalt learn by trial what evils I will practise upon thee. O thou 
head-devil, the beginning of death, and root of sin, and end of 
all evil, what ill didst thou find in Jesus that thou wentest about 
his destruction? how didst thou dare to do so great wickedness ? 
how didst thou desire to bring down such an one into this darkness, 
whereby thou art bereaved of all them that have died since the 


beginning. 
VIII (XXIV) 
1 And as Hades talked thus with Satan, the King of glory 
spread forth his right hand and took hold on our forefather Adam 


Latin B. IX (XXV) i 
1 Then the Lord Jesus, the Saviour of all men, pitiful and most 
gracious, greeted Adam with kindness, saying unto him: Peace 


138 PASSION GOSPELS 


Latin A. 

that by the tree and the devil and death were condemned, behold 
now the devil and death condemned by the tree. And forthwith 
all the saints were gathered in one under the hand of the Lord. 
And the Lord holding the right hand of Adam, said unto him: 
Peace be unto thee with all thy children that are my righteous 
ones. But Adam, casting himself at the knees of the Lord, 
entreated him with tears and beseechings, and said with a loud 
voice: I will magnify thee, O Lord, for thou hast set me up 
and not made my foes to triumph over me: O Lord my God, 
I cried unto thee and thou hast healed me; Lord, thou hast 
brought my soul out of hell, thou hast delivered me from them 
that go down to the pit. Sing praises unto the Lord all ye saints 
of his, and give thanks unto him for the remembrance of his 
holiness. For there is wrath in his indignation and life is in his 
good pleasure. In like manner al! the saints of God kneeled 
and cast themselves at the feet of the Lord, saying with one 
accord: Thou art come, O redeemer of the world: that which 
thou didst foretell by the law and by thy prophets, that hast 
thou accomplished in deed. Thou hast redeemed the living by 
thy cross, and by the death of the cross thou hast come down 
unto us, that thou mightest save us out of hell and death through 
thy majesty. O Lord, like as thou hast set the name of thy 


Greek. 


and raised him up; and then turned himself unto the rest and 
said: Come with me all ye, as many as have suffered death 
through the tree which this man touched. For lo, I do raise you 
all up again through the tree of the cross. And with that he put 
them all forth, and our forefather Adam was seen full of gladness 
of soul and said: I give thanks to thy greatness, O Lord, for thou 
hast brought me up out of the lowest hell. Likewise also all the 
prophets and the saints said: We give thanks unto thee, O Christ, 


Saviour of the world, for that thou hast brought up our life from 
corruption. 


Latin B. 


be unto thee, Adam, and unto thy children unto everlasting ages. 
Amen. Then Father Adam cast himself at the Lord’s feet, and 
rose up and kissed his hands, and shed abundant tears, saying: 
Behold the hands which formed me: testifying unto all. “And 
he said to the Lord: Thou art come, O King of glory, to set men 
free and gather them to thine everlasting kingdom. Then our 
mother Eve also in like manner cast herself at the feet of the 
Lord, and rose up and kissed his hands, and shed tears abundantly, 


and said: Behold the hands which fashioned me: testifying 
anto all. 


ACTS OF PILATE 139 


Latin A. 


glory in the heavens and set up thy cross for a token of re- 
demption upon the earth, so, Lord, set thou up the sign of 
the victory of thy cross in hell, that death may have no more 
dominion. 

2 And the Lord stretched forth his hand and made the sign 
of the cross over Adam and over all his saints, and he took the 
right hand of Adam and went up out of hell, and all the saints 
followed him. Then did holy David cry aloud and say: Sing 
unto the Lord a new song, for he hath done marvellous things. 
His right hand hath wrought salvation for him and his holy 
arm. The Lord hath made known his saving health, before the 
face of all nations hath he revealed his righteousness. And the 
whole multitude of the saints answered, saying: Such honour 
have all his saints. Amen, Alleluia. 


Greek. 


2 And when they had thus said, the Saviour blessed Adam 
upon his forehead with the sign of the cross, and so did he also 
unto all the patriarchs and prophets and martyrs and forefathers. 
And he took them and leaped up out of hell. And as he went 
the holy fathers sang praises, following him and saying: Blessed 
is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. Unto him be the 
glory of all the saints. 


Latin B. 


2 Then all the saints adoring him cried out, saying: Blessed 
is he that cometh in the name of the Lord: God the Lord hath 
showed us light. Amen throughout all ages. Alleluia, world 
without end: laud, honour, might, and glory, because thou hast 
come from on high to visit us. And they gathered them beneath 
the hands of the Lord, singing always Alleluia, and rejoicing 
together at the glory. Then the Saviour searched throughout 
and did bite hell (al. hell was in affliction), forasmuch as he cast 
down part into Tartarus, and part he brought again with him 
on high. 


X (XXVI) 

Then all the saints of God besought the Lord that he would 
leave the sign of victory—even of the holy cross—in hell, that the 
wicked ministers thereof might not prevail to keep back any 
that was accused, whom the Lord absolved. And so it was done, 
and the Lord set his cross in the midst of hell, which is the sign 
of victory; and it shall remain there for ever. 

Then all we went out thence with the Lord, and left Satan and 
Hell in Tartarus. 


140 PASSION GOSPELS 


Latin A. 


3 And thereafter Habacuc the prophet cried out and said: 
Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people to set free 
thy chosen. And all the saints answered, saying: Blessed is he 
that cometh in the name of the Lord. God is the Lord and hath 
showed us light. Amen, Alleluia. 

Likewise after that the prophet Micheas also cried, saying: 
What God is like thee, O Lord, taking away iniquity and removing 
sins? and now thou withholdest thy wrath for a testimony 
that thou art merciful of free will, and thou dost turn away and 
have mercy on us, thou forgivest all our iniquities and hast 
sunk all our sins in the depths of the sea, as thou swarest unto our 
fathers in the days of old. And all the saints answered, saying: 
This is our God for ever and ever, he shall be our guide, world 
without end. Amen, Alleluia. And so spake all the prophets, 
making mention of holy words out of their praises, and all the 
saints followed the Lord, crying Amen, Alleluia. 


IX (XXV) 

But the Lord holding the hand of Adam delivered him unto 
Michael the archangel, and all the saints followed Michael the 
archangel, and he brought them all into the glory and beauty 
(grace) of paradise. And there met with them two men, ancients 
of days, and when they were asked of the saints: Who are ye 
that have not yet been dead in hell with us and are set in paradise 
in the body? then one of them answering, said: I am Enoch 
which was translated hither by the word of the Lord, and this 
that is with me is Elias the Thesbite which was taken up in a 
chariot of fire: and up to this day we have not tasted death, 
but we are received unto the coming of Antichrist to fight against 
him with signs and wonders of God, and to be slain of him in 
Jerusalem, and after three days and a half to be taken up again 
alive on the clouds. 


Greek. IX (XXV) 


He went therefore into paradise holding our forefather Adam 
by the hand, and delivered him, and all the righteous, unto 
Michael the archangel. And as they were entering in at the gate 
of paradise, there met them two aged men, unto whom said the 
holy fathers: Who are ye, which have not seen death nor come 
down into hell, but dwell in paradise with your bodies and souls ? 
And one of them answered and said: I am Enoch that pleased 
God and was translated hither by him: and this is Elias the 
Thesbite: and we shall live unto the end of the world, but at 
that time we shall be sent by God to withstand Antichrist and 
to be slain of him, and after three days to rise and be caught up 
in the clouds to meet the Lord. 


ACTS OF PILATE 141 


Latin A. X (XXVI) 

And as Enoch and Elias spake thus with the saints, behold 
there came another man of vile habit, bearing upon his shoulders 
the sign of the cross; whom when they beheld, all the saints 
said unto him: Who art thou? for thine appearance is as of a 
robber; and wherefore is it that thou bearest a sign upon thy 
shoulders? And he answered them and said: Ye have rightly 
said: for I was a robber, doing all manner of evil upon the earth. 
And the Jews crucified me with Jesus, and I beheld the wonders 
in the creation which came to pass through the cross of Jesus 
when he was crucified, and I believed that he was the maker of 
all creatures and the almighty king, and I besought him, saying: 
Remember me, Lord, when thou comest into thy kingdom. And 
forthwith he received my prayer, and said unto me: Verily I say 
unto thee, this day shalt thou be with me in paradise: and he 
gave me the sign of the cross, saying: Bear this and go unto 
paradise, and if the angel that keepeth paradise suffer thee not 
to enter in, show him the sign of the cross; and thou shalt say 
unto him: Jesus Christ the Son of God who now is crucified 
hath sent me. And when I had so done, I spake all these things 
unto the angel that keepeth paradise; and when he heard this 
of me, forthwith he opened the door and brought me in and set 
me at the right hand of paradise, saying: Lo now, tarry a little, 
and Adam the father of all mankind will enter in with all his 
children that are holy and righteous, after the triumph and glory 
of the ascending up of Christ the Lord that is crucified. When 
they heard all these words of the robber, all the holy patriarchs 


Greek. X (XXVI) 

And as they thus spake there came another man, humble of 
aspect, and bearing also a cross upon his shoulder, unto whom 
the holy fathers said: Who art thou that hast the appearance 
of a robber, and what is that cross that thou bearest on thy 
shoulder? He answered: I as ye say was a robber and a thief 
in the world, and therefore the Jews took me and delivered me 
unto the death of the cross together with our Lord Jesus Christ. 
When, therefore, he hung upon the cross, I beheld the signs which 
came to pass, and I believed on him and besought him and said: 
Lord, when thou shalt reign, forget not me. And straightway 
he said to me: Verily, verily, to-day, I say unto thee, thou shalt 
be with me in paradise. 

I came, therefore, bearing my cross, into paradise, and found 
Michael the archangel, and said unto him: Our Lord Jesus 
Christ that was crucified hath sent me hither; bring me there- 
fore unto the gate of Eden. And when the flaming sword saw the 
sign of the cross, it opened unto me and I entered in. Then said 
the archangel unto me: Tarry a little, for Adam the forefather 


142 PASSION GOSPELS 


Latin A. 


and prophets said with one voice: Blessed be the Lord Almighty, 
the Father of eternal good things, the Father of mercies, thou 
that hast given such grace unto thy sinners and hast brought 
them again into the beauty of paradise and into thy good pas- 
tures: for this is the most holy life of the spirit. Amen, Amen. 


XI (XXVIT) 

These are the divine and holy mysteries which we saw and 
heard, even I, Karinus, and Leucius: but we were not suffered 
to relate further the rest of the mysteries of God, according as 
Michael the archangel strictly charged us, saying: Ye shall go 
with your brethren unto Jerusalem and remain in prayer, crying 
out and glorifying the resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, 
who hath raised you from the dead together with him: and ye 
shall not be speaking with any man, but sit as dumb men, until 
the hour come when the Lord himself suffereth you to declare 
the mysteries of his godhead. But unto us Michael the arch- 
angel gave commandment that we should go over Jordan unto 
a place rich and fertile, where are many which rose again together 
with us for a testimony of the resurrection of Christ the Lord. 
For three days only were allowed unto us who rose from the 
dead, to keep the passover of the Lord in Jerusalem with our 
kindred (parents) that are living for a testimony of the resurrec- 
tion of Christ the Lord: and we were baptized in the holy river 
of Jordan and received white robes, every one of us. And after 
the three days, when we had kept the passover of the Lord, all 


Greek. 


of mankind cometh with the righteous, that they also may enter 
in. And now, having seen you, lam come to meet you. And 
when the saints heard these things, they cried aloud with a great 
voice, saying: Great is our Lord, and great is his power. 

XI (XXVIT) 

All these things did we see and hear, even we the two brethren 
which also were sent by Michael the archangel and appointed to 
proclaim the resurrection of the Lord, but first to go unto Jordan 
and be baptized; whither also we went and were baptized, 


Latin B. 


But unto us and many others was it commanded that we 
should rise again with our bodies, and bear witness in the world 
of the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, and concerning 
those things that were done in hell. 

These are the things, brethren beloved, which we have seen, 
and do testify being adjured of you, as he beareth witness who 
died for us and rose again. For like as it is written, so was it 
performed in every point. 


ACTS OF PILATE 143 


Latin A. 


they were caught up in the clouds which had risen again with us, 
and were taken over Jordan and were no more seen of any man. 
But unto us it was said that we should remain in the city of 
Arimathaea and continue in prayer. 

_ These be all things which the Lord bade us declare unto you: 
give praise and thanksgiving (confession) unto him, and repent 
that he may have mercy upon you. Peace be unto you from the 
same Lord Jesus Christ which is the Saviour of us all. Amen. 

And when they had finished writing all things in the several 
volumes of paper they arose; and Karinus gave that which he 


Greek. 

together with other dead that had risen again. Thereafter we 
went unto Jerusalem also and accomplished the passover of the 
resurrection: but now we depart, for we are not able to abide in 
this place. And the love of God and the Father, and the grace of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, and <the fellowship) of the Holy Ghost 
be with you all. Amen. 

When they had thus written and had closed up the books, 
they gave the one half unto the high priests and the one half unto 
Joseph and Nicodemus: and they themselves vanished suddenly. 

To the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen. 


Latin B. XI (XXVIT) 

But when the paper was wholly read through, all that heard it 
fell upon their faces weeping bitterly and smote hard upon their 
breasts, crying out and saying: Woe unto us: wherefore cometh 
this to pass unto us wretched men? Pilate did flee, Annas and 
Caiaphas did flee, the priests and Levites did flee, and all the 
people of the Jews beside, lamenting and saying: Woe unto us 
miserable men; we have shed innocent blood upon the earth. 

Therefore for three days and three nights they tasted not at 
all either bread or water, neither did any of them return unto the 
synagogue. But on the third day the council gathered together 
again, and the other paper, to wit of Leucius, was read, and 
neither more nor less was found in it, even to one letter, than 
what was contained in the writing of Karinus. 

Then was the synagogue troubled and they mourned all of 
them forty days and forty nights, looking for death at the hand 
of God and for the vengeance of God. But the Most High God, 
which is merciful and pitiful, destroyed them not immediately, 
but gave them freely a place of repentance: but they were not 
found worthy to be turned unto the Lord. 

These be the testimonies, beloved brethren, of Karinus and 
Leucius, concerning Christ the Son of God and his holy acts in 
Hell: unto whom let us all give praise and glory unto ages 
without end. Amen. 


144 PASSION GOSPELS 


Latin A. 

had written into the hands of Annas and Caiaphas and Gamaliel; 
likewise Leucius gave that which he had written into the hands 
of Nicodemus and Joseph. And suddenly they were transfigured 
and became white exceedingly and were no more seen. But 
their writings were found to be the same (Jit. equal), neither more 
nor less by one letter. 

And when all the synagogue of the Jews heard all these mar- 
vellous sayings of Karinus and Leucius, they said one to another: 
Of a truth all these things were wrought by the Lord, and blessed 
be the Lord, world without end, Amen. And they went out all 
of them in great trouble of mind, smiting their breasts with fear 
and trembling, and departed every man unto his own home. — 

And all these things which were spoken by the Jews in their 
synagogue, did Joseph and Nicodemus forthwith declare unto 
the governor. And Pilate himself wrote all the things that 
were done and said concerning Jesus by the Jews, and laid up 
all the words in the public books of his judgement hall (praetorium). 


XIL (XXVIII) 
This chapter is not found in the majority of copies. 

After these things Pilate entered into the temple of the Jews 
and gathered together all the chief of the priests, and the 
teachers (grammaticos) and scribes and doctors of the law, and 
went in with them into the holy place of the temple and com- 
manded all the doors to be shut, and said unto them: We have 
heard that ye have in this temple a certain great Bible; wherefore 
I ask you that it be presented before us. And when that great 
Bible adorned with gold and precious jewels was brought by four 
ministers, Pilate said to them all: I adjure you by the God of 
your fathers which commanded you to build this temple in the 
place of his sanctuary, that ye hide not the truth from me. 
Ye know all the things that are written in this Bible; but tell 
me now if ye have found in the scriptures that this Jesus whom 
ye have crucified is the Son of God which should come for the 
salvation of mankind, and in what year of the times he must 
come. Declare unto me whether ye crucified him in ignorance or 
knowingly. 

And Annas and Caiaphas when they were thus adjured com- 
manded all the rest that were with them to go out of the temple; 
and they themselves shut all the doors of the temple and of the 
sanctuary, and said unto Pilate: Thou hast adjured us, O excel- 
lent judge, by the building of this temple to make manifest unto 
thee the truth and reason (or a true account). After that we had 
crucified Jesus, knowing not that he was the Son of God, but 
supposing that by some chance he did his wondrous works, we 
made a great assembly (synagogue) in this temple; and as we 
conferred one with another concerning the signs of the mighty 


ACTS OF PILATE 145 


Latin A. 


works which Jesus had done, we found many witnesses of our 
own nation who said that they had seen Jesus alive after his 
passion, and that he was passed into the height of the heaven. 
Moreover, we saw two witnesses whom Jesus raised from the 
dead, who declared unto us many marvellous things which Jesus 
did among the dead, which things we have in writing in our 
hands. Now our custom is that every year before our assembly 
we open this holy Bible and inquire the testimony of God. And 
we have found in the first book of the Seventy how that Michael 
the angel spake unto the third son of Adam the first man con- 
cerning the five thousand and five hundred years, wherein should 
come the most beloved Son of God, even Christ: and furthermore 
we have thought that peradventure this same was the God of 
Israel which said unto Moses: Make thee an ark of the covenant 
in length two cubits and a half, and in breadth one cubit and a 
half, and in height one cubit and a half. For by those five cubits 
and a half we have understood and known the fashion of the 
ark of the old covenant, for that in five thousand and a half 
thousand years Jesus Christ should come in the ark of his body: 
and we have found that he is the God of Israel, even the Son of 
God. For after his passion, we the chief of the priests, because 
we marvelled at the signs which came to pass on his account, 
did open the Bible, and searched out all the generations unto the 
generation of Joseph, and Mary the mother of Christ, taking 
her to be the seed of David: and we found that from the day 
when God made the heaven and the earth and the first man, 
from that time unto the Flood are 2,212 years: and from the 
Flood unto the building of the tower 531 years: and from the 
building of the tower unto Abraham 606 years: and from 
Abraham unto the coming of the children of Israel out of Egypt 
470 years: and from the going of the children of Israel out of 
Egypt unto the building of the temple 511 years: and from the 
building of the temple unto the destruction of the same temple 
464 years: so far found we in the Bible of Esdras: and inquiring 
from the burning of the temple unto the coming of Christ and his 
birth we found it to be 686 years, which together were five 
thousand and five hundred years,} like as we found it written 
in the Bible that Michael the archangel declared before unto 
Seth the third son of Adam, that after five thousand and a half 
thousand years Christ the Son of God hath (? should) come. 
Hitherto have we told no man, lest there should be a schism 
in our synagogues; and now, O excellent judge, thou hast 
adjured us by this holy Bible of the testimonies of God, and we 
do declare it unto thee: and we also have adjured thee by thy 
life and health that thou declare not these words unto any map 
in Jerusalem. 
1 Really 5480: no MS. gives a correct calculation. 


870 L 


146 PASSION GOSPELS 


Latin A. XIII (X XTX) 

And Pilate, when he heard these words of Annas and Caiaphas, 
jaid them all up amongst the acts of the Lord and Saviour in 
the public books of his judgement hall, and wrote a letter unto 
Claudius the king of the city of Rome, saying: 

[The following Epistle or Report of Pilate is inserted in Greek into 
the late Acts of Peter and Paul (§ 40) and the Pseudo-Marcellus Passion 
of Peter and Paul (§ 19). We thus have it in Greek and Latin, and the 
‘Greek is used here as the basis of the version.] 


Pontius Pilate unto Claudius, greeting. 


There befell of late a matter which I myself brought to light (or 
made trial of): for the Jews through envy have punished them- 
selves and their posterity with fearful judgements of their own 
fault ; for whereas their fathers had promises (al. had announced 
unto them) that their God would send them out of heaven his 
holy one who should of right be called their king, and did promise 
that he would send him upon earth by a virgin; he, then (or 
this God of the Hebrews, then), came when I was governor of 
Judaea, and they beheld him enlightening the blind, cleansing 
lepers, healing the palsied, driving devils out of men, raising the 
dead, rebuking the winds, walking upon the waves of the sea 
dry-shod, and doing many other wonders, and all the people of 
the Jews calling him the Son of God: the chief priests therefore, 
moved with envy against him, took him and delivered him unto 
me and brought against him one false accusation after another, 
saying that he was a sorcerer and did things contrary to their law. 

But I, believing that these things were so, having scourged 
him, delivered him unto their will: and they crucified him, and 
when he was buried they set guards upon him. But while my 
soldiers watched him he rose again on the third day: yet so 
much was the malice of the Jews kindled that they gave money 
to the soldiers, saying: Say ye that his disciples stole away his 
body. But they, though they took the money, were not able 
to keep silence concerning that which had come to pass, for they 
also have testified that they saw him arisen and that they 
received money from the Jews. And these things have I reported 
<unto thy mightiness> for this cause, lest some other should 
lie unto thee (Lat. lest any lie otherwise) and thou shouldest 
deem right to believe the false tales of the Jews. 


147 


COPTIC NARRATIVES OF THE MINISTRY AND 
THE PASSION 


There is a large mass of fragments in Coptic (Sahidic), some relating 
to the Ministry of our Lord and others to his Passion, which demand 
some notice here. 

The largest collections of them (I pass over earlier publications such 
as those of Zoega and Dulaurier) are in Forbes Robinson’s Coptic 
Apocryphal Gospels, E. Revillout’s Apocryphes Coptes, I (Patrologia 
Orientalis II. 2), P. Lacau’s Fragments d’ Apocryphes Coptes (Mémoires 
de l’Institut Frangais d’Archéologie Orientale du Caire, 1904). 

The fragments relating to the Life of Christ’ before the Passion are 
none of them attributed definitely to any author. They are mostly in 
homiletic form: the writer addresses his readers or congregation from 
time to time, directly, and not seldom he makes definite mention of 
the Gospels. 

In one passage which Forbes Robinson humorously makes to serve 
as a motto to his volume, we read, ‘But some one will say to me, 
Art thou then adding a supplement to the Gospels? Let that beloved 
one listen attentively and .. .’, the fragment ends. Whatever his 
defence or explanation may have been, he certainly does add a great 
many supplements to the Gospels. It seems likely (judging from the 
analogy of other Coptic documents) that he personated, if not an 
apostle, a disciple of the apostles. The names of Evodius of Antioch 
and Gamaliel are found attached to similar writings. It would be quite 
in order for such a person to postulate the existence of the canonical 
Gospels, and to profess to offer information which was not contained 
in them. 

It is conceivable that some of the narrative matter in these frag- 
ments may be taken from earlier books; but the fragments themselves 
cannot, I think, be earlier in date than the fifth century. 

They will not be translated here in full: but a list, and a brief 
description of their contents, shall be given. 

1. Robinson, p. 162. Birth and childhood of John Baptist. 
Birth of Christ. His star in the form of a wheel, its figure like 
a cross, letters on it: This is Jesus the Son of God. The wise men 
see it and come to Herod. 

2. Robinson, p.163. The Feast at Cana. The wine has failed ; 
the parents of the bridegroom complain to Mary, who is their 
sister, and ask her to approach Christ. She does so. He orders 
that the water-pots be filled. We (the servants) hasted and filled 
them. 

This, then, belongs to a narrative written by an eyewitness. 

8. Revillout no. 1. 

Herod accuses Philip to Tiberius. 

Tiberius orders him to confiscate all Philip’s goods. 

Herod does so: Philip knows not the reason. 

4. Revillout no. 2. Robinson, p. 168. 


148 PASSION GOSPELS 


This is one of the longest of the fragments. It begins with 
a passage addressed to the hearers, and quotes John the Evan- 
gelist on the feeding of the 5,000: the story is filled out with 
dialogue, and tells how Judas was the last to receive the bread 
and ‘had no inheritance’ init. Thomas then says that he wishes 
to see the power of Christ displayed in the raising of the dead 
from their tombs, not only from the bier, as at Nain. Jesus 
replies in along and rhetorical address of many clauses, beginning, 
‘Come with me, Didymus, to the tomb of Lazarus’. Then the 
raising of Lazarus is told, and the risen man says that when the 
voice, ‘Lazarus, come forth!’ sounded in Amente (Hades), Adam 
knew it and bore witness to it. 

We then hear of one Carius, a Roman officer appointed to 
look after the confiscated lands of Philip (see fragment 38). 
He came to see Jesus and reported his mighty works to Herod, 
saying that he ought to be made king. Herod threatened 
any one who consented thereto with death. Annas and 
Caiaphas went to Carius and accused Jesus—he is a magician, 
was born of fornication, breaks the sabbath, has abolished 
the synagogue of the Jews. Joseph and Nicodemus opposed 
them. 

(Robinson’s text ends here: Revillout’s (p. 145) continues 
without break.) 

Herod cast Joseph and Nicodemus into prison. Carius 
threatened the Jews with destruction if any ill befell them. Then 
Herod got a pound of gold from every one of the chiefs of the 
Jews and bribed Carius with it not to tell Tiberius. And Carius 
kept silence. 

Joseph escaped to Arimathaea. 

Carius sent the apostle John to Tiberius to tell him about 
Jesus, and the emperor honoured him, and wrote that Jesus 
should be made king: and as the Gospel (John vi. 15) says, Jesus 
departed into a mountain alone. 

After that he summoned the apostles; and now we have 
a lengthy blessing of Peter on the mountain, at the end of which 
Peter sees the seven heavens open, and the Trinity. All the 
armies of heaven and the very stones of the mountain cry out the 
trisagios to Peter. 

5. Revillout no. 4, p. 151. Robinson, p. 176. 

Jesus is comforting the apostles on the mountain. The 
messengers of Theophilus come to fetch him to make him king. 
‘My kingdom is not of this world.’ 

The ‘authorities’ of Tiberius prevailed the second time con- 
cerning Jesus, with Pilate also, to commend Jesus to make him 
king. Pilate advocated the plan strongly. Herod who was there 
abused him: ‘Thou art a Galilaean foreign Egyptian Pontus!’ 
There was enmity between Pilate and Herod, and Herod bribed 
the Roman authorities and slandered Jesus. 


COPTIC NARRATIVES OF THE MINISTRY 149 


Jesus’ address to the apostles, ending ‘let us go hence, for 
Herod seeketh me to kill me’. 

They came down from the mountain, and met the devil in the 
form of a fisherman with attendant demons carrying nets and 
hooks, &c.: and they cast their nets and hooks on the mount. 
The apostles questioned Jesus about this: John, Philip, and 
Andrew, in particular. John was sent to speak to the devil and 
ask him what he was catching. The devilsaid: ‘It isnot a wonder 
to catch fish in the waters: the wonder is in this desert, to catch 
fish there.’ He cast his nets and caught all manner of fish (really 
men), some by their eyes, others by their lips, &c. 

(Here follows a fragment given only by Lacau, p. 108.) Jesus 
told John to tell the devil to cast his nets again. He did so, and 
a great smoke rose up, and the devil’s power disappeared. John 
threw a stone at him and he fled, cursing. Bartholomew then 
asked to be permitted to see ‘him whom thou didst create to 
laugh at him’ (Leviathan), and Jesus said that the sight was 
almost too terrible for human eyes; but the request was granted. 
A cloud—that of the Transfiguration—appeared in the heaven. 


(Here the piece ends.) 


And here Revillout would place a few lines which he calls 
no. 4 bis (p. 189), which paraphrase John vii. 8-11, about Jesus 
refusing at first to go to the feast, and subsequently going in 
secret. The only detail worth noting is that (at Jerusalem). 
Jesus sojourns in the house of Irmeél. 

We next have a group of pieces relating to the Passion. 

First we place two fragments relating to Judas and his wife. 

6. Revillout no. 5, p. 156. 

Some speaker tells how Judas used to take his ill-gotten gains 
home to his wife: sometimes he cheated her of them, and then 
she mocked him. 

She counselled him to betray his Master. 

He listened to her as Adam did to Eve, and went and covenanted 
with the Jews. The prophecy (Zech.) was fulfilled. 

He took the money to his wife: he said to her... 

7. Lacau, p. 34. Revillout, Suppl. 1, p. 195. 

Judas received the thirty pieces. 

His wife was foster-mother to the child of Joseph of Arima- 
thaea, which was seven months old. When the money was brought 
into the house, the child (fell ill or would not stop crying). 
Joseph was summoned: the child cried out, begging him to take 
it away ‘from this evil beast, for yesterday at the ninth hour 
they received the price (of blood)’. Joseph took the child away. 

Judas went to the priests. They arrested Jesus and took him 
to Pilate. . . . He was crowned with thorns and crucified, and 
said: Father forgive them. 

1 Compare with this the Gospel of Bartholomew, iv. 44. 


150 PASSION GOSPELS 


8. Revillout no. 6, p. 157. Lacau, p. 33. ' 

Jesus and the apostles at table. The table turned of itself 
after Jesus had partaken of a dish, to present it to each apostle. 

Matthias set a dish on the table in which was a cock, and told 
Jesus how, when he was killing it, the Jews said: ‘The blood of 
your master shall be shed like that of this cock.” Jesus smiled 
and answered that it was true; and after some more words, bade 
the cock come to life and fly away and ‘announce the day whereon 
they will deliver me up’. And it did so. 


Here a reference will not be out of place to the Ethiopic ‘Book of 
the Cock’ which is read in the Abyssinian Church on Maundy Thursday. 
It has been translated by Marius Chaine, in the Revue Sémitique, 1905, 
p. 276. 


The contents are as follows : 


After these things Akrosina, the wife of Simon the Pharisee, 
brought a cock cut up with a knife, put it in a magnificent dish, 
and set it on the table before our Lord. Jesus said, ‘My time is 
at hand’. He blessed the bread and gave it to Judas. Satan 
entered into him and he went out—without receiving the blessing 
of Jesus. 

Jesus touched the slain cock and it stood up whole. He bade 
it follow Judas and see what he did, and return and report it: 
he endowed it with human speech. It followed Judas home: 
his wife urged him to betray Jesus. He went to the temple. 
The dialogue with the Jews is reported, and Paul of Tarsus, 
“son of Josue Almason, son of Cadafana’, a rough man, says, 
“Now, thou, deliver him into my hands without error’. 

The cock returned to Bethany, and sat before Jesus and wept 
bitterly, and told all the story. The disciples wept. Jesus 
dismissed the cock to mount up into the sky for a thousand years. 

The fragments 7 and 8 most probably belong to the beginning 
of the Book of Bartholomew, which has to be noticed hereafter. 
Certainly this is the case with Revillout no. 12, p. 165 (Lacau 8, 
p. 84), which narrates the death of Ananias. 

9. Revillout no. 10, p. 161. A dialogue between Christ and 
Pilate expanded from that in St. John. 


1 By way of a curiosity another Ethiopic narrative of the Passion 
may find mention here. It is noticed in Dillmann’s catalogue of the 
Ethiopie MSS. in the British Museum (no. 40, Add. 16, 254) under 
the name of Liber Vivificans (Dirsan Mahyawi), and contains the story 
of the Passion written by the Evangelists and by three Virgins, Berzeda, 
Mathilda, and Elisabeth, to whom the Lord revealed his Passion. 
Another copy, apparently, is in the D’Abbadie MS. 29. The ‘three 
Virgins’ are evidently SS. Birgitta of Sweden (fourteenth century), 
Mechtildis (twelfth or thirteenth century), and Elisabeth of Schénau 
{twelfth century), all of whom had revelations about the Passion. How 
their writings made their way to Abyssinia it would be curious and 
interesting to ascertain. 


COPTIC NARRATIVES OF THE PASSION 151 


10. Revillout no. 11, p. 168. A further piece of a like dialogue, 
ee long speeches of our Lord, and ending with Ecce 

omo. 

The place and order of the two next is uncertain. 

11. Revillout no. 18, p. 168. An address of our Lord (to 
Thomas) reminding him of the signs at the crucifixion, and 
exhorting him to touch him. 

12. Revillout no. 14, p. 169. Mary (the Virgin) at the sepul- 
chre. Jesus appears to her and addresses her, forbidding her to 
touch him. The scene is assimilated to that of the appearance 
to Mary Magdalene (as elsewhere in Coptic writings): see above 
on the ‘XXth Discourse of Cyril’, pp. 87, 88. 

13. Revillout no. 15, p. 170. Lacau, p. 19. Two leaves with 
a gap of two between them. 

This fragment has a definite attribution, to Gamaliel. 

It is a narrative connected with the resurrection. 

We find Pilate examining four soldiers as to their statement 
that the body of Jesus was stolen. One (the second: the testi- 
mony of the first is gone) says the eleven apostles took the body ;. 
the third says, Joseph and Nicodemus; the fourth, ‘we were 
asleep’. They are imprisoned, and Pilate goes with the centurion 
and the priests to the tomb and finds the grave-clothes. He 
says, ‘If the body had been stolen, these would have been taken. 
too’. They say, ‘These grave-clothes belong to some one else’. 
Pilate remembers the words of Jesus, ‘Great wonders must 
happen in my tomb’, and goes in, and weeps over the shroud. 
Then he turns to the centurion, who had but one eye, having lost 
the other in batile. 

Here is a gap, in which no doubt the centurion’s eye is healed 
by touching the grave clothes, and he is converted. Also it is 
clear that Joseph and Nicodemus are sent for, and that the Jews 
point out to Pilate that in a well in the garden there is the body 
of a crucified man. 

The other leaf begins with a dialogue between Pilate and the 
centurion. Then all go to the well. ‘I, Gamaliel, followed them 
also among the band.’ They see the body, and the Jews cry, 
“Behold the sorcerer’.... Pilate asks Joseph and Nicodemus. 
whether this is the body of Jesus. They answer, the grave- 
clothes are his, but the body is that of the thief who was crucified 
with him. The Jews are angry and wish to throw Joseph and 
Nicodemus into the well. . . . Pilate remembers the words of 
Jesus, ‘The dead shall rise again in my tomb’, and says to the 
Jews, ‘You believe that this is truly the Nazarene’. ‘They say, 
‘Yes’. ‘Then’, says Pilate, ‘it is but right to lay his body in 
his own tomb.’... fee iid 

Here the leaf ends; but we can see that when the body is laid 
in Jesus’ tomb it will revive and declare the truth. : 

A detached sheet of an Ethiopic MS. which was in private 


152 PASSION GOSPELS 


hands in 1892 (sce Newbery House Magazine, 1892, p. 641), 
contains a like story in another form. 

Here we have the Jews explaining to Pilate that the sweet 
odour of the sepulchre is due to the spices put on the body by 
Joseph, and to the flowers in the garden. Pilate rebukes them, 
and they retort that he has no business to come to the sepulchre. 
He addresses the centurion. After a gap is a prayer of Pilate’s, 
in which he asks pardon for having put ‘another body in the place 
where they put thy body’. At the end of the prayer a voice comes 
from the mouth of the dead bidding Pilate remove the stone that 
he (the dead) may come out. 

An Arabic Life of Pilate, noticed by De Sacy, extant in manu- 
script at Paris (Arab. 160), seems likely to contain the whole 
story, of which we here have fragments. It purports to have 
been written by Gamaliel and Annas (or Ananias). Migne, Dict. 
des Apocr. I. 1101. 


This, I believe, completes the list of the fragments of this character 
which have been published up to date. Nearly all of them are put 
together by Revillout under the title of the Gospel of the Twelve 
Apostles. But we have seen that at least one (13) is from a narrative 
under Gamaliel’s name; and it is also pretty clear that not all the 
rest can belong to a single writing. 

Nos. 1, 3, 4, 5 must go together: they are from the ‘homiletic’ book. 
1 is the least certainly pertinent. 

These pieces have an element which links them together in the 
motif of the intrigues to make Jesus a king. Their late date is apparent 
in the long rhetorical speeches, and in the tremendous exaltation of 
St. Peter. 

No. 2 is by an eyewitness, assigned by Baumstark to Gamaliel. 

No. 6 may belong to Gamaliel. 

Nos. 7, 8 to Bartholomew. 

Nos. 9, 10, with their interest in Pilate, are probably from Gamaliel. 

Nos. 11, 12 uncertain. Baumstark refers them to Gamaliel. 

No. 18, Gamaliel. 

Baumstark’s article referred to here is in the Revue Biblique Inter- 
nationale for 1906, p. 245. He would refer nos. 2, 3, 4, 5 to Gamaliel, 
as well as the later ones. 

Other Coptic documents will come up for notice when we deal with 
the Gospel of Bartholomew, the Death of the Virgin, and the Acts of 
the Apostles: and also with the Apocalypses. It may be as well, 
however, to register here the statement or warning that the Copts 
were tireless in producing embroideries upon the Biblical stories, and 
perhaps in rewriting older documents to suit their own taste. Only 
fresh discoveries of older texts can enable us to decide how much, if 
any, of the details which these later fragments supply, is really archaic. 


153 


OTHER APPENDIXES TO THE ACTS OF PILATE 


Under this heading may be noticed the various forms of Reports of 
Pilate to the Emperor, and other Letters attributed to him: of his 
death, of the Vengeance of the Saviour, and also the Greek writing 
called the Story of Joseph of Arimathaea. 

It is probable that some sort of Report of Pilate to Tiberius was 
concocted very early. Tertullian states it as a fact that Pilate reported 
all the events of the Passion to Tiberius, and that the Emperor tried, 
without success, to induce the Senate to declare Jesus a God. What 
the source of this story was is unknown, but it is a very obvious one 
to invent. The texts of the apocryphal Reports which we have are 
all late, but in some of the Greek ones there are faint similarities to 
the Gospel of Peter. 

Tischendorf prints a short 


LETTER OF PILATE TO TIBERIUS, 
which cannot be traced further back than the fifteenth century. It is 
written in rather elegant Latin, evidently, I think, by an Italian of the 
early Renaissance. The tenor of it is this : 

‘Jesus Christ of whom I recently wrote to you has been exe- 
cuted against my will. So pious and austere a man has never 
been seen, nor will be again. But there was a wonderful unani- 
mity in the request of the Jews and their leader that he should be 
crucified, though their own prophets, and the Sibyls, testified 
against them, and signs appeared at his death which the philoso- 
phers said threatened the collapse of the whole world. His 
disciples who still live do not belie their master’s teaching, but 
are active in good works. Had I not feared a general rising, the 
man might have been yet alive.’ He ends, feebly excusing his 
conduct. Date, the 5th of the Kalends of April. 


REPORT OF PILATE (ANAPHORA). 

There are two Greek texts of this which do not differ in essentials. 
In some manuscripts one form is appended to the Acts of Pilate. It 
is a late document, and not of much interest in its present form: but, 
as has been said, it contains faint reminders of the Gospel of Peter, 
and may be based on a briefer document of early date. After the 
address it begins: 

‘I have received a communication, O most mighty, which 
oppresses me with fear and trembling.’ 

He goes on to say that in Jerusalem, a city of his province, the 
Jews delivered him a man named Jesus, charging him with much 
that they could not substantiate, and in particular with violating 
the sabbath. The miracles are then described with some rhetorical 
ornament, particularly in the case of Lazarus. 

1 A letter of Tiberius to Abgar of Edessa, quoted by Moses of 


Chorene (History of Armenia, II, ch. 33) gives exactly the same account 
of the proceedings in the Senate, and mentions the report of Pilate. 


154 PASSION GOSPELS 


Jesus was delivered to him by Herod, Archelaus, Philip, Annas, 
Caiaphas, and all the people. 

At his crucifixion the sun was darkened; the stars appeared, 
and in all the world people lighted lamps from the sixth hour till 
evening; the moon appeared like blood, and the stars and Orion 
lamented at the sin of the Jews. (The other recension says that 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, the twelve patriarchs, and Moses and 
Job, who were seen by the Jews, and many others ‘whom I, too, 
saw’, appeared in the body and thus lamented.) 

On the first day of the week, at the third hour of night, there 
was a great light: the sun shone with unwonted brightness, 
men in shining garments appeared in the air and cried out to 
the souls in Hades to come up, and proclaimed the resurrection 
of Jesus. 

The light continued all night. Many Jews disappeared in the 
chasms which the earthquake had caused: and all the synagogues 
except one fell down. 

Under the stress of the consternation caused by all these 
portents Pilate writes to Caesar. 

To this is appended in one recension the ‘Delivering up, 
Paradosis, of Pilate’. 

On receipt of the letter there was great astonishment at Rome, 
and Caesar in wrath ordered Pilate to be brought to him as 
@ prisoner. 

On hearing of his arrival Caesar took his seat ‘in the temple of 
the gods before all the senate, and with all his army and all the 
multitude of his power’, and said to Pilate: How didst thou dare, 
thou, most impious, to do such a thing, when thou hadst seen 
such signs concerning that man? by thy wicked daring thou hast 
destroyed the whole world. 

Pilate threw the blame on the Jews, on Herod, Archelaus, 
Philip, Annas, and Caiaphas (see the Anaphora). Caesar. Why 
didst thou yield to them? Pilate. The nation is rebellious and 
disobedient. Caesar. Thou oughtest to have kept him safe and 
sent him to me, and not have yielded and crucified one who had 
done all those mighty works of which thou spakest in thy report. 
It is plain that he was the Christ, the king of the Jews. 

When Caesar named Christ, all the images of the gods fell down 
and became as dust. There was great consternation: Caesar 
remanded Pilate to prison. 

Next day he sat in the Capitol with all the senate, and a 
dialogue similar to the last took place. After it Caesar wrote to 
Licianus, the chief governor of the East, bidding him enslave all 
the nation of the Jews, and make them few in number for their 
wickedness. This Licianus did. 

Caesar then commanded a ruler named Albius to behead Pilate. 
He was led forth to death, and prayed: Number me not among 
the wicked Hebrews. Remember not evil against me or against 


OTHER APPENDIXES TO THE ACTS OF PILATE 155 


thy servant Procla which standeth here, whom thou didst make 
to prophesy that thou must be nailed to the cross. But pardon 
us and number us among thy righteous ones. 

A voice from heaven came, saying: All the generations and the 
families of the Gentiles shall call thee blessed, because in thy 
days were fulfilled all these things which were spoken by the 
prophets concerning me; and thou also shalt appear as my 
witness (or martyr) at my second coming, when I shall judge 
the twelve tribes of Israel and them that have not confessed my 
name. 

The prefect cut off Pilate’s head, and an angel of the Lord 
received it: whom when Procla his wife saw, she was filled with 
joy, and straightway gave up the ghost and was buried with her 
husband. 

This extraordinarily favourable view of Pilate is characteristic of 
the East. From the same workshop as the Report and the Paradosis 
come two letters—of Pilate to Herod, and Herod to Pilate—which 
exist in Greek and in Syriac (the latter in a manuscript of the sixth or 
seventh century). There is some divergence between the two versions. 


THE LETTER OF PILATE TO HEROD 


It was no good thing which I did at your persuasion when 
I crucified Jesus. I ascertained from the centurion and the 
soldiers that he rose again, and I sent to Galilee and learned that 
he was preaching there to above five hundred believers. 

My wife Procla took Longinus, the believing centurion, and 
ten (or twelve) soldiers (who had kept the sepulchre), and went 
forth and found him ‘sitting in a tilled field’ teaching a multitude. 
He saw them, addressed them, and spoke of his victory over 
death and hell. Procla and the rest returned and told me. I was 
in great distress, and put on a mourning garment and went with 
her and fifty soldiers to Galilee. We found Jesus: and as 
we approached him there was a sound in heaven and thunder, and 
the earth trembled and gave forth a sweet odour. We fell on our 
faces and the Lord came and raised us up, and I saw on him 
the scars of the passion, and he laid his hands on my shoulders, 
saying: All generations and families shall call thee blessed (see 
above), because in thy days the Son of Man died and rose again. 


THE LETTER OF HEROD TO PILATE 


It is in no small sorrow—according to the divine Scriptures— 
(i. e. as I might have anticipated from the teaching of Scripture) 
that I write to you. 

My dear daughter Herodias was playing upon the water 
(i. e. the ice) and fell in up to her neck. And her mother caught 
at her head to save her, and it was cut off, and the water 


156 PASSION GOSPELS 


swept her body away. My wife is sitting with the head on her 
knees, weeping, and all the house is full of sorrow. 

I am in great distress of mind at the death of Jesus, and 
reflecting on my sins in killing John Baptist and massacring the 
Innocents. ‘Since, then, you are able to see the man Jesus again, 
strive for me and intercede for me: for to you Gentiles the 
kingdom is given, according to the prophets and Christ.’ 

Lesbonax my son is in the last stages of a decline. I am 
afflicted with dropsy, and worms are coming out of my mouth. 
My wife’s left eye is blinded through weeping. Righteous are 
the judgements of God, because we mocked at the eye of the 
righteous. Vengeance will come on the Jews and the priests, and 
the Gentiles will inherit the kingdom, and the children of light 
be cast out. 

And, Pilate, since we are of one age, bury my family honour- 
ably: it is better for us to be buried by you than by the priests, 
who are doomed to speedy destruction. Farewell. I have sent 
you my wife’s earrings and my own signet ring. I am already 
beginning to receive judgement in this world, but I fear the 
judgement hereafter much more. This is temporary, that is 
everlasting. 


If the Eastern Christians—or at least those of Egypt and Syria— 
regarded Pilate as a saint and martyr, those of the West thought of 
him only as a criminal. The biography of him which is given in the 
Golden Legend (cap. 53, on the Passion) is of too late a date to be 
reproduced here; but the legends of his death are older. Insummarizing 
them we will begin with one of the few Greek writings which takes the 
Western, the unfavourable, view of Pilate. It is assuredly not early 
in date: it has points of connexion with the B recension (Greek) of 
the Acts of Pilate. It is the 


LETTER OF TIBERIUS TO PILATE 


This was delivered to Pilate by means of the messenger Raab 
(cf. Rachaab in Recension B, p. 116), who was sent with 2,000 
soldiers to bring him to Rome. 

Since you have given a violent and iniquitous sentence of 
death against Jesus of Nazareth, showing no pity, and having 
received gifts to condemn him, and with your tongue have 
expressed sympathy (a reference to the Anaphora), but in your 
heart have delivered him up, you shall be brought home a 
prisoner to answer for yourself. 

I have been exceedingly distressed at the reports that have 
reached me: a woman, a disciple of Jesus, has been here, called 
Mary Magdalene,! out of whom he is said to have cast seven devils, 
and has told of all his wonderful cures. How could you permit 
him to be crucified? If you did not receive him as a God, you 


1 Cf. Recension B of the Acts of Pilate. 


OTHER APPENDIXES TO THE ACTS OF PILATE 157 


might at least have honoured him as a physician. Your own 
deceitful writing to me has condemned you. 

As you unjustly sentenced him, I shall justly sentence you, 
and your accomplices as well. 

Pilate, Archelaus, Philip, Annas, and Caiaphas were arrested. 

Rachaab and the soldiers slew all the Jewish males, defiled 
the women, and brought the leaders to Rome. On the way 
Caiaphas died in Crete: the earth would not receive his body, and 
he was covered with a cairn of stones. 

It was the old law that if a condemned criminal saw the face 
of the emperor he was spared: so Tiberius would not see Pilate, 
but shut him up in a cave. 

Annas was sewed into a fresh bull’s-hide, which, contracting as 
it dried, squeezed him to death. The other chiefs of the Jews 
were beheaded: Archelaus and Philip were crucified. 

One day the emperor went out to hunt, and chased a hind to 
the door of Pilate’s prison. Pilate looked out, trying to see the 
emperor’s face, but at that moment the emperor shot an arrow 
at the hind, which went in at the window and killed Pilate. 

The same tale is told in a Greek life of Mary Magdalene, which 
I have transcribed from a manuscript at Holkham, and which 
is evidently under strong Western influence, since it tells the 
story of her mission to Marseilles and of a miracle wrought on 
a prince there, which is a very favourite subject with French 
mediaeval artists. 


THE DEATH OF PILATE 


The Latin legend of Pilate’s death hardly ranks as an apocryphal book. 
It is printed by Tischendorf from a Milan manuscript of the fourteenth 
century—the illustrated manuscript mentioned above (p. 66) under 
the heading of Infancy Gospels, facsimiled under the title of Canonical 
Histories and Apocryphal Legends. It is also found in the Golden 
Legend, cap. 53, as the conclusion of the fabulous life of Pilate, and is 
there said to be taken from ‘a certain history, though an apocryphal 
one’. This life is found separate—usually in company with a similar 
life of Judas Iscariot—in manuscripts of an earlier date than the Golden 
Legend; but the whole composition is thoroughly mediaeval and has 
nothing antique about it. 

The story is this: 

The Emperor Tiberius, being sorely diseased, heard that there 
was a wonderful physician in Jerusalem, named Jesus, who 
healed all sicknesses. He sent an officer of his named Volusianus 
to Pilate to bid him send the physician to him. Pilate was 
terrified, knowing that Jesus had been crucified (and begged for 
fourteen days delay, Golden Legend). On the way back to his inn, 
Volusianus met a matron called Veronica and asked her about 
Jesus. She told him the truth, to his great grief, and, to console 
him added that when our Lord was away teaching she had 


158 PASSION GOSPELS 


desired to have a picture of him always by her, and went to carry 
a linen cloth to a painter for that purpose. Jesus met her, and 
on hearing what she wished, took the cloth from her and im- 
printed the features of his face upon it. This cloth, she said, 
will cure your lord: I cannot sell it, but I will go with you to 
him. 

Volusianus and Veronica returned to Rome, and Tiberius, when 
the likeness was to be brought to him, spread the path with 
silken cloths. He was instantly healed by looking at the like- 
ness. 

Pilate was arrested and brought before the emperor at Rome. 
Now he was wearing the seamless tunic of Jesus. When he 
came before the emperor, he, who had been raging against him 
before, became quite mild. He sent Pilate away and imme- 
diately his rage returned. This happened again. Then, either 
by divine inspiration or on the suggestion of some Christian, he 
had him stripped of the tunic, sent him back to prison, and 
shortly after sentenced him to die by the basest of deaths. 
On hearing this, Pilate killed himself with his own knife. Caesar 
had a millstone tied to his neck and threw him into the Tiber. 
The demons gathered in crowds, and storms disturbed the place 
so that all were in great fear. The corpse was taken out of 
the river and carried off to Vienne (via Gehennae) on the Rhone, 
with the same result. Thence it was taken to be buried in the 
territory of Lausanne; but disturbances continued there till the 
inhabitants dug it up and threw it into a well surrounded by 
mountains, where diabolical manifestations are still said to 
occur. 

The last class of these legends is somewhat older. We have it in 
several forms in Latin and also in an old Anglo-Saxon version. It 
has something in common with the Death of Pilate, and it merges into 
the romances of the Destruction of Jerusalem which were very popular 
in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. The oldest form is that 
called the Healing of Tiberius (Cura sanitatis Tiberi), which goes back 
in manuscripts to the eighth century. 

This runs as follows: Tiberius was sorely diseased. He heard 
from a Jew named Thomas of the miracles of Jesus, and sent 
a great officer, Volusianus, to bring him from Jerusalem. The 
voyage took a year and three months. Pilate and the Jews were 
much frightened. Pilate had to be persuaded by one of his 
soldiers that it was the crucified Jesus who was meant: the 
evidence for the resurrection was confirmed by Joseph of Arima- 
thaea and others. Pilate, imprisoned meanwhile, was made to 
avow his guilt publicly. 

young man named Marcius now informed Volusian that 
a woman of Tyre, Veronica (who is also called Basilla, say some 
early copies), possessed the likeness of Jesus, who had cured her 
issue of blood three years before. Denying it at first, she at last 


OTHER APPENDIXES TO THE ACTS OF PILATE 159 


produced it under compulsion. Volusian adored it, and threatened 
with punishment all who had taken part in Jesus’ death. He 
then set off for Rome with Veronica and Pilate, and reached it 
in a short time. ‘Tiberius inquired why Pilate had not been 
executed. Volusian said he did not wish to anticipate the 
emperor’s judgement. Tiberius banished Pilate, without seeing 
him, to Ameria in Tuscany. Volusian then brought Veronica 
and the likeness to Tiberius, who adored it and was healed. He 
gave money to Veronica, and made a precious shrine for the 
likeness, was baptized, and died after some years in peace. 
The next development of the legend is thought to originate in 
Aquitaine. The manuscripts go back to the tenth century, and the 
Anglo-Saxon version is not later than the eleventh. The name of this is 


THE VENGEANCE OR AVENGING OF THE SAVIOUR, 
and a brief summary of it shall be given. 


There was a king Titus (or Tyrus) under Tiberius, in Aquitaine, 
in a city of Libia called Burgidalla (Bordeaux). He had a cancer 
in his right nostril and his face was eaten away up to his eye. 

There was also a Jew named Nathan, son of Naum, whom the 
Jews had sent to Tiberius to bear a treaty to him. Tiberius, too, 
was ill of fever and ulcers and had nine kinds of leprosy. Nathan’s 
ship was driven ashore at Titus’s city. Nathan was sent for and 
told his story. Titus asked if he knew any one who could cure 
him. Nathan said: If you had been in Jerusalem lately there 
was a prophet called Emanuel (the miracles are enumerated, 
and the Passion, descent into hell, and resurrection described). 
Titus said: Woe to you, Tiberius, in whose realm such things are 
done. I would have slain these Jews with my own hand for 
destroying my Lord. At this word the wound fell from his face 
and he was healed, and so were all the sick who were there. 
Titus cried out, confessing his belief in Christ, and made Nathan 
baptize him (and instead of Tyrus he was called Titus, which 
in our tongue means Pious, Anglo-Saxon). 

Then he sent for Vespasian to come with all his forces, 
and he came with 5,000 men, and said: What do you want 
me for? ‘To destroy the enemies of Jesus.’ So they sailed off to 
Jerusalem. Archelaus in terror gave his kingdom to his son, 
and stabbed himself. The son allied himself with other kings 
and fortified Jerusalem, which was besieged seven years, till 
the inhabitants had to eat earth. At last they took counsel 
to surrender, and gave the keys to Titus and Vespasian. 
Some were slain, some crucified head downwards, or pierced 


1 An appendix or continuation tells how, in Nero’s days, Simon 
Magus came to Rome and claimed to be the risen Son of God. How 
Pilate was sent for, and his letter to Claudius read ; how Pilate returned 
into exile at Ameria, and soon died; and of Nero’s evil end. 


160 PASSION GOSPELS 


with lances, sold, cast lots upon, and divided into four parts, 
and the rest sold at thirty for a penny. 

Then they made search for the likeness of Jesus and found 
Veronica, who had it. Pilate they delivered to four quaternions 
of soldiers. (Veronica was the woman healed of the issue of blood. 
She abode with Titus and Vespasian till the emperor’s kinsman 
Velosian came.) 

A message was sent by Titus to Tiberius to send Velosian. He 
told him to go to Jerusalem and bring some one to heal him, to 
whom he might promise half the kingdom. 

Velosian arrived after a year and seven days, and first found 
Joseph and Nicodemus. Joseph told of the burial, of his im- 
prisonment, and his deliverance by Jesus. 

Then Veronica came and told of her healing. Velosian ar- 
raigned and imprisoned Pilate (put him in an iron cage, Anglo- 
Saxon). He then examined Veronica, who denied that she had 
the likeness. He threatened her with torture; at last she con- 
fessed that she had it in (or on) a linen cloth and adored it every 
day. She produced it. Velosian adored it, took it, put it in 
a gold cloth and locked it in a box, and embarked for Rome. 
Veronica left all she had and insisted on coming with him. They 
sailed up the Tiber to Rome, after a year’s journey. 

Tiberius heard of their arrival and summoned Velosian, who 
told him all the story at length, including the destruction of 
the Jews. Then Tiberius asked for the likeness. It was brought, 
and he adored it, and his flesh was cleansed and he prayed. 
Then he asked if there were any there who had seen Christ and 
knew how to baptize. And Nathan was brought, and baptized 
him, and he blessed God, and was instructed in all the articles 
of the Christian faith. 

Another form of the legend is given in the Golden Legend, and 
incorporated, with pictures, in the Milan manuscript referred to before. 


This begins by telling how Pilate sent a messenger, Albanus, 
to Caesar to excuse himself for the condemnation of Jesus. 
Albanus was driven ashore in Galicia and brought to Vespasian, 
who derived his name from the fact that from his childhood he 
had been troubled with a wasps’ nest in his nose. Vespasian 
said to Albanus: You come from the land of the wise; you 
must cure me. Albanus said: I am not skilled in medicine. 
Vespasian: You must cure me or die. Albanus: There was a man 
who could have cured you with a word; he cast out devils, 
and raised the dead. He was Jesus of Nazareth, whom the Jews 
killed for envy. If you believed in him you would recover, 
Vespasian: I do firmly believe that he is the Son of God and that 
he can cure me. And immediately the wasps fell from his nose 


? Cap. 67, of St. James the Less. 


OTHER APPENDIXES TO THE ACTS OF PILATE 161 


and he was healed. Vespasian then vowed to go to Tiberius 
and get forces wherewith to destroy the city and nation of 
the Jews. And after some years spent in gathering an army 
he besieged Jerusalem. The Christians, warned by the Holy 
Ghost, had fled to Pella. 

Then there is a meeting between the historian Josephus and 
Vespasian; the latter’s elevation to the empire is prophesied 
and takes place. Then we have the story of Titus falling ill 
from joy at his father’s triumph, and being cured by having 
a slave whom he hated set next him at table. This was contrived 
by Josephus. Thereafter the famine in Jerusalem, and the 
incident of the woman Mary eating her child. Then the city 
is taken and the Jews are sold thirty for a penny. 

Then the discovery of an old man built up in a very massive 
wall, who is Joseph of Arimathaea. Delivered by Jesus, as the 
Gospel of Nicodemus tells, he had been imprisoned again by 
the Jews because he continued to preach the gospel, and had 
been miraculously sustained ever since with light and food 
from heaven. 


The very last of these late fictions which shall be noticed here is the 
STORY OF JOSEPH OF ARIMATHAEA 


which we have in Greek only. The earliest manuscript used by 
Tischendorf is said to be of the twelfth century. 


I. 1 I, Joseph of Arimathaea, who begged the body of the 
Lord Jesus from Pilate, was imprisoned by the Jews on that 
account. These are the people who provoked their lawgiver 
Moses, and failing to recognize their God crucified his Son. 

Seven days before the passion of Christ, two condemned 
robbers were sent from Jericho to Pilate, whose crimes were 
these. 

2 The first, Gestas, used to strip and murder wayfarers, hang 
up women by the feet and cut off their breasts, drink the blood 
of babes: he knew not God nor obeyed any law, but was violent 
from the beginning. 

The other, Demas, was a Galilaean who kept an inn; he 
despoiled the rich but did good to the poor, even burying them, 
like Tobit. He had committed robberies on the Jews, for he 
stole (plundered) the law itself at Jerusalem, and stripped the 
daughter of Caiaphas, who was a priestess of the sanctuary, 
and he took away even the mystic deposit of Solomon which 
had been deposited in the (holy) place. 

8 Jesus also was taken at even on the third day before the 
passover. But Caiaphas and the multitude of the Jews had 
no passover but were in great grief because of the robbery of 
the sanctuary by the thief. And they sent for Judas Iscariot 
who was brother’s son to Caiaphas, and had been persuaded by 


870 M 


162 PASSION GOSPELS 


the Jews to become a disciple of Jesus, not to follow his teachings, 
but to betray him. They paid him a didrachm of gold daily; 
and as one of Jesus’ disciples, called John, says, he had been 
two years with Jesus. 

4 On the third day before Jesus was taken, Judas said to 
the Jews: Let us assemble a council and say that it was not 
the robber who took away the law, but Jesus. Nicodemus, 
who had the keys of the sanctuary, said No: for he was a truthful 
man. But Sarra, Caiaphas’ daughter, cried out that Jesus said 
in public, ‘I can destroy the temple’ (&c.). All the Jews said: 
We believe you. For they held her as a prophetess. So Jesus 
was taken. 

II. 1 On the morrow, being Wednesday, at the ninth hour, 
they brought him into Caiaphas’ hall, and Annas and Caiaphas 
asked him: Why didst thou take away the law? He was silent. 
Why wouldst thou destroy the temple of Solomon? He was 
silent. 

2 In the evening the multitude sought the daughter of 
Caiaphas, to burn her with fire, because the law was stolen 
and they could not keep the passover. But she said: Wait 
a little, my children, and let us destroy Jesus, and the law will 
be found and the feast kept. Then Annas and Caiaphas privily 
gave gold to Judas and said: Say as you said before, that it 
was Jesus who stole the law. Judas agreed, but said: The people 
must not know that you have told me this: and you must let 
Jesus go, and I will persuade them. So they fraudulently let 
Jesus go. 

3 At dawn of the Thursday Judas went into the sanctuary 
and said to all the people: What will ye give me if I deliver 
to you the destroyer of the law and robber of the prophets? 
They said: Thirty silver pieces of gold(!). But they did not 
know that it was Jesus of whom he spoke, for many thought him 
to be the Son of God. And Judas received the thirty pieces. 

4 At the fourth and fifth hours he went out and found Jesus 
walking in the street. Towards evening he obtained a guard 
of soldiers. As they went, Judas said: Whomsoever I shall 
kiss, take him: he it is that stole the law and the prophets. 
He came to Jesus and kissed him, saying: Hail, Rabbi. They 
took Jesus to Caiaphas and examined him. ‘Why didst thou 
do this?’ but he answered nothing. Nicodemus and I left 
the seat of the pestilent, and would not consent to perish in the 
council of sinners. 

Ill. 1 They did many evil things to Jesus that night, and on 
the dawn of Friday delivered him to Pilate. He was condemned 
and crucified with the two robbers, Gestas on the left, Demas 
on the right. 

2 He on the left cried out to Jesus: See what evils I have 
wrought on the earth; and had I known thou wert the king, 


OTHER APPENDIXES TO THE ACTS OF PILATE 163 


I would have killed thee too. Why callest thou thyself Son of 
God and canst not help thyself in the hour of need? or how 
canst thou succour any other that prayeth? if thou be the Christ, 
come down from the cross that I may believe thee. But now 
I behold thee, not as a man but as a wild beast caught and perish- 
ing along with me. And much else he spake against Jesus, 
blaspheming and gnashing his teeth upon him: for he was. 
caught in the snare of the devil. 

3 But Demas, on the right, seeing the divine grace of Jesus, 
began to cry out thus: I know thee, Jesus Christ, that thou 
art the Sonof God. I see thee, Christ, worshipped by ten thousand 
times ten thousand angels; forgive my sins that I have com- 
mitted: make not the stars to enter into judgement with me, or 
the moon, when thou judgest all the world: for in the night did 
I work my evil plans: stir not up the sun that now is darkened 
for thy sake to tell the evil of my heart: for I can give thee 
no gift for remission of sins. Already death cometh on me for 
my sins, but pardon belongeth unto thee: save me, Lord of 
all things, from thy terrible judgement: give not power unto 
the enemy to swallow me up and be inheritor of my soul, as of 
his that hangeth on the left; for I see how the devil taketh his. 
soul rejoicing, and his flesh vanisheth away. Neither command 
me to depart into the lot of the Jews, for I see Moses and the 
patriarchs weeping sore, and the devil exulting over them. 
Therefore before my spirit departeth, command O Lord that 
my sins be blotted out, and remember me the sinner in thy 
kingdom when thou sittest on the great throne of the Most 
High and shalt judge the twelve tribes of Israel: for thou hast 
prepared great punishment for thy world for thy sake. 

4 And when the thief had so said, Jesus saith unto him: 
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Demas, that to-day thou shalt 
be with me in paradise: but the sons of the kingdom, the children 
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and Moses shall be cast out into. 
the outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of 
teeth. But thou only shalt dwell in paradise until my second 
coming, when I shall judge them that have not confessed my 
name. And he said to the thief: Go and say unto the cherubim 
and the powers that turn about the flaming sword, that keep 
the garden since Adam the first-created was in paradise and 
transgressed and kept not my commandments and I cast him 
out thence—but none of the former men shall see paradise until 
I come the second time to judge the quick and dead—And 
he wrote thus: Jesus Christ the Son of God that came down 
from the heights of heaven, that proceeded out of the bosom 
of the invisible Father without separation, and came down 
into the world to be incarnate and to be nailed to the cross, 
that I might save Adam whom I formed: unto my powers the 
archangels, that keep the doors of paradise, the servants of 


164 PASSION GOSPELS 


my Father: I will and command that he that is crucified with 
me [enter in,] receive remission of his sins for my sake, and 
being clothed with an incorruptible body enter in to paradise, 
and that he dwell there where no man else is ever able to dwell. 

And when this was said, Jesus gave up the ghost on Friday 
at the ninth hour. And there was darkness over all the land 
and a great earthquake, so that the sanctuary fell, and the 
pinnacle of the temple. 

IV. 1 And I, Joseph, begged the body and laid it in my new 
tomb. The body of Demas was not found: that of Gestas 
was in appearance like that of a dragon. 

The Jews imprisoned me on the evening of the sabbath. 

2 When it was evening on the first day of the week, at the 
fifth hour of the night, Jesus came to me with the thief on the 
right hand. There was great light; the house was raised up 
by the four corners and I went forth: and I perceived Jesus 
first, and then the thief bringing a letter to him, and as we 
journeyed to Galilee there was a very great light, and a sweet 
fragrance came from the thief. 

8 Jesus sat down in a certain place and read as follows: The 
cherubim and the six-winged that are commanded by thy God- 
head to keep the garden of paradise make known to thee this 
by the hand of the robber that by thy dispensation was crucified 
with thee. When we saw the mark of the nails on the robber 
that was crucified with thee and the light of the letters of thy 
Godhead, the fire was quenched, being unable to bear the light 
of the mark, and we were in great fear and crouched down. For 
we heard that the maker of heaven and earth and all creation 
had come to dwell in the lower parts of the earth for the sake 
of Adam the first-created. For we beheld the spotless cross, 
with the robber flashing with light and shining with seven times 
the light of the sun, and trembling came on us, when we heard 
the crashing of them beneath the earth, and with a great voice 
the ministers of Hades said with us: Holy, Holy, Holy, is he 
that was in the highest in the beginning: and the powers sent 
up a cry, saying, Lord, thou hast been manifested in heaven and 
upon earth, giving joy unto the worlds (ages) and saving thine 
own creation from death. 

V. 1 And as I went with Jesus and the robber to Galilee, the 
form of Jesus was changed and he became wholly light, and 
angels ministered to him and he conversed with them. I stayed 
with him three days, and none of the disciples were there. 

2 In the midst of the days of unleavened bread his disciple 
John came, and the robber disappeared. John asked who it 
was, but Jesus did not answer. John said: Lord, I know that 
thou hast loved me from the beginning: why dost thou not 
reveal this man to me? Jesus said: Seekest thou to know 
hidden things? art thou wholly without understanding? per- 


OTHER APPENDIXES TO THE ACTS OF PILATE 165 


ceivest thou not the fragrance of paradise filling the place? 
knowest thou not who it was? The thief that was on the cross 
is become heir of paradise: verily, verily, I say unto you, that 
it is his alone until the great day come. John said: Make me 
worthy to see him. 

3 Then suddenly the thief appeared and John fell to the 
earth: for he was now like a king in great might, clad with 
the cross. And a voice of a multitude was heard: Thou art 
come into the place of paradise prepared for thee: we are ap- 
pointed to serve thee by him that sent thee until the great day. 
After that both the thief and I, Joseph, vanished, and I was 
found in my own house, and I saw Jesus no more. 

All this I saw and have written, that all might believe on 
Jesus and no longer serve Moses’ law, but believe in the signs 
and wonders of Christ, and believing obtain eternal life and be 
found in the kingdom of heaven. 

For His is glory, might, praise, and majesty, world without 
end. Amen. 

There is a certain amount of inventiveness in this: none of the 
picturesque detail, however, can be called antique, and several phrases 
betray the influence of the same workshop that produced the Letters 
of Herod to Pilate. The ignorance of Jewish customs which it betrays 
is colossal. 


GOSPEL OF BARTHOLOMEW 


Jerome, in the prologue to his Commentary on Matthew, mentions 
a number of apocryphal Gospels—those according to the Egyptians, 
Thomas, Matthias, Bartholomew, the Twelve, Basilides, and Apelles: 
probably he depends upon Origen, for he himself disliked and avoided 
apocryphal books, with few exceptions; the Gospel according to the 
Hebrews, for instance, he hardly reckoned as apocryphal. Of this 
Gospel of Bartholomew we have no sort of description: we find it 
condemned in the Gelasian Decree, which may mean either that the 
compiler of the Decree knew a book of that name, or that he took it 
on trust from Jerome. In the pseudo-Dionysian writings two sentences 
are quoted from ‘the divine Bartholomew’, and a third has just been 
brought to light from the kindred ‘book of Hierotheus’.t But one 
cannot be sure that these writers are quoting real books. 

We have, however, a writing attributed to Bartholomew which 
attained some popularity; the manuscripts do not call it a Gospel, 
but the Questions of Bartholomew. It contains ancient elements, 
and I think that MM. Wilmart and Tisserant have made out their 
claim that it at least represents the old Gospel. I therefore give 
a translation of it here. 

It exists in three languages, and not, apparently, in a very original 
form in any of them: Greek is the original language, of which we have 
two manuscripts, at Vienna and Jerusalem ; Latin 1, consisting of two 
leaves of extracts, of the ninth century ; Latin 2, complete : see below ; 
Slavonic (i-iv. 15). The Greek text may be as old as the fifth century ; 
the Latin 2 of the sixth or seventh. 

In the Revue Biblique for 1913 the Latin fragments and a fresh 
Greek text were published by MM. Wilmart and Tisserant, with the 
variants of the other authorities, and in 1921-2 yet another text, a 
complete Latin one, appeared in the same periodical, edited by 
Professor Moricca from a manuscript in the Casanatensian library at 
Rome, in which the text is, in parts, tremendously expanded. ‘This 
copy is of the eleventh century and came from the monastery of 
Monte Amiata. The Latin is exceedingly incorrect, and there are 
many corruptions, and interpolations which extend to whole pages of 
closely printed text. I cite it as Lat. 2. 

I take the Greek and Slavonic, where they exist, as the basis of my 
version, and add some passages from the Latin. The main topics, 
common to two or more of the texts, are: 

i. The descent into Hell: the number of souls saved and lost. 

ii. The Virgin’s account of the Annunciation. 

iii. The apostles see the bottomless pit. 

iv. The devil is summoned and gives an account of his doings. 

v. Questions about the deadly sins. Commission of the apostles to 
preach. Departure of Christ. (This reads like a late addition.) 


} By the Rev. F. Marsh, Journal of Theol. Studies, 1922. 


GOSPEL OF BARTHOLOMEW 167 


GOSPEL (QUESTIONS) OF ST. BARTHOLOMEW 
I 1 

Greek. 1 After the resurrection from the dead of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, Bartholomew came unto the Lord and questioned 
him, saying: Lord, reveal unto me the mysteries of the heavens. 

2 Jesus answered and said unto him: If I put <not> off the 
veh as the flesh, I shall not be able to tell them unto thee. 

3 Om. 

Slavonic. 1 Before the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ 
from the dead, the apostles said: Let us question the Lord: 
Lord, reveal unto us the wonders. 

2 And Jesus said unto them: If I put <not> off the body of 
the flesh, I cannot tell them unto you. 

8 But when he was buried and risen again, they all durst not 
question him, because it was not <possible> to look upon him, 
but the fullness of his Godhead was seen. 

4 But Bartholomew, &c. 

Latin 2. 1 At that time, before the Lord Jesus Christ suffered, 
all the disciples were gathered together, questioning him and 
saying: Lord, show us the mystery in the heavens. 

2 But Jesus answered and said unto them: If I put not off 
the body of flesh I cannot tell you. 

3 But after that he had suffered and risen again, all the 
apostles, looking upon him, durst not question him, because his 
countenance was not as it had been aforetime, but showed forth 
the fullness of power. 

Greek. 4 Bartholomew therefore drew near unto the Lord 
and said: I have a word to speak unto thee, Lord. 

5 And Jesus said to him: I know what thou art about to say ; 
say then what thou wilt, and I will answer thee. 

6 And Bartholomew said: Lord, when thou wentest to be 
hanged upon the cross, I followed thee afar off and saw thee hung 
upon the cross, and the angels coming down from heaven and 
worshipping thee. And when there came darkness, 7 I beheld, 
and I saw thee that thou wast vanished away from the cross, 
and I heard only a voice in the parts under the earth, and great 
wailing and gnashing of teeth ona sudden. Tell me, Lord, whither 
wentest thou from the cross? 

8 And Jesus answered and said: Blessed art thou, Bartholo- 
mew, my beloved, because thou sawest this mystery; and now 
will I tell thee all things whatsoever thou askest me. 9 For when 
I vanished away from the cross, then went I down into Hades 
that I might bring up Adam and all them that were with him, 
according to the supplication of Michael the archangel. ; 

10 Then said Bartholomew: Lord, what was the voice which 
was heard? 

1 I give the opening verses in all three texts. 


168 GOSPEL OF BARTHOLOMEW 


11 Jesus saith unto him: Hades said unto Beliar: As I per- 
ceive, a God cometh hither. 

[Slavonic and Latin 2 continue: And the angels cried unto the 
powers, saying: Remove your gates, ye princes, remove the 
everlasting doors, for behold the King of glory cometh down. 
12 Hades said: Who is the King of glory, that cometh down from 
heaven unto us? 

13 And when I had descended five hundred steps, Hades was 
troubled, saying: I hear the breathing of the Most High, and 
Icannot endure it. (Latin 2. He cometh with great fragrance and 
I cannot bear it.) 14 But the devil answered and said: Submit 
not thyself, O Hades, but be strong: for God himself hath not 
descended upon the earth. 15 But when I had descended yet 
five hundred steps, the angels and the powers cried out: Take 
hold, remove the doors, for behold the King of glory cometh down. 
And Hades said: O, woe unto me, for I hear the breath of God.] 

Greek. 16-17 And Beliar said unto Hades: Look carefully 
who it is that <cometh), for it is Elias, or Enoch, or one of the 
prophets that this man seemeth to me to be. But Hades answered 
Death and said: Not yet are six thousand years accomplished. 
And whence are these, O Beliar; for the sum of the number is in 
mine hands. 

[Slavonic. 16 And the devil said unto Hades: Why affrightest 
thou me, Hades? it is a prophet, and he hath made himself like 
unto God: this prophet will we take and bring him hither unto 
those that think to ascend into heaven. 17 And Hades said: 
Which of the prophets is it? Show me: Is it Enoch the scribe 
of righteousness? But God hath not suffered him to come down 
upon the earth before the end of the six thousand years. Sayest 
thou that it is Elias, the avenger? But before <the end> he cometh 
not down. What shall I do, whereas the destruction is of God: 
for surely our end is at hand? For I have the number (of the 
years) in mine hands.] 

Greek. 18 <And Beliar said unto Hades>: Be not troubled, 
make safe thy gates and strengthen thy bars: consider, God 
cometh not down upon the earth. 

19 Hades saith unto him: These be no good words that I hear 
from thee: my belly is rent, and mine inward parts are pained: 
it cannot be but that God cometh hither. Alas, whither shall 
I flee before the face of the power of the great king? Suffer me 
to enter into myself (thyself, Latin): for before (of, Latin) thee 
was I formed. 

20 Then did I enter in and scourged him and bound him with 
chains that cannot be loosed, and brought forth thence all the 
patriarchs and came again unto the cross. 

21 Bartholomew saith unto him: [Latin 2, I saw thee again, 
hanging upon the cross, and all the dead arising and worshipping 
thee, and going up again into their sepulchres.] Tell me, Lord, 


GOSPEL OF BARTHOLOMEW 169 


who was he whom the angels bare up in their hands, even that 
man that was very great of stature? [Slav., Lat. 2, And what 
spakest thou unto him that he sighed so sore ?] 

22 Jesus answered and said unto him: It was Adam the first- 
formed, for whose sake I came down from heaven upon earth. 
And I said unto him: I was hung upon the cross for thee and for 
thy children’s sake. And he, when he heard it, groaned and said: 
So was thy good pleasure, O Lord. 

23 Again Bartholomew said: Lord, I saw the angels ascending 
before Adam and singing praises. 24 But one of the angels 
which was very great, above the rest, would not ascend up with 
them: and there was in his hand a sword of fire, and he was 
looking steadfastly upon thee only. 

[Slav. 25 And all the angels besought him that he would 
go up with them, but he would not. But when thou didst 
command him to go up, I beheld a flame of fire issuing out of 
his hands and going even unto the city of Jerusalem. 26 And 
Jesus said unto him: Blessed art thou, Bartholomew my beloved, 
because thou sawest these mysteries. This was one of the angels 
of vengeance which stand before my Father’s throne: and this 
angel sent he unto me. 27 And for this cause he would not 
ascend up, because he desired to destroy all the powers of the 
world. But when I commanded him to ascend up, there went 
a flame out of his hand and rent asunder the veil of the temple, 
and parted it in two pieces for a witness unto the children of 
Israel for my passion because they crucified me. (Lat. 1. But the 
flame which thou sawest issuing out of his hands smote the 
house of the synagogue of the Jews, for a testimony of me, 
wherein they crucified me.)]. 

Greek. 28 And when he had thus spoken, he said unto the 
apostles: Tarry for me in this place, for to-day a sacrifice is 
offered in paradise. 29 And Bartholomew answered and said 
unto Jesus: Lord, what is the sacrifice which is offered in 
paradise? And Jesus said: There be souls of the righteous 
which to-day have departed out of the body and go unto 
paradise, and unless I be present they cannot enter into paradise. 

30 And Bartholomew said: Lord, how many souls depart out 
of the world daily? Jesus saith unto him: Thirty thousand. 

31 Bartholomew saith unto him: Lord, when thou wast with us 
teaching the word, didst thou receive the sacrifices in paradise ? } 
Jesus answered and said unto him: Verily I say unto thee, my 
beloved, that I both taught the word with you and continually 
sat with my Father, and received the sacrifices in paradise every 
day. 32 Bartholomew answered and said unto him: Lord, if 
thirty thousand souls depart out of the world every day, how 
many souls out of them are found righteous? Jesus saith unto 
him: Hardly fifty [three] my beloved. 33 Again Bartholomew 

1 In Lat. 2, 31 follows 29. 


170 GOSPEL OF BARTHOLOMEW 


saith: And how do three only enter into paradise? Jesus saith 
unto him: The [fifty] three enter into paradise or are laid up in 
Abraham’s bosom: but the others go into the place of the resur- 
rection, for the three are not like unto the fifty. 

834 Bartholomew saith unto him: Lord, how many souls above 
the number are born into the world daily? Jesus saith unto him: 
One soul only is born above the number of them that depart. 
[30, &c., Latin 1. Bartholomew said: How many are the souls 
which depart out of the body every day? Jesus said: Verily 
I say unto thee, twelve (thousand) eight hundred, four score 
and three souls depart out of the body every day.]* 

35 And when he had said this he gave them the peace, and 
vanished away from them. 


II 


1 Now the apostles were in the place [Cherubim, Cheltoura, 
Chritir] with Mary. 2 And Bartholomew came and said unto 
Peter and Andrew and John: Let us ask her that is highly 
favoured how she conceived the incomprehensible, or how she 
bare him that cannot be carried, or how she brought forth so 
much greatness. But they doubted to ask her. 3 Bartholomew 
therefore said unto Peter: Thou that art the chief, and my 
teacher, draw near and ask her. But Peter said to John: Thou 
art a virgin and undefiled (and beloved) and thou must ask her. 
4 And as they all doubted and disputed, Bartholomew came near 
unto her with a cheerful countenance and said to her: Thou that 
art highly favoured, the tabernacle of the Most High, unblemished, 
we, even all the apostles, ask thee (or All the apostles have sent 
me to ask thee) to tell us how thou didst conceive the incompre- 
hensible, or how thou didst bear him that cannot be carried, or 
how thou didst bring forth so much greatness. 

5 But Mary said unto them: Ask me not (or Do ye indeed 
ask me) concerning this mystery. If I should begin to tell you, 
fire will issue forth out of my mouth and consume all the world. 
6 But they continued yet the more to ask her. And she, for she 
could not refuse to hear the apostles, said: Let us stand up in 
prayer. 7 And the apostles stood behind Mary: but she said 
unto Peter: Peter, thou chief, thou great pillar, standest thou 
behind us? Said not our Lord: the head of the man is Christ 
<but the head of the woman is the man, Slav., Lat. 2)? now 
therefore stand ye before me and pray. 8 But they said unto 
her: In thee did the Lord set his tabernacle, and it was his good 
pleasure that thou shouldest contain him, and thou oughtest to be 


* Lat. 2, 30-4 has: 6,074 souls depart out of the body every day. 
Three go into paradise. 83 How three only? Fifty-three go into 
paradise, but only three into Abraham’s bosom. The rest are in the 


place of repose, for they are not like the three. 84 One more soul 
departs every day than is born. 


GOSPEL OF BARTHOLOMEW 171 


the leader in the prayer (al. to go with us to). 9 But she said 
unto them: Ye are shining stars, and as the prophet said, ‘I did 
lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence shall come mine 
help’; ye, therefore, are the hills, and it behoveth you to pray. 
10 The apostles say unto her: Thou oughtest to pray, thou 
art the mother of the heavenly king. 11 Mary saith unto them: 
In your likeness did God form the sparrows,! and sent them forth 
into the four corners of the world. 12 But they say unto her: 
He that is scarce contained by the seven heavens was pleased to 
be contained in thee. 

13 Then Mary stood up before them and spread out her hands 
toward the heaven and began to speak thus: Elphué Zarethra 
Charboum Nemioth Melitho Thraboutha Mephnounos Chemiath 
Aroura Marid6én Elisén Marmiadon Seption Hesaboutha Ennouna 
Saktinos Athodr Belelam Ophedth Abo Chrasar (this is the read- 
ing of one Greek copy: the others and the Slavonic have many 
differences,? as in all such cases: but as the original words—assuming 
them to have once had a meaning—are hopelessly corrupted, the 
matter is not of importance), which is in the Greek tongue 
(Hebrew, Slav.): O God the exceeding great and all-wise and 
king of the worlds (ages), that art not to be described, the in- 
effable, that didst establish the greatness of the heavens and all 
things by a word, that out of darkness (or the unknown) didst 
constitute and fasten together the poles of heaven in harmony, 
didst bring into shape the matter that was in confusion, didst 
bring into order the things that were without order, didst part 
the misty darkness from the light, didst establish in one place 
the foundations of the waters, thou that makest the beings of the 
air to tremble, and art the fear of them that are on (or under) the 
earth, that didst settle the earth and not suffer it to perish, and 
filledst it, which is the nourisher of all things, with showers of 
blessing: (Son of) the Father, thou whom the seven heavens 
hardly contained, but who wast well-pleased to be contained 
without pain in me, thou that art thyself the full word of the 
Father in whom all things came to be: give glory to thine 
exceeding great name, and bid me to speak before thy holy 
apostles. 

14 And when she had ended the prayer she began to say unto 
them: Let us sit down upon the ground; and come thou, Peter 
the chief, and sit on my right hand and put thy left hand beneath 
mine armpit; and thou, Andrew, do so on my left hand; and 
thou, John, the virgin, hold together my bosom; and _ thou, 
Bartholomew, set thy knees against my back and hold my 


1 See the Infancy Gospels. 

2 Lat.2. Helfoith . Alaritha . arbar . Neniotho . Melitho . Tarasunt . 
Chanebonos . Umia . Theirura . Marado . Seliso . Heliphomar . Mabon . 
Saruth . Gefutha . Enunnas . Sacinos . Thatis . Etelelam . Tetheo. 
abocia . Rusar. 


172 GOSPEL OF BARTHOLOMEW 


shoulders, lest when I begin to speak my bones be loosed one from 
another. 

15 And when they had so done she began to say: When I abode 
in the temple of God and received my food from an angel, on 
a certain day there appeared unto me one in the likeness of an 
angel, but his face was incomprehensible, and he had not in his 
hand bread or a cup, as did the angel which came to me aforetime. 
16 And straightway the robe (veil) of the temple was rent and 
there was a very great earthquake, and I fell upon the earth, for 
I was not able to endure the sight of him. 17 But he put his 
hand beneath me and raised me up, and I looked up into heaven 
and there came a cloud of dew and sprinkled me from the head to 
the feet, and he wiped me with his robe. 18 And said unto me: 
Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the chosen vessel, grace 
inexhaustible. And he smote his garment upon the right hand 
and there came a very great loaf, and he set it upon the altar of 
the temple and did eat of it first himself, and gave unto me also. 
19 And again he smote his garment upon the left hand and there 
came a very great cup full of wine: and he set it upon the altar 
of the temple and did drink of it first himself, and gave also unto 
me. And I beheld and saw the bread and the cup whole as they 
were. 

20 And he said unto me: Yet three years, and I will send my 
word unto thee and thou shalt conceive my (or a) son, and 
through him shall the whole creation be saved. Peace be unto 
thee, my beloved, and my peace shall be with thee continually. 
21 And when he had so said he vanished away from mine eyes, 
and the temple was restored as it had been before. 

22 And as she was saying this, fire issued out of her mouth; 
and the world was at the point to come to an end: but Jesus 
appeared quickly (Lat. 2, and laid his hand upon her mouth) and 
said unto Mary: Utter not this mystery, or this day my whole 
creation will come to an end (Lat. 2, and the flame from her 
mouth ceased). And the apostles were taken with fear lest 
haply the Lord should be wroth with them. 


Ill 


1 And he departed with them unto the mount Mauria (Lat. 2, 
Mambre), and sat in the midst of them. 2 But they doubted to 
question him, being afraid. 8 And Jesus answered and said unto 
them: Ask me what ye will that I should teach you, and I will 
show it you. For yet seven days, and I ascend unto my Father, 
and I shall no more be seen of you in this likeness. 4 But they, 
yet doubting, said unto him: Lord, show us the deep (abyss) 
according unto thy promise. 5 And Jesus said unto them: It is 


* Compare the appearance of the angel to Aseneth in the History 
of Aseneth. 


GOSPEL OF BARTHOLOMEW 173 


not good (Lat. 2, is good) for you to see the deep: notwithstanding, 
if ye desire it, according to my promise, come, follow me and 
behold. 6 And he led them away into a place that is called 
Cherubim (Cherukt Slav., Chairoudec Gr., Lat. 2 omits), that is 
the place of truth. 7 And he beckoned unto the angels of the 
West, and the earth was rolled up like a volume of a book and 
the deep was revealed unto them. 8 And when the apostles 
saw it, they fell on their faces upon the earth. 9 But Jesus 
raised them up, saying: Said I not unto you, ‘It is not good for 
you to see the deep’. And again he beckoned unto the angels, 
and the deep was covered up. 


IV 


1 And he took them and brought them again unto the Mount 
of Olives. 

2 And Peter said unto Mary: Thou that art highly favoured, 
entreat the Lord that he would reveal unto us the things that 
are in the heavens. 

3 And Mary said unto Peter: O stone hewn out of the rock, 
did not the Lord build his church upon thee? Go thou therefore 
first and ask him. 

4 Peter saith again: O tabernacle that art spread abroad <it 
behoveth thee to ask>. 5 Mary saith: Thou art the image of 
Adam: was not he first formed and then Eve? Look upon the 
sun, that according to the likeness of Adam it is bright, and upon 
the moon, that because of the transgression of Eve it is full of 
clay. For God did place Adam in the east and Eve in the west, 
and appointed the lights that the sun should shine on the earth 
unto Adam in the east in his fiery chariots, and the moon in the 
west should give light unto Eve with a countenance like milk. 
And she defiled the commandment of the Lord. Therefore was 
the moon stained with clay (Lat. 2, is cloudy) and her light is not 
bright. Thou therefore, since thou art the likeness of Adam, 
oughtest to ask him: but in me was he contained that I might 
recover the strength of the female. 

6 Now when they came up to the top of the mount, and the 
Master was withdrawn from them a little space, Peter saith unto 
Mary: Thou art she that hast brought to nought the transgression 
of Eve, changing it from shame into joy; it is lawful, therefore, 
for thee to ask. 

7 When Jesus appeared again, Bartholomew saith unto him: 
Lord, show us the adversary of men that we may behold him, of 
what fashion he is, and what is his work, and whence he cometh 
forth, and what power he hath that he spared not even thee, but 
caused thee to be hanged upon the tree. 8 But Jesus looked upon 
him and said: Thou bold heart! thou askest for that which thou 
art not able to look upon. 9 But Bartholomew was troubled 
and fell at Jesus’ feet and began to speak thus: O lamp that 


174 GOSPEL OF BARTHOLOMEW 


cannot be quenched, Lord Jesu Christ, maker of the eternal light, 
that hast given unto them that love thee the grace that beautifieth 
all, and hast given us the eternal light by thy coming into the 
world, that hast}... tthe heavenly essence by a word]... { hast 
accomplished the work of the Father, hast turned the shame- 
facedness of Adam into mirth, hast done away the sorrow of Eve 
with a cheerful countenance by thy birth from a virgin: re- 
member not evil against me but grant me the word of mine 
asking. (Lat. 2, who didst come down into the world, who hast 
confirmed the eternal word of the Father, who hast called the 
sadness of <Adam)> joy, who hast made the shame of Eve 
glad, and restored her by vouchsafing to be contained in the 
womb.) 

10 And as he thus spake, Jesus raised him up and said unto 
him: Bartholomew, wilt thou see the adversary of men? I tell 
thee that when thou beholdest him, not thou only but the rest of 
the apostles and Mary will fall on your faces and become as dead 
corpses. 

11 But they all said unto him: Lord, let us behold him. 

12 And he led them down from the Mount of Olives and 
looked wrathfully upon the angels that keep hell (Tartarus), and 
beckoned unto Michael to sound the trumpet in the height of the 
heavens. And Michael] sounded, and the earth shook, and Beliar 
came up, being held by 660 (560 Gk., 6,064 Lat. 1, 6,060 Lat. 2) 
angels and bound with fiery chains. 12 And the length of him 
was 1,600 cubits and his breadth 40 (Lat. 1, 300; Slav. 17) cubits 
(Lat. 2, his length 1,900 cubits, his breadth 700, one wing of him 
80), and his face was like a lightning of fire and his eyes full of 
darkness (like sparks, Slav.). And out of his nostrils came a 
stinking smoke; and his mouth was as the gulf of a precipice, 
and the one of his wings was four-score cubits. 14 And straight- 
way when the apostles saw him, they fell to the earth on their 
faces and became as dead. 15 But Jesus came near and raised 
the apostles and gave them a spirit of power, and he saith unto 
Bartholomew: Come near, Bartholomew, and trample with thy 
feet on his neck, and he will tell thee his work, what it is, and how 
he deceiveth men. 16 And Jesus stood afar off with the rest of 
the apostles. 17 And Bartholomew feared, and raised his voice 
and said: Blessed be the name of thine immortal kingdom from 
henceforth even for ever. And when he had spoken, Jesus 
permitted him, saying: Go and tread upon the neck of Beliar: 
and Bartholomew ran quickly upon him and trode upon his neck: 
and Beliar trembled. (For this verse the Vienna MS. has: And 
Bartholomew raised his voice and said thus: O womb more 
Spacious than a city, wider than the spreading of the heavens, 
that contained him whom the seven heavens contain not, but 


thou without pain didst contain sanctified in thy bosom, &c.: 
evidently out of place. 


GOSPEL OF BARTHOLOMEW 175 


Latin 1 has only: Then did Antichrist tremble and was filled 
with fury.) 

18 And Bartholomew was afraid, and fled, and said unto Jesus: 
Lord, give me an hem of thy garments (Lat. 2, the kerchief (?) 
from thy shoulders) that I may have courage to draw near unto 
him. 19 But Jesus said unto him: Thou canst not take an hem 
of my garments, for these are not my garments which I wore 
before I was crucified. 20 And Bartholomew said: Lord, I fear 
lest, like as he spared not thine angels, he swallow me up also. 
21 Jesus saith unto him: Were not all things made by my word, 
and by the will of my Father the spirits were made subject unto 
Solomon? thou, therefore, being commanded by my word, go in 
my name and ask him what thou wilt. (Lat. 2 omits 20.) 221 [And 
Bartholomew made the sign of the cross and prayed unto Jesus 
and went behind him. And Jesus said to him: Draw near. And 
as Bartholomew drew near, fire was kindled on every side, so 
that his garments appeared fiery. Jesus saith to Bartholomew: 
As I said unto thee, tread upon his neck and ask him what is his 
power.| And Bartholomew went and trode upon his neck, and 
pressed down his face into the earth as far as his ears. 23 And 
Bartholomew saith unto him: Tell me who thou art and what 
is thy name. And he said to him: Lighten me a little, and I will 
tell thee who I am and how I came hither, and what my work is 
and what my poweris. 24 And he lightened him and saith to him: 
Say all that thou hast done and all that thou doest. 25 And 
Beliar answered and said: If thou wilt know my name, at the 
first I was called Satanael, which is interpreted a messenger of 
God, but when I rejected the image of God my name was called 
Satanas, that is, an angel that keepeth hell (Tartarus).? 26 And 
again Bartholomew saith unto him: Reveal unto me all things 
and hide nothing from me. 27 And he said unto him: I swear 
unto thee by the power of the glory of God that even if I would 
hide aught I cannot, for he is near that would convict me. For 
if I were able I would have destroyed you like one of them that 
were before you. 28 For, indeed, I was formed (al. called) the 
first angel: for when God made the heavens, he took a handful 
of fire and formed me first, Michael second [Vienna MS. here 
has these sentences: for he had his Son before the heavens and the 
earth and we were formed (for when he took thought to create 
all things, his Son spake a word), so that we also were created by 
the will of the Son and the consent of the Father. He formed, 
I say, first me, next Michael the chief captain of the hosts that 
are above], Gabriel third, Uriel fourth, Raphael fifth, Nathanael 
sixth, and other angels of whom I cannot tell the names. 
(Jerusalem MS., Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, Uriel, Xathanael, and 

1 92[ ]is from Gk. (Jerusalem MS.) and Latin 1. 

2 25, Lat. 2 adds about seven lines descriptive of Satan’s character: 
not interesting. 


176 GOSPEL OF BARTHOLOMEW 


other 6,000 angels. Lat. 1, Michael thet honour of power, third 
Raphael, fourth Gabriel, and other seven. Lat. 2, Raphael third, 
Gabriel fourth, Uriel fifth, Zathael sixth, and other six.] For 
they are the rod-bearers (lictors) of God, and they smite me with 
their rods and pursue me seven times in the night and seven times 
in the day, and leave me not at all and break in pieces all my 
power. These are the (twelve, Lat. 2) angels of vengeance which 
stand before the throne of God: these are the angels that were 
first formed. 30 And after them were formed all the angels. 
In the first heaven are an hundred myriads, and in the second an 
hundred myriads, and in the third an hundred myriads, and in 
the fourth an hundred myriads, and in the fifth an hundred 
myriads, and in the sixth an hundred myriads, and in the seventh 
(an hundred myriads, and outside the seven heavens, Jerusalem 
M/S.) is the first firmament (flat surface) wherein are the powers 
which work upon men. 81 For there are four other angels set 
over the winds. The first angel is over the north, and he is called 
Chairoum (.. . broil, Jerusalem MS.; Lat. 2, angel of the north,’ 
Mauch), and hath in his hand a rod of fire, and restraineth the super- 
fluity of moisture that the earth be not overmuch wet. 382 And 
the angel that is over the north” is called Oertha (Lat. 2, Alfatha): 
he hath a torch of fire and putteth it to his sides, and they warm 
the great coldness of him that he freeze not the world. 83 And the 
angel that is over the south is called Kerkoutha (Lat. 2, Cedar), 
and they break his fierceness that he shake not the earth. 34 And 
the angel that is over the south-west is called Naoutha, and he 
hath a rod of snow in his hand and putteth it into his mouth, and 
quencheth the fire that cometh out of his mouth. And if the angel 
quenched it not at his mouth it would set all the world on fire. 
35 And there is another angel over the sea which maketh it rough 
with the waves thereof. 86 But the rest I will not tell thee, for 
he that standeth by suffereth me not. 

37 Bartholomew saith unto him: How chastisest thou the 
souls of men? 38 Beliar saith unto him: Wilt thou that I 
declare unto thee the punishment of the hypocrites, of the back- 
biters, of the jesters, of the idolaters, and the covetous, and the 
adulterers, and the wizards, and the diviners, and of them that 
believe in us, and of all whom I flook upont (deceive?)? (88 
Lat. 2: When I will show any illusion by them. But they that 
do these things, and they that consent unto them or follow 
them, do perish with me. 389 Bartholomew said unto him: 
Declare quickly how thou persuadest men not to follow God, 
and thine evil arts, that are slippery and dark, that they should 
leave the straight and shining paths of the Lord.) 39 Bar- 
tholomew saith unto him: fI will that thou declaret it in few words. 
40 And he smote his teeth together, gnashing them, and there 
came up out of the bottomless pit a wheel having a sword flash- 

1 Boreas. 2 Aparktios. 


GOSPEL OF BARTHOLOMEW 177 


ing with fire, and in the sword were pipes. 41 And I (he) asked 
him, saying: What is this sword? 42 And he said: This sword 
is the sword of the gluttonous: for into this pipe are sent they 
that through their gluttony devise all manner of sin; into the 
second pipe are sent the backbiters which backbite their neigh- 
bour secretly; into the third pipe are sent the hypocrites and 
the rest whom I overthrow by my contrivance. (Lat. 2: 40 
And Antichrist said: I will tell thee. And a wheel came up 
out of the abyss, having seven fiery knives. The first knife 
hath twelve pipes (canales). . .. 42 Antichrist answered: The 
pipe of fire in the first knife, in it are put the casters of lots 
and diviners and enchanters, and they that believe in them 
or have sought them, because in the iniquity of their heart they 
have invented false divinations. In the second pipe of fire are 
first the blasphemers . . . suicides... . idolaters. . . . In the rest are 
first perjurers . . . (long enumeration).) 43 And Bartholomew 
said: Dost thou then do these things by thyself alone? 44 And 
Satan said: If I were able to go forth by myself, I would have 
destroyed the whole world in three days: but neither I nor 
any of the six hundred go forth. For we have other swift 
ministers whom we command, and we furnish them with an hook 
of many points? and send them forth to hunt, and they catch 
for us souls of men, enticing them with sweetness of divers 
baits, that is by drunkenness and laughter, by backbiting, 
hypocrisy, pleasures, fornication, and the rest of the {triflest 
that come out of their treasures. (Lat. 2 amplifies enormously.) 

45 And I will tell thee also the rest of the names of the angels. 
The angel of the hail is called Mermedth, and he holdeth the 
hail upon his head, and my ministers do adjure him and send 
him whither they will. And other angels are there over the 
snow, and other over the thunder, and other over the lightning, 
and when any spirit of us would go forth either by land or by 
sea, these angels send forth fiery stones and set our limbs on fire. 
(Lat. 2 enumerates all the transgressions of Israel and all 
possible sins in two whole pages.) 

46 Bartholomew saith: Be still (be muzzled) thou dragon of 
the pit. 47 And Beliar said: Many things will I tell thee of 
the angels. ‘They that run together throughout the heavenly 
places and the earthly are these: Mermedth, Onomatath, Douth, 
Melioth, Charouth, Graphathas, Oethra, Nephonos, Chalkatoura. 
With them +do flyt (are administered?) the things that are in 
heaven and on earth and under the earth. 

48 Bartholomew saith unto him: Be still (be muzzled) and 
be faint, that I may entreat my Lord. 49 And Bartholomew 
fell upon his face and cast earth upon his head and began to 
say: O Lord Jesu Christ, the great and glorious name. All 


1 hook of many points, &c. This passage recalls the Coptic fragment 
No. 5, above, p. 149. 


870 N 


178 GOSPEL OF BARTHOLOMEW 


the choirs of the angels praise thee, O Master, and I that am 
unworthy with my lips t+... ¢ do praise thee, O Master. Hearken 
unto me thy servant, and as thou didst choose me from the receipt 
of custom and didst not suffer me to have my conversation 
unto the end in my former deeds, O Lord Jesu Christ, hearken 
unto me and have mercy upon the sinners. 50 And when he 
had so said, the Lord saith unto him: Rise up, suffer him that 
groaneth to arise: I will declare the rest unto thee. 51 And 
Bartholomew raised up Satan and said unto him: Go unto 
thy place, with thine angels; but the Lord hath mercy upon 
all his world. (50, 51, again enormously amplified in Lat. 2. 
Satan complains that he has been tricked into telling his secrets 
before the time. The interpolation is to some extent dated 
by this sentence: ‘Simon Magus and Zaroés and Arfaxir and 
Jannes and Mambres are my brothers.’ Zaroés and Arfaxat 
are wizards who figure in the Latin Acts of Matthew and of 
Simon and Jude (see below). 49 follows 51 in this text.) 

52 But the devil said: Suffer me, and I will tell thee how 
I was cast down into this place and how the Lord did make 
man. 53 I was going to and fro in the world, and God said unto 
Michael: Bring me a clod from the four corners of the earth, 
and water out of the four rivers of paradise. And when Michael 
brought them God formed Adam in the regions of the east, and 
shaped the clod which was shapeless, and stretched sinews and 
veins upon it and established it with joints; and he worshipped 
him, himself for his own sake first, because he was the image 
of God, therefore he worshipped him. 54 And when I came from 
the ends of the earth Michael said: Worship thou the image 
of God, which he hath made according to his likeness. But 
I said: I am fire of fire, I was the first angel formed, and shall 
I worship clay and matter? 55 And Michael saith to me: Wor- 
ship, lest God be wroth with thee. But I said to him: God 
will not be wroth with me; but I will set my throne over against 
his throne, and I will be as he is. Then was God wroth with me 
and cast me down, having commanded the windows of heaven 
to be opened. 56 And when I was cast down, he asked also 
the six hundred that were under me, if they would worship: 
but they said: Like as we have seen the first angel do, neither 
will we worship him that is less than ourselves. Then were 
the six hundred also cast down by him with me. 57 And when 
we were cast down upon the earth we were senseless for forty 
years; and when the sun shone forth seven times brighter 
than fire, suddenly I awaked; and I looked about and saw the 
six hundred that were under me senseless. 58 And I awaked my 
son Salpsan and took him to counsel how I might deceive the 
man on whose account I was cast out of the heavens. 59 And 
thus did I contrive it. I took a vial in mine hand and scraped 
the sweat from off my breast and the hair of mine armpits, and 


GOSPEL OF BARTHOLOMEW 179 


washed myself (Lat. 2, I took fig-leaves in my hands and wiped 
the sweat from my bosom and below mine arms and cast it 
down beside the streams of waters. 59 is greatly prolonged in 
this text) in the springs of the waters whence the four rivers 
flow out, and Eve drank of it and desire came upon her: for 
if she had not drunk of that water I should not have been able 
to deceive her. 60 Then Bartholomew commanded him to go 
into hell. 

61 And Bartholomew came and fell at Jesus’ feet and began 
with tears to say thus: Abba, Father, that art past finding 
out by us, Word of the Father, whom the seven heavens hardly 
contained, but who wast pleased to be contained easily and 
without pain within the body of the Virgin: whom the Virgin 
knew not that she bare: thou by thy thought hast ordained all 
things to be: thou givest us {that which we need} before thou 
art entreated. 62 Thou that didst wear a crown of thorns that 
thou mightest prepare for us that repent the precious crown 
from heaven; that didst hang upon the tree, that (a clause 
gone): (Lat. 2, that thou mightest turn from us the tree of lust 
and concupiscence (etc., etc.). The verse is prolonged for over 
40 lines) (that didst drink wine mingled with gall) that thou 
mightest give us to drink of the wine of compunction, and wast 
pierced in the side with a spear that thou mightest fill us with 
thy body and thy blood: 638 Thou that gavest names unto 
the four rivers: to the first Phison, because of the faith (pistis) 
which thou didst appear in the world to preach; to the second 
Geon, for that man was made of earth (gé); to the third Tigris, 
because by thee was revealed unto us the consubstantial Trinity 
in the heavens (to make anything of this we must read Trigis); 
to the fourth Euphrates, because by thy presence in the world 
thou madest every soul to rejoice (euphrdnai) through the word 
of immortality. 641 My God, and Father, the greatest, my King: 
save, Lord, the sinners. 65 When he had thus prayed Jesus 
said unto him: Bartholomew, my Father did name me Christ, 
that I might come down upon earth and anoint every man that 
cometh unto me with the oil of life: and he did call me Jesus 
that I might heal every sin of them that know not...and give 
unto men (several corrupt words: the Latin has) the truth of God. 

66 And again Bartholomew saith unto him: Lord, is it 
lawful for me to reveal these mysteries unto every man? 67 
Jesus saith unto him: Bartholomew, my beloved, as many 
as are faithful and are able to keep them unto themselves, to 
them mayest thou entrust these things. For some there are 

1 In Lat. 2, vv. 64-71 occupy 88 lines: verse 65 fills nearly 50 of 
these; Jesus dwells on the words, ‘I am the way, the truth, and the life’, 
and speaks at some length of his benefits to the Jewish nation and their 
blindness and ingratitude (recalling the Improperia and 2 Esdras 1): 
there are also many clauses from John xiii—xv. 


180 GOSPEL OF BARTHOLOMEW 


that be worthy of them, but there are also other some unto 
whom it is not fit to entrust them: for they are vain (swaggerers), 
drunkards, proud, unmerciful, partakers in idolatry, authors 
of fornication, slanderers, teachers of foolishness, and doing 
all works that are of the devil, and therefore are they not worthy 
that these should be entrusted to them. 68 And also they are 
secret, because of those that cannot contain them; for as many 
as can contain them shall have a part in them. Herein (Hitherto ?), 
therefore, my beloved, have I spoken unto thee, for blessed art 
thou and all thy kindred which of their choice have this word 
entrusted unto them; for all they that can contain it shall receive 
whatsoever they will in the <day ?> of my judgement. 

69 Then I, Bartholomew, which wrote these things in mine 
heart, took hold on the hand of the Lord the lover of men and 
began to rejoice and to speak thus: 

Glory be to thee, O Lord Jesus Christ, that givest unto all 
thy grace which all we have perceived. Alleluia. 

Glory be to thee, O Lord, the life of sinners. 

Glory be to thee, O Lord, death is put to shame. 

Glory be to thee, O Lord, the treasure of righteousness. 

For unto God do we sing. 

70 And as Bartholomew thus spake again, Jesus put off 
his mantle and took a kerchief from the neck of Bartholomew 
and began to rejoice and say (70 Lat. 2, Then Jesus took a 
kerchief (?)' and said: Iam good: mild and gracious and merciful, 
strong and righteous, wonderful and holy): Iam good. Alleluia. 
I am meek and gentle. Alleluia. Glory be to thee, O Lord: 
for I give gifts unto all them that desire me. Alleluia. 

Glory be to thee, O Lord, world without end. Amen. Alleluia. 

71 And when he had ceased, the apostles kissed him, and he 
gave them the peace of love. 


Vv 


1 Bartholomew saith unto him:? Declare unto us, Lord, 
what sin is heavier than all sins? 2 Jesus saith unto him: 
Verily I say unto thee that hypocrisy and backbiting is heavier 
than all sins: for because of them, the prophet said in the 
psalm, that ‘the ungodly shall not rise in the judgement, neither 
sinners in the council of the righteous’, neither the ungodly in 
the judgement of my Father. Verily, verily, I say unto you, 
that every sin shall be forgiven unto every man, but the sin 
against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven. 3 And Bar- 
tholomew saith unto him: What is the sin against the Holy 
Ghost? 4 Jesus saith unto him: Whosoever shall decree against 
any man that hath served my holy Father hath blasphemed 
against the Holy Ghost: For every man that serveth God 


1 toracem. * In Lat. 2, vv. 1-6 occupy 58 lines. 


GOSPEL OF BARTHOLOMEW 18} 


worshipfully is worthy of the Holy Ghost, and he that speaketh 
anything evil against him shall not be forgiven. 

5 Woe unto him that sweareth by the head of God, yea woe (?) 
to him that sweareth falsely by him jtruly+. For there are 
twelve heads of God the most high: for he is the truth, and in 
him is no lie, neither forswearing. 6 Ye, therefore, go ye and 
preach unto all the world the word of truth, and thou, Bar- 
tholomew, preach this word unto every one that desireth it; and 
as many as believe thereon shall have eternal life. 

7 Bartholomew saith: ? O Lord, and if any sin with sin of the 
body, what is their reward? 8 And Jesus said: It is good if he 
that is baptized present his baptism blameless: but the pleasure 
of the flesh will fbecome a lovert. For a single marriage belong- 
eth to sobriety: for verily I say unto thee, he that sinneth after 
the third marriage (wife) is unworthy of God. (8 Lat. 2 is to 
this effect: ... But if the lust of the flesh come upon him, 
he ought to be the husband of one wife. The married, if they 
are good and pay tithes, will receive a hundredfold. A second 
marriage is lawful, on condition of the diligent performance 
of good works, and due payment of tithes: but a third marriage 
is reprobated: and virginity is best.) 9 But ye, preach ye 
unto every man that they keep themselves from such things: 
for I depart not from you and I do supply you with the Holy 
Ghost. (Lat. 2, At the end of 9, Jesus ascends in the clouds, 
and two angels appear and say: ‘Ye men of Galilee’, and the 
rest.) 10 And Bartholomew worshipped him with the apostles, 
and glorified God earnestly, saying: Glory be to thee, Holy 
Father, Sun unquenchable, incomprehensible, full of light. 
Unto thee be glory, unto thee honour and adoration, world 
without end. Amen. (Lat. 2, End of the questioning of the 
most blessed Bartholomew and (or) the other apostles with 
the Lord Jesus Christ.) 


THE BOOK OF THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 
BY BARTHOLOMEW THE APOSTLE 


This exists in Coptic only. There are several recensions of it: the 
most complete is in a manuscript recently acquired by the British 
Museum (Or. 6804), and translated first by W. E. Crum (Rustafjaell’s 
Light of Egypt, 1910) and then edited and translated by Sir KE. A. Wallis 
Budge (Coptic Apocrypha in the dialect of Upper Egypt, 1913). Other 
fragments are in the publications of Lacau and Revillout. No full 
translation, but only an analysis, will be offered here. 


1 Lat. 2 enumerates seventeen other sins—chiefly forms of idolatry 
and wrong belief. 
2 In Lat. 2, vv. 7-10 fill 69 lines. 


182 BOOK OF THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


Five leaves are wanting at the beginning of the British Museum MS. 
The contents of these can be partly filled up from Lacau and Revillout. 
But in the first place a passage (p. 198, Budge) may be quoted which 
shows something of the setting of the book: ‘Do not let this book come 
into the hand of any man who is an unbeliever and a heretic. Behold, 
this is the seventh time that I have commanded thee, O my son 
Thaddaeus, concerning these mysteries. Reveal not thou them to 
any impure man, but keep them safely.’ We see that the book was 
addressed by Bartholomew to his son Thaddaeus, and this would no 
doubt have been the subject of some of the opening lines of the text. 

Next we may place the two fragments, one about the child of Joseph 
of Arimathaea, the other about the cock raised to life, which have been 
already described as nos. 7 and 8 of the Coptic narratives of the 
Passion (pp. 149, 150). The order is uncertain. 

Then we have a piece which in Revillout is no. 12 (p. 165), in Lacau 
no. 8 (p. 84). Lacau gives it partly in two recensions. 

Christ is on the cross, but his side has been pierced, and he 
is dead. 

A man in the crowd named Ananias, of Bethlehem, rushes 
to the cross and embraces and salutes the body breast to breast, 
hand to hand, and denounces the Jews. A voice comes from 
the body of Jesus and blesses Ananias, promising him incorruption, 
and the name of ‘the firstfruits of the immortal fruit’. The 
priests decide to stone Ananias: he utters words of exultation. 
The stoning produces no effect. They cast him into a furnace, 
where he remains till Jesus has risen. At last they pierce him 
with a spear. 

The Saviour takes his soul to heaven, and blesses him. 


There can be but little matter lost between this and the opening of the 
British Museum MS., in the first lines of which the taking of Ananias’ 
soul to heaven is mentioned. 

We now take up the British Museum MS. as our basis. Certain 
passages of it are preserved in Paris fragments which partly overlap 
each other, and so three different texts exist for some parts: but it 
will not be important for our purpose to note many of the variations. 


Joseph of Arimathaea buried the body of Jesus. Death 
came into Amente (the underworld), asking who the new arrival 
was, for he detected a disturbance. 

He came to the tomb of Jesus with his six sons in the form 
of serpents. Jesus lay there (it was the second day, i.e. the 
Saturday) with his face and head covered with napkins. 

Death addressed his son the Pestilence, and described the 
commotion which had taken place in his domain. Then he spoke 
to the body of Jesus and asked, ‘Who art thou?’ Jesus removed 
the napkin that was on his face and looked in the face of Death 
and laughed at him. Death and his sons fled. Then they ap- 
proached again, and the same thing happened. He addressed 


‘ esus again at some length, suspecting, but not certain, who 
€ was. 


BY BARTHOLOMEW THE APOSTLE 188 


Then Jesus rose and mounted into the chariot of the Cherubim. 
He wrought havoe in Hell, breaking the doors, binding the 
demons Beliar and Melkir (cf. Melkira in the Ascension of Isaiah), 
and delivered Adam and the holy souls. 

Then he turned to Judas Iscariot and uttered a long rebuke, 
and described the sufferings which he must endure. Thirty 
names of sins are given, which are the snakes which were sent 
to devour him. 

Jesus rose from the dead, and Abbaton (Death) and Pestilence 
came back to Amente to protect it, but they found it wholly 
desolate, only three souls were left in it (those of Herod, Cain, 
and Judas, says the Paris MS.). 

Meanwhile the angels were singing the hymn which the Sera- 
phim sing at dawn on the Lord’s day over his body and his blood. 

Early in the morning of the Lord’s day the women went 
to the tomb. They were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of 
James whom Jesus delivered out of the hand of Satan, Salome 
who tempted him, Mary who ministered to him and Martha 
her sister, Joanna (al. Susanna) the wife of Chuza who had 
renounced the marriage bed, Berenice who was healed of an 
issue of blood in Capernaum, Lia (Leah) the widow whose son 
he raised at Nain, and the woman to whom he said, ‘Thy sins 
which are many are forgiven thee’. 

These were all in the garden of Philogenes, whose son Simeon 
Jesus healed when he came down from the Mount of Olives 
with the apostles (probably the lunatic boy at the Mount of 
Transfiguration). 

Mary said to Philogenes: If thou art indeed he, I know thee. 
Philogenes said: Thou art Mary the mother of Thalkamarimath, 
which means joy, blessing, and gladness. Mary said: If thou 
have borne him away, tell me where thou hast laid him and 
I will take him away: fear not. Philogenes told how the Jews 
sought a safe tomb for Jesus that the body might not be stolen, 
and he offered to place it in a tomb in his own garden and watch 
over it: and they sealed it and departed. At midnight he rose 
and went out and found all the orders of angels: Cherubim, 
Seraphim, Powers, and Virgins. Heaven opened, and the Father 
raised Jesus. Peter, too, was there and supported Philogenes, 
or he would have died. 

The Saviour then appeared to them on the chariot of the 
Father and said to Mary: Mari Khar Mariath (Mary the mother 
of the Son of God). Mary answered: Rabbouni Kathiathari 
Midth (The Son of God the Almighty, my Lord, and my Son). 
A long address to Mary from Jesus follows, in the course of 
which he bids her tell his brethren, ‘I ascend unto my Father 
and your Father’, &c. Mary says: If indeed I am not permitted 
to touch thee, at least bless my body in which thou didst deign 
to dwell. 


184 BOOK OF THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


Believe me, my brethren the holy apostles, I, Bartholomew, 
beheld the Son of God on the chariot of the Cherubim. All 
the heavenly hosts were about him. He blessed the body of 
Mary. 

She went and gave the message to the apostles, and Peter 
blessed her, and they rejoiced. 

Jesus and the redeemed souls ascended into Heaven, and the 
Father crowned him. The glory of this scene Bartholomew 
could not describe. It is here that he enjoins his son Thaddaeus 
not to let this book fall into the hands of the impure (quoted 
above). 

Then follows a series of hymns sung in heaven, eight in all, 
which accompany the reception of Adam and the other holy 
souls into glory. Adam was eighty cubits high and Eve fifty. 
They were brought to the Father by Michael. Bartholomew 
had never seen anything to compare with the beauty and glory 
of Adam, save that of Jesus. Adam was forgiven, and all the 
angels and saints rejoiced and saluted him, and departed each 
to their place. 

Adam was set at the gate of life to greet all the righteous as 
they enter, and Eve was set over all the women who had done 
the will of God, to greet them as they come into the city of 
Christ. 

As for me, Bartholomew, I remained many days without 
food or drink, nourished by the glory of the vision. 

The apostles thanked and blessed Bartholomew for what 
he had told them: he should be called the apostle of the mysteries 
of God. But he protested: I am the least of you all, a humble 
workman. Will not the people of the city say when they see 
me, ‘Is not this Bartholomew the man of Italy, the gardener, 
the dealer in vegetables? Is not this the man that dwelleth 
in the garden of Hierocrates the governor of our city? How 
has he attained this greatness ?’ 

The next words introduce a new section. 

At the time when Jesus took us up into the Mount of Olives 
he spoke to us in an unknown tongue, which he revealed to us, 
saying: Anetharath (or Atharath Thaurath). The heavens 
were opened and we all went up into the seventh heaven (so the 
London MS.: in the Paris copy only Jesus went up, and the 
apostles gazed after him). He prayed the Father to bless us. 
The Father, with the Son and the Holy Ghost, laid His hand 
on the head of Peter (and made him archbishop of the whole 
world: Paris B). All that is bound or loosed by him on earth 
shall be so in heaven; none who is not ordained by him shall be 
accepted. Each of the apostles was separately blessed (there 
are omissions of single names in one or other of the three texts). 
Andrew, James, John, Philip (the cross will precede him wherever 
he goes), Thomas, Bartholomew (he will be the depositary of 


BY BARTHOLOMEW THE APOSTLE 185, 


the mysteries of the Son), Matthew (his shadow will heal the 
sick), James son of Alphaeus, Simon Zelotes, Judas of James, 
Thaddeus, Matthias (who was rich and left all to follow Jesus). 

And now, my brethren the apostles, forgive me: I, Bar- 
tholomew, am not a man to be honoured. 

The apostles kissed and blessed him. And then, with Mary, 
they offered the Eucharist. 

The Father sent the Son down into Galilee to console the 
apostles and Mary: and he came and blessed them and showed 
them his wounds, and committed them to the care of Peter, and 
gave them their commission to preach. They kissed his side and 
sealed themselves with the blood that flowed thence. He went 
up to heaven. 

Thomas was not with them, for he had departed to his city, 
hearing that his son Sidphanes (Theophanes ?) was dead: it was 
the seventh day since the death when he arrived. He went to 
the tomb and raised him in the name of Jesus. 

Siophanes told him of the taking of his soul by Michael: how 
it sprang from his body and lighted on the hand of Michael, who 
wrapped it in a fine linen cloth: how he crossed the river of fire 
and it seemed to him as water, and was washed thrice in the 
Acherusian lake: how in heaven he saw the twelve splendid 
thrones of the apostles, and was not permitted to sit on his 
father’s throne. 

Thomas and he went into the city to the consternation of all 
who saw them. He, Siophanes, addressed the people and told 
his story: and Thomas baptized 12,000 of them, founded a 
church, and made Siophanes its bishop. 

Then Thomas mounted on acloud and it took him to the Mount 
of Olives and to the apostles, who told him of the visit of Jesus: 
and he would not believe. Bartholomew admonished him. Then 
Jesus appeared, and made Thomas touch his wounds: and 
departed into heaven. 

This is the second time that he showed himself to his disciples 
after that he had risen from the dead. 

This is the Book of the Resurrection of Jesus the Christ, our 
Lord, in joy and gladness. In peace. Amen. 

Peter said to the apostles: Let us offer the offering before we 
separate. They prepared the bread, the cup, and incense. 

Peter stood by the sacrifice and the others round the Table. 
They waited (break in the text: Budge and others suppose an 
appearance of Christ, but I do not think this is correct: 4} lines 
are gone: then there are broken words): 

table ... their hearts rejoiced . . . worshipped the Son of God. 
He took his seat .. . his Father (probably, who sitteth at the right 
hand of the Father). His Body was on the Table about which 

1 This vision resembles one inserted in the end of the Coptic version 
of the Apocalypse of Paul. 


186 BOOK OF THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


they were assembled; and they divided it. They saw the blood 
of Jesus pouring out as living blood down into the cup. Peter 
said: God hath loved us more than all, in letting us see these 
great honours: and our Lord Jesus Christ hath allowed us to 
behold and hath revealed to us the glory of his body and his 
divine blood. They partook of the body and blood—and then 
they separated and preached the word. (What is clearly indi- 
cated is a change in the elements: there is not room for a 
description of an appearance of Jesus: he says no word, and his 
departure is not mentioned.) 


This writing may be better described as a rhapsody than a narrative. 
It bristles with contradictions of itself: Joseph and Philogenes both 
bury Jesus; Thomas raises the dead and will not believe in Christ’s 
resurrection: and so forth. That Mary the mother of Jesus is identified 
with Mary Magdalene is typical of the disregard of history, and we 
have seen it in other Coptic documents. The interest of the author 
is centred in the hymns, blessings, salutations, and prayers, which in 
this analysis have been wholly omitted, but which occupy a large part 
of the original text. The glorification of St. Bartholomew is another 
purpose of the writer: the special blessings given to him recall the 
attitude which he takes in the Gospel (i. 1, 8) as inquiring into the 
mysteries of heaven, and seeing things which are hidden from others. 
Both Gospel and Book are specially interested in the Descent into 
Hell, the Resurrection, and the redemption of Adam. 

Bartholomew (Nathanael) was told (in St. John’s Gospel) that he 
would see the angels ascending and descending upon the Son of Man. 
This promise is fulfilled in the Gospel (i. 6, 23) and very often in the 
Book: in St. John we also read of his being ‘under the fig-tree’, and 
this was probably enough to suggest to the Coptic author of the Book 
that he was a gardener. 

A date is hard to suggest. The British Museum MS. is assigned to 
the twelfth century ; the Paris fragments are older. That of the Coptic 
literature of this class is usually supposed to belong to the fifth and sixth 
centuries ; and I think this, or at latest the seventh century, may be 
the period when the book was produced. 


187 


TuEReE is a fairly large class of books, early and late, which consists, 
like the Gospel of Bartholomew, of questions addressed to our Lord 
and his answers to them. Earliest of all are perhaps the Gnostic 
books preserved in Coptic in a Berlin MS. and not yet edited. One of 
these was used by Irenaeus. We hear of lost books of a similar kind: 
Questions of Mary, and a Gospel of Philip. We also possess, in Greek, 
late specimens of this class: e.g. Questions of John to Christ about the 
Last Things, which go by the name of the Apocryphal Apocalypse of 
John and have been printed by Tischendorf. Another like book is 
the Liber S. Joannis which was found in use in a Latin version among 
the Albigensian heretics in Southern France: it is printed by Thilo. 
Yet another is the Dispute of the Devil with Christ, printed in two texts, 
in Greek, by Vassiliev, and on the same general lines are Questions of 
St. James the brother of the Lord to St. John, also printed by Vassiliev. 
Various late Testaments or Dialogues of Jesus with the apostles 
remain unprinted. 


BOOK OF JOHN THE EVANGELIST 


Reprinted by Thilo from I. Benoist’s Histoire des Albigeois, &c., 
Paris, 1691, T. 1, 283-96. Dé6llinger in his Bettrége zur mittelalter- 
lichen Sektengeschichie, vol. ii, printed another text from a fourteenth- 
century manuscript at Vienna. I have not given the variants. Thilo’s 
reprint is followed. The Vienna MS. is rather imperfect at the end. 
Benoist derived his text from the Archives of the Inquisition at 
Carcassonne. The manuscript of it had this annotation in Latin: 

‘This is the secret book of the heretics of Concoréze, brought from 
Bulgaria by their bishop Nazarius; full of errors.’ 

This Nazarius was examined by Rainer (Contra Waldenses, vi: 
printed in Bibl. Patr. max. xxv. 271). He said that the Blessed Virgin 
was an angel, and that Christ did not take upon him a human nature 
but an angelic or heavenly one: and that he had this erroneous 
teaching from a bishop and elder son of the church of Bulgaria almost 
sixty years since. 

The book is a Bogomile production, denying that the world was 
made by God, and attributing creation to the devil. Catholic Christians 
are disciples of John Baptist: baptism has no value, nor, probably, 
the Eucharist: but the statement about this has dropped out of the 
text. The law of sacrifices (promulgated by Enoch) and the Mosaic 
law are works of the devil. 

The account of the Last Judgement, I agree with Thilo, seems too 
orthodox and conventional to square with the rest of the book: one 
suspects dilution from another source. In its Latin dress the book can 
hardly be older than the twelfth century. The original might be of the 
sixth or seventh. 

I, John, your brother and partaker in tribulation, and that shall 
be also a partaker in the kingdom of heaven, when I lay upon 
the breast of our Lord Jesus Christ and said unto him: Lord, who 
is he that shall betray thee? [and] he answered and said: He that 


188 BOOK OF JOHN THE EVANGELIST 


dippeth his hand with me in the dish: then Satan entered unto 
him and he sought how he might betray me. 

And I said: Lord, before Satan fell, in what glory abode he 
with thy Father? And he said unto me: In such glory was he 
that he commanded the powers of the heavens: but I sat with 
my Father; and he did order all the followers of the Father, and 
went down from heaven unto the deep and ascended up out of 
the deep unto the throne of the invisible Father. And he saw 
the glory of him that moveth the heavens, and he thought to set 
his seat above the clouds of heaven and desired to be like unto 
the Most High. 

And when he had descended into the air, he said unto the 
angel of the air: Open unto me the gates of the air. And he 
opened them unto him. And he sought to go further downward 
and found the angel which held the waters, and said unto him: 
Open unto me the gates of the waters. And he opened to him. 
And he passed through and found all the face of the earth covered 
with waters. And he passed through beneath the earth and 
found two fishes lying upon the waters, and they were as oxen 
yoked for ploughing, holding the whole earth by the command- 
ment of the invisible Father, from the west even unto the sun- 
rising. And when he had gone down he found clouds hanging 
which held the waters of the sea. And he went down yet further 
and found hell, that is the gehenna of fire,1 and thereafter he 
could go down no further because of the flame of the burning 
fire. And Satan returned back and filled up (passed over again) 
the paths and entered in unto the angel of the air and to him 
that was over the waters, and said unto them: All these things 
are mine: if ye will hearken unto me, I will set my seat in the 
clouds and be like the Most High, and I will take the waters from 
this upper firmament and gather together the other parts (places) 
of the sea, and thereafter there shall be no water upon the face 
of all the earth, and I will reign with you world without end. 

And when he had said thus unto the angels, he went up unto 
the other angels, even unto the fifth heaven, and thus spake he 
unto each of them: How much owest thou unto thy lord? He 
said: An hundred measures (cors) of wheat. And he said unto 
him: Take pen and ink and write sixty. And unto others he 
said: And thou, how much owest thou unto thy lord? and he 
answered: An hundred jars of oil. And he said: Sit down and 
write fifty. And as he went up through all the heavens he said 
thus, even unto the fifth heaven, seducing the angels of the 
invisible Father. And there came forth a voice out of the throne 
of the Father, saying: What doest thou, O denier of the Father, 


* Here (in Thilo’s text only) occurs the word ossop which means 
nothing. A marginal note in Déllinger’s Vienna MS. speaks of oseph 
and says that it is a place, apparently the Vallis Josaphat. 


BOOK OF JOHN THE EVANGELIST 189 


seducing the angels? doer of iniquity, that thou hast devised do 
quickly. 

Then the Father commanded his angels, saying: Take away 
their garments. And the angels took away their garments and 
their thrones and their crowns from all the angels that hearkened 
unto him. 

And I asked of the Lord: When Satan fell, in what place 
dwelt he? And he answered me: My Father changed his 
appearance because of his pride, and the light was taken from him, 
and his face became like unto heated iron, and his face became 
wholly like that of a man: and he drew with his tail the third 
part of the angels of God, and was cast out from the seat of God 
and from the stewardship of the heavens. And Satan came down 
into this firmament, and he could find (make) no rest for himself 
nor for them that were with him. And he asked the Father, 
saying: Have patience with me and I will pay thee all. And 
the Father had mercy on him and gave him rest and them that 
were with him, as much as they would even unto seven days. 

And so sat he in the firmament and commanded the angel that 
was over the air and him that was over the waters, and they raised 
the earth up and it appeared dry: and he took the crown of the 
angel that was over the waters, and of the half thereof he made 
the light of the moon and of the half the light of the stars: and 
of the precious stones he made all the hosts of the stars. 

And thereafter he made the angels his ministers according to 
the order of the form of the Most High, and by the commandment 
of the invisible Father he made thunder, rain, hail, and snow. 

And he sent forth angels to be ministers over them. And he 
commanded the earth to bring forth every beast for food (fatling), 
and every creeping thing, and trees and herbs: and he commanded 
the sea to bring forth fishes, and the fowls of the heaven. 

And he devised furthermore and made man in his likeness, and 
commanded the (or an) angel of the third heaven to enter into 
the body of clay. And he took thereof and made another body 
in the form of a woman, and commanded the (or an) angel of the 
second heaven to enter into the body of the woman. But the 
angels lamented when they beheld a mortal shape upon them 
and that they were unlike in shape. And he commanded them 
to do the deed of the flesh in the bodies of clay, and they knew 
not how to commit sin. 

Then did the contriver of evil devise in his mind to make 
paradise, and he brought the man and woman into it. And he 
commanded to bring areed, and the devil planted it in the midst of 
paradise, and so did the wicked devil hide his device that they knew 
not his deceit. And he came in and spake unto them, saying: 
Of every fruit which is in paradise eat ye, but of the fruit of the 
knowledge of good and evil eat not. Notwithstanding, the devil 
entered into a wicked serpent and seduced the angel that was in 


190 BOOK OF JOHN THE EVANGELIST 


the form of the woman, and +... + and he wrought his lust 
with Eve in the tsongt of the serpent. And therefore are they 
called sons of the devil and sons of the serpent that do the lust 
of the devil their father, even unto the end of this world. And 
again the devil poured out upon the angel that was in Adam the 
poison of his lust, and it begetteth the sons of the serpent and the 
sons of the devil even unto the end of this world. 

And after that I, John, asked of the Lord, saying: How say 
men that Adam and Eve were created by God and set in paradise 
to keep the commandments of the Father, and were delivered 
unto death? And the Lord said to me: Hearken, John, beloved 
of my Father; foolish men say thus in their deceitfulness that 
my Father made bodies of clay: but by the Holy Ghost made 
he all the powers of the heavens, and holy ones were found having 
bodies of clay because of their transgression, and therefore were 
delivered unto death. 

And again I, John, asked the Lord: How beginneth a man to be 
in the Spirit (to have a spirit) in a body of flesh? And the Lord 
said unto me: Certain of the angels which fell do enter unto the 
bodies of women, and receive flesh from the lust of the flesh, and 
so isa spirit born of spirit, and flesh of flesh, and so is the kingdom 
of Satan accomplished in this world and among all nations. 

<And again I asked the Lord: How long shall be the reign of 
Satan?> And he said to me: My Father hath suffered him to 
reign seven days, which are seven ages. 

And I asked the Lord and said: What shall be in that time? 
And he said to me: From the time when the devil fell from the 
glory of the Father and (lost) his own glory, he sat upon the 
clouds, and sent his ministers, even angels flaming with fire, unto 
men from Adam even unto Henoch his servant. And he raised 
up Henoch upon the firmament and showed him his godhead, 
and commanded pen and ink to be given him: and he sat down 
and wrote threescore and seven books. And he commanded that 
he should take them to the earth and deliver them unto his sons. 
And Henoch let his books down upon the earth and delivered 
them unto his sons, and began to teach them to perform the 
custom of sacrifice, and unrighteous mysteries, and so did he 
hide the kingdom of heaven from men. And he said unto them: 
Behold that I am your god and beside me is none other god. 
And therefore did my Father send me into the world that I might 
make it known unto men, that they might know the evil device 
of the devil. 

And then when he perceived that I had come down out of 
heaven into the world, he sent an angel and took of three sorts 
of wood and gave them unto Moses that I might be crucified, 
and now are they reserved for me. But then (now) did the devil 
proclaim unto him (Moses) his godhead, and unto his people, and 
commanded a law to be given unto the children of Israel, and 


BOOK OF JOHN THE EVANGELIST 191 


brought them out through the midst of the sea which was 
dried up. 

When my Father thought to send me into the world, he sent 
his angel before me, by name Mary, to receive me. And I when 
I came down entered in by the ear and came forth by the ear. 
And Satan the prince of this world perceived that I was come to 
seek and save them that were lost, and sent his angel, even Helias 
the prophet, baptizing with water: who is called John the 
Baptist. And Helias asked the prince of this world: How can 
I know him? Then his lord said: On whomsoever thou shalt see 
the spirit descending like a dove and resting upon him, he it is 
that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost unto forgiveness of sins: 
thou wilt be able to destroy him and to savey. 

And again I, John, asked the Lord: Can a man be saved by the 
baptism of John without thy baptism’? And the Lord answered: 
Unless I have baptized him unto forgiveness of sins, by the 
baptism of water can no man see the kingdom of heaven: for 
I am the bread of life that came down from the seventh heaven, 
and they that eat my flesh and drink my blood, they shall be 
called the sons of God. 

And I asked the Lord and said: What meaneth it, to eat my 
flesh and drink my blood? (An answer and question seem to 
have fallen out.) And the Lord said unto me: Before the falling 
of the devil with all his host from the glory of the Father [in 
prayer], they did glorify the Father in their prayers thus, saying: 
Our Father, which art in heaven; and so did all their songs come 
up before the throne of the Father. But when they had fallen, 
after that they are not able to glorify God with that prayer. 

And I asked the Lord: How do all men receive the baptism 
of John, but thine not at all? And the Lord answered: Because 
their deeds are evil and they come not unto the light. 

The disciples of John marry and are given in marriage; but my 
disciples neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are as the 
angels of God in heaven. But I said: If, then, it be sin to have to 
do with a woman, it is not good to marry. And the Lord said 
unto me: Not every one can receive this saying (&c., Matt. xix. 
th. 12). 

I asked the Lord concerning the day of judgement: What 
shall be the sign of thy coming? And he answered and said unto 
me: When the numbers of the righteous shall be accomplished, 
that is, the number of the righteous that are crowned,{ that have 
fallen,} then shall Satan be loosed out of his prison, having great 
wrath, and shall make war with the righteous, and they shall cry 
unto the Lord with a loud voice. And immediately the Lord 
shall command an angel to blow with the trumpet, and the voice 
of the archangel shall be heard in the trumpet from heaven even 
unto hell. 

And then shall the sun be darkened and the moon shall not 


192 BOOK OF JOHN THE EVANGELIST 


give her light, and the stars shall fall, and the four winds shall be 
loosed from their foundations, and shall cause the earth and the 
sea and the mountains to quake together. And the heaven shall 
immediately shake and the sun shall be darkened, and it shall 
shine even to the fourth hour. Then shall appear the sign of the 
Son of man, and all the holy angels with him, and he shall set his 
seat upon the clouds, and sit on the throne of his majesty with 
the twelve apostles on the twelve seats of their glory. And the 
books shall be opened and he shall judge the whole world and the 
faith which he proclaimed. And then shall the Son of man send 
his angels, and they shall gather his elect from the four winds, 
from the heights of the heavens unto the boundaries of them, and 
shall bring them j;to seeky. 

Then shall the Son of God send the evil spirits, to bring all 
nations before him, and shall say unto them: Come, ye that did 
say: We have eaten and drunk and received the gain of this 
world. And after that they shall again be brought, and shall all 
stand before the judgement-seat, even all nations, in fear. And 
the books of life shall be opened and all nations shall show forth 
their ungodliness. And he shall glorify the righteous for their 
patience: and glory and honour and incorruption shall be the 
reward of their good works: but as for them that kept the com- 
mandments of the angels and obeyed unrighteously, indignation 
and trouble and anguish shall take hold on them. 

And the Son of God shall bring forth the elect out of the midst 
of the sinners and say unto them: Come, ye blessed of my Father, 
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the 
world. ‘Then shall he say unto the sinners: Depart from me, 
ye cursed, into everlasting fire, which was prepared for the devil 
and his angels. And the rest, beholding the last cutting off, shall 
cast the sinners into hell by the commandment of the invisible 
Father. Then shall the spirits of them that believe not go forth 
out of the prisons, and then shall my voice be heard, and there 
shall be one fold and one shepherd: and the darkness and 
obscurity shall come forth out of the lower parts of the earth— 
that is to say, the darkness of the gehenna of fire—and shall burn 
all things from below even to the air of the firmament. }tAnd the 
Lord shall be in the firmament andj even to the lower parts 
of the earth. (read And the distance from the firmament unto the 
lower parts of the earth shall be) as if a man of thirty years old 
should take up a stone and cast it down, hardly in three years 
would it reach the bottom: so great is the depth of the pit and 
of the fire wherein the sinners shall dwell. And then shall Satan 
and all his host be bound and cast into the lake of fire. And the 
Son of God shall walk with his elect above the firmament and 
shall shut up the devil, binding him with strong chains that cannot 
be loosed. At that time the sinners, weeping and mourning, shall 
say: O earth, swallow us up and cover us in death. And then 


BOOK OF JOHN THE EVANGELIST 198 


shall the righteous shine as the sun in the kingdom of their 
Father. And he shall bring them before the throne of the in- 
visible Father, saying: Behold, I and my children whom God 
hath given me: O righteous one, the world hath not known thee, 
but I bave known thee in truth, because thou hast sent me. 
And then shall the Father answer his Son and say: My beloved 
Son, sit thou on my right hand until I make thine enemies the 
footstool of thy feet, which have denied me and said: We are 
gods, and beside us there is none other god: which have slain 
thy prophets and persecuted thy righteous ones, and thou hast 
persecuted them even unto the outer darkness: there shall be 
weeping and gnashing of teeth. 

And then shall the Son of God sit on the right hand of his 
Father, and the Father shall command his angels, and they shall 
minister unto them (i.e. the righteous) and set them among the 
choirs of the angels, to clothe them with incorruptible garments, 
and shall give them crowns that fade not and seats that cannot 
be moved. And God shall be in the midst of them ; and they shall 
not hunger nor thirst any more, neither shall the sun light on 
them nor any heat. And God shall wipe away every tear from 
their eyes. And he shall reign with his holy Father, and of his 
kingdom there shall be no end for ever and ever. 


THE ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN 


As was the case with the Acts of Pilate, we must admit that we have 
as yet no critical edition of the very numerous forms of this legend. 

We have texts in Greek, Latin, Syriac, Coptic, Arabic, not to 
mention derivatives in many vernacular mediaeval versions, all of 
which would have to be dealt with in a comprehensive survey. Clearly 
the present collection cannot attempt to do that. What it can do is 
to present a statement of the contents of the principal ancient versions. 

My own belief is that the legend was first elaborated, if it did not 
originate, in Egypt: and therefore the Sahidic and Bohairic texts 
will receive special attention. 

The standard Greek writing on the subject is one attributed to 
St. John, which is edited from five manuscripts (of eleventh-fourteenth 
centuries) by Tischendorf. This was exploited and inflated in sermon- 
form by John, archbishop of Thessalonica, in the seventh century. 
It will be translated here. 

The standard Latin form is that attributed to Melito, bishop of 
Sardis: often printed, last by Tischendorf (Transitus Mariae B). 

What Tischendorf calls the Latin A form is attributed to Joseph of 
Arimathaea. The text, which is very divergent in various copies, is 
printed by Tischendorf from three late manuscripts, all Italian. 

Of the Syriac, of which there are many forms, we have editions by 
Wright, Budge, and Mrs. Lewis. 

The Arabic, edited by Enger in 1854, is akin to the Syriac; it is not 
very important for our purpose, nor is the Ethiopic, edited by Chaine 
in Apocrypha de B. V. M. 


THE ASSUMPTION. COPTIC TEXTS 


Of these we have two complete texts in Bohairic and one in Sahidie, 
with fragments of others. 

The first Bohairic account is in a Homily attributed to Evodius 
(usually described as first bishop of Antioch, but here), archbishop of 
Rome, the successor and spiritual son of Peter; he insists that he 
was an eyewitness of all that he tells. (Ed. by Robinson, Coptic 
Apocryphal Gospels.) 

The first four sections of the homily are panegyric. The 
narrative begins with V. 

Evodius first tells of his calling by Jesus. He was with Peter 
and Andrew and Alexander and Rufus his kinsmen, and followed 
Jesus when Peter and Andrew did, and was of the seventy-two 
disciples. 

They lived with Mary after the Passion, as did Salome and 
Joanna and the rest of the virgins who were with her, and Peter 
sanctified an altar in the house. 

VI. On the twentieth of the month Tobi, they were all gathered 


COPTIC TEXTS 195 


at the altar, and Jesus appeared and greeted them. He bade 
Peter prepare the altar because ‘I must needs take a great offering 
from your midst on the morrow, before that each one of you goes 
to the lot that hath fallen to him to preach therein’. He then 
ordained Peter archbishop, and others, including Evodius, pres- 
byters, and also deacons, readers, psalmists, and doorkeepers; 
and departed to heaven. They remained, wondering what the 
offering was to be. 

VII. On the twenty-first of Tobi Jesus returned, on the 
chariot of the cherubim, with thousands of angels, and David the 
sweet singer. ‘We’ besought him to tell what the great offering 
was to be, and he told them that it was his Mother whom he was 
to take to himself. (Here, as elsewhere, I do not pretend to give 
the long discourses which occur, but only the bare skeleton of 
the story.) 1 

VIII. We all wept, and Peter asked if it was not possible that 
Mary should never die, and then if she might not be left to them 
for a few days. But the Lord said that her time was accomplished. 

IX. The women, and also Mary, wept, but Jesus consoled her. 
She said: I have heard that Death has many terrible faces. How 
shall I bear to see them? He said: How dost thou fear his divine 
shape when the Life of all the world is with thee? And he kissed 
her, and blessed them all, and bade Peter look upon the altar for 
heavenly garments which the Father had sent to shroud Mary in. 

X.? Mary arose and was arrayed in the garments, and turned 
to the east and uttered a prayer in the language of heaven, and 
then lay down, still facing eastward. 

Jesus made us stand for the prayer, and the virgins also who 
used to minister in the temple and had come to wait on Mary 
after the Passion. We asked them why they left it. They said: 
When we saw the darkness at the crucifixion we fled into the holy 
of holies and shut the door. We saw a strong angel come down 
with a sword, and he rent the veil in twain : and we heard a great 
voice (from the house of the altar Sah.), saying, Woe to thee, 
Jerusalem, which killest the prophets. The angel of the altar 
flew up into the canopy of the altar with the angel of the sword : 
and we knew that God had left his people, and we fled to his 
Mother. 

XI. The virgins stood about Mary singing, and Jesus sat by 
her. She besought him to save her from the many terrors of the 
next world—the accusers of Amenti, the dragon of the abyss, 
the river of fire that proves the righteous and the wicked. (Al 
this Sah. omits.) 


1 Parts of VII and VIII exist in Sahidic fragment I (Robinson, 


. 66). ; 
f 2 At this point begins Sahidic fragment II (Robinson, p. 70) and 
continues into XVII: it has important differences. 


196 THE ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN 


XII. He comforted her and said to the apostles: Let us 
withdraw outside for a little while, for Death cannot approach 
while I am here. And they went out and he sat on a stone, and 
looked up to heaven and groaned and said: I have overcome 
thee, O Death, that dwellest in the storehouses of the south. 
Come, appear to my virgin mother: but not in a fearful shape. 
He appeared, and when she saw him, her soul leaped into the 
bosom of her son—white as snow, and he wrapped it in garments 
of fine linen and gave it to Michael. 

All the women wept; Salome ran to Jesus and said: Behold, 
she whom thou lovest is dead. David the singer rejoiced and 
said: Right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of his 
saints. (The Sahidic does not describe the moment of death, but 
says it took place at the ninth hour of the 21st of Tobi: and 
omits David.) 

XIII. ‘They re-entered the house and found her lying dead, 
and Jesus blessed her. 

XIV. Jesus shrouded the body in the heavenly garments, and 
they were fastened thereto. He bade the apostles take up the 
body, Peter bearing the head and John the feet, and carry it to 
a new tomb in the field of Jehoshaphat, and watch it for three 
and a half days. 

David rejoiced, saying: She shall be brought unto the King, 
&c. (Ps. xlv. 14), and: Arise, O Lord, into thy resting place 
(BsFexxsaies)s 

(Sah. omits details: the order is merely to carry the body to 
the tomb: David again omitted.) 

XV. Jesus ascended with Mary’s soul in the chariot of the 
Cherubim. (Sah. merely: he hid himself from us.) We took 
up the body, and when we came to the field of Jehoshaphat, the 
Jews heard the singing and came out intending to burn the body. 
But a wall of fire encompassed us, and they were blinded: and the 
body was laid in the tomb and watched for three and a half days. 

(Sah. omits all after the blindness.) 

XVI. The Jews were in terror and confessed their sin and 
asked pardon. Their eyes were opened and they sought and 
found not the body: and they were amazed and confessed them- 
selves guilty. 

(Here Sah. has a very confusing insertion. When the eyes of 
the Jews have been opened: ‘there came a great choir of angels 
and caught away the body of the Virgin, and Peter and John 
and we looked on while she was carried to heaven, until we lost 
pa of it. And the Jews saw it also, and confessed themselves 
guilty. 

XVII. At mid-day on the fourth day all were gathered at the 
tomb. A great voice came, saying: Go every one to his place till 
the seventh month: for I have hardened the heart of the Jews, 
and they will not be able to find the tomb or the body till I take 


COPTIC TEXTS 197 


it up to heaven. Return on the 16th of Mesore. We returned 
to the house. 

In the seventh month after the death, i. e. on 15th of Mesore, 
we reassembled at the tomb and spent the night in watching and 
singing. 

(Sah. has only: We returned to the house.) 

XVIII. At dawn on the 16th of Mesore, Jesus appeared. 
Peter said: We are grieved that we have not seen thy Mother 
since her death. Jesus said: She shall now come. The chariot 
of the Cherubim appeared with the Virgin seated in it. There 
were greetings. Jesus bade the apostles go and preach in all the 
world. He spent all that day with us and with his Mother, and 
gave us the salutation of peace and went up to heaven in glory. 

XIX. Such was the death of the Virgin on the 21st of Tobi, 
and her assumption on 16th Mesore. I, Evodius, saw it all. The 
sermon ends with a blessing. 

(Sah. has: XVIII. At dawn on the eighth day after her death 
Jesus appeared (as in Boh.), and the fragment ends at his promise 
that the apostles shall now see the Virgin.) 

The other Sahidie account is in the ‘Twentieth Discourse of Cyril 
of Jerusalem’, edited by Budge (Misc. Copt. texts). We have seen 
what he says of the early part of the life of the Virgin. At p. 642 
(Eng. trans.) he takes up the subject of her death. A considerable 
portion of this had been already edited by Robinson as Sahidic Frag- 
ment IV of the Life of the Virgin, pp. 24-40. 

For ten (Rob. fifteen) years after the resurrection, according to 
Josephus and Irenaeus(!), John and Mary lived together at 
Jerusalem. One day the Virgin bade John summon Peter and 
James: and they sat down before her and she addressed them, 
reminding them of the life of Jesus (up to the Ascension and 
Pentecost). She went on to say that Jesus had come to her and 
warned her that her time was accomplished. ‘I will hide thy body 
in the earth, no man shall find it until the day when I raise it 
incorruptible. A great church shall be built over it.’ Now there- 
fore summon the virgins. 

It was done. Mary took the hand of one of them, Mary 
Magdalene, now very old, and committed the others to her charge. 

She bade Peter fetch from the house of his disciple Birrus the 
linen clothes she had committed to him: James was to buy for 
a stater (shekel, Rob.) spices and perfumes. 

John lighted the lamps. Mary spread the linen on the ground 
and poured the spices upon it and stood and prayed, facing east: 
she asked to be delivered from the terrors of the next world—the 
dragon and the river of fire. Then she lay down facing east. 

Jesus appeared on the Cherubim and bade her not fear death. 
And said to Death: Come, O thou who art in the chambers of 
the south. When Mary saw him her soul leaped into the bosom 
of her Son, and he wrapped it in a garment of light. 


198 THE ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN 


She fell asleep on the night of the 20th day of Tobi (early on 
the 21st, Rob.). 

The Lord bade the apostles take the body to the valley of 
Jehoshaphat and set down the bier, because of the Jews, and he 
would hide it. 

In the morning they took it forth. The Jews heard the singing, 
and took counsel and set out with fire to burn it. The apostles 
saw them coming, and dropped the bier and fled. The Jews 
found nothing but the bier, and that they burnt. A sweet odour 
came from the place where the body was laid, and a voice said: 
Let no man give himself the trouble of seeking it till the great 
day of the appearing of Christ. The Jews were ashamed and 
fled, and told their neighbours, but bade them tell no one. 

This is Cyril’s account, which entirely shuts out a corporal 
assumption, but has frequent coincidences of language and 
matter with the Bohairic account of Evodius, and the Sahidic 
fragments of the same. 


THE DISCOURSE OF THEODOSIUS 


Archbishop of Alexandria (probably the Jacobite Patriarch of 
586-68). It is in Bohairic, edited by Robinson (p. 90), who calls it 
the Second Bohairic account: he omits fifteen pages of homiletic 
matter at the beginning. 

I. At the moment of the Ascension Jesus charged Peter, ‘his 
bishop’. and John to remain with Mary till her death. 

II. She was living in Jerusalem with a number of virgins. 
‘We also, the apostles Peter and John’, were with her. 

On the 20th of Tobi we came to her and found her amazed. 
She explained that that night, after she had finished the ‘little 
office (synaxis)’, she slumbered and saw a beautiful youth about 
thirty years of age, ‘and you also standing at his right hand, with 
garments in your hands’. She perceived that it was Jesus, and 
he told her that the garments were her shroud; and he vanished. 

Then Mary makes a long discourse on the horrors of death— 
the river of fire, the two powers of light and darkness, the 
avengers with diverse faces, the worm, the unquenchable fire 
which three tears will put out, the ruler of darkness. 

On hearing this we wept. 

III. There was a knocking at the door. It was the virgins 
who had come from the Mount of Olives, with censers and lamps. 
They had been warned by a voice in the night to come to Mary, 
who was to die next day. 

_Mary bade us withdraw a little, and uttered a (long) thanks- 
giving to her Son, and a prayer to be delivered from the terrors 
of the next world. 

IV. There were thunderings and lightnings. Jesus came on 
a chariot of light with Moses, David, the prophets, and the 


THE DISCOURSE OF THEODOSIUS 199 


righteous kings, and addressed Mary. (There is a refrain to the 
speech, ‘O my beloved Mother, arise, let us go hence’.) 

Mary spoke comfort to the apostles. Jesus spoke of the 
necessity of death. If she were translated, ‘wicked men will 
think concerning thee that thou art a power which came down 
from heaven, and that the dispensation (the Incarnation) took 
place in appearance’. 

V. He turned to the apostles—to me Peter and to John—and 
said that Mary should appear to them again. ‘There are 206 days 
from her death unto her holy assumption. I will bring her unto 
you arrayed in this body.’ 

He bade them bring garments and perfumes from the altar, 
which were sent from heaven. 

They spread them on the bed. 

The Virgin arose and prayed him to receive her. 

VI. She lay down on the garments, turned her face to him, 
and straightway commended her spirit into his hands. 

He bade us prepare her for burial, and gave us three palms: 
from paradise and three branches of the olive-tree which Noah’s 
dove brought to Noah, and we laid them on her body. Peter was 
to bear the head, John the feet. The Jews would plot against her, 
but they should be blinded. The body was to be placed in the 
stone coffin and watched, and in 206 days he would bring the 
soul to it. 

He went up to heaven and presented the soul to the Father and 
the Holy Ghost. And the voice of the Holy Trinity was heard 
welcoming the soul. 

VII. We carried the body out to the field of Jehoshaphat. 
The Jews saw it and took counsel to come and burn it. The 
apostles set down the bier and fled. 

Darkness came on the Jews, and they were blinded and smitten 
by their own fire. They cried out for mercy and were healed, 
and many were converted. 

We returned to Jerusalem, and often came back to the tomb. 

VIII. When the 206 days were over, on the evening of the 
15th, that is the morning of the 16th of Mesore, we gathered at 
the tomb and watched all night. 

At the tenth hour there were thunderings, and a choir of angels 
was heard, and David’s harp. Jesus came on the chariots of the 
Cherubim with the soul of the Virgin seated in his bosom, and 
greeted us. 

He called over the coffin and bade the body arise (a long 
address). 

IX. The coffin, which had been shut like Noah’s ark, opened. 
The body arose and ‘embraced its own soul, even as two brothers 
who are come from a strange country, and they were united one 
with another’. David said, ‘Mercy and truth are met together’ 


(&e.). 


200 THE ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN 


Jesus went up to heaven, blessing us, and we heard the voice 
of the powers singing: Bring to the Lord the honour due unto 
his name. The virgins that be her fellows (her holy deeds) shall 
be her company (&c.). 

Here we have the corporal assumption after 206 days. 


Yet another Sahidic fragment is to be found in Revillout (Patrol. 
Orient. Apocryphes Coptes, I, fr. 16, p. 174). He attributes it quite 
without reason to the Gospel of the Twelve Apostles. It is told by 
an eyewitness, but he cannot be identified. 

We here encounter the high priest whose hand is smitten off when he 
touches the bier: he appears in the other versions. 


The high priest begs to be healed. Peter says, if he believes in 
Jesus Christ he can be healed. 

The high priest acknowledges that he and his people crucified 
Jesus (knowing him to be the Son of God) because he drove the 
traders out of the temple. 

Peter bids him, if he believes, to embrace the body of the 
Virgin and profess his belief. 

He does so and takes his own cut-off hand and puts it to the 
stump, and it adheres. 

Peter bids him take ‘this palm branch’ and go to the city and 
lay it on the eyes of those who are blind. He found many of them 
lamenting, and all who believed were healed. 

Meanwhile the apostles laid the body in the tomb and remained 
there, to wait till the Lord should come and raise it up as he had 
said. 

They bade the virgins go home in peace: but they wanted to 
stay there too. Peter and John reassured them. They asked to 
be blessed, and Peter blessed them. 

At the third hour of the day the converted high priest came 
and told Peter that the Jews were still plotting to burn the body 
and the tomb. 

Peter warned the disciples: but God sent forgetfulness upon 
the Jews. And the apostles took courage. And a voice from 
heaven came also, promising safety. 

It came to pass after that we reached the 16th of Mesore, and 
were gathered with the apostles at the tomb. We saw lightnings 
and were afraid. There was a sweet odour and a sound of 
trumpets. The door of the tomb opened: there was a great 
light within. A chariot descended in fire: Jesus was in it; he 
greeted us. 

He called into the tomb: Mary, my mother, arise! And we 
saw her in the body, as if she had never died. Jesus took her 
into the chariot. The angels went before them. A voice called, 
‘Peace be to you, my brethren’. 

The miracle was even greater than that of the resurrection of 
Jesus. which no one saw except Mary and Mary Magdalene. 


THE DISCOURSE OF THEODOSIUS 201 


We, then, the apostles, are witnesses of these things, and have 
added or diminished nothing. 

We went to the tomb and found the garments where the body 
had lain: we buried them. 

Here the fragment ends. It forms a link between the Egyptian 
and the other forms of the story. 

To sum up. All the narratives except the Discourse of Cyril tell 
of a corporal assumption, and all but cne place it on the 16th of 
Mesore, the exception being the Sahidic fragment II, which puts it on 
the eighth day after the death. 

The same fragment seems to indicate that the body was taken up 
at the burial: whether it was brought back and taken up a second 
time we cannot tell. 

The other versions will mostly agree in assembling all the apostles 
at the death-bed. In the Coptic group the death takes place before the 
dispersion of the apostles, and we do not hear of any of them 
individually except Peter and John. 


GREEK NARRATIVE 


THE DISCOURSE OF ST. JOHN THE DIVINE CONCERNING 
THE FALLING ASLEEP OF THE HOLY MOTHER OF GOD 


1 Whenas the all-holy glorious mother of God and ever-virgin 
Mary according to her custom went unto the holy sepulchre of 
our Lord to burn incense, and bowed her holy knees, she besought 
Christ our God that was born of her to come and abide with her 
(rather, that she might depart unto him). 

2 And when the Jews saw her resorting unto the holy sepulchre 
they came to the chief priests, saying: Mary goeth every day 
unto the sepulchre. And the chief priests called the watchmen 
which were charged by them not to suffer any to pray at the holy 
sepulchre, and inquired of them if it were so in truth. But the 
watch answered and said that they saw no such thing; for God 
did not suffer them to see her venerable presence. 

8 Now on one day, which was Friday, the holy Mary came as 
she was wont to the sepulchre, and as she prayed it came to pass 
that the heavens were opened and the archangel Gabriel came 
down unto her and said: Hail, thou that didst bear Christ our 
God: thy prayer hath passed through the heavens unto him that 
was born of thee and hath been accepted, and henceforth according 
to thy petition thou shalt leave the world and come unto the 
heavenly places unto thy Son, unto the true life that hath no 
successor. 

4 And when she heard that from the holy archangel she 
returned unto Bethlehem the holy, having with her three virgins 
that ministered unto her. And when she had rested a little space 
she sat up and said to the virgins: Bring me a censer that I may 
pray. And they brought it as it was commanded them. 


202 THE ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN 


5 And she prayed, saying: My Lord Jesu Christ, who didst 
vouchsafe of thine excellent goodness to be born of me, hear my 
voice and send unto me thine apostle John, that seeing him I may 
have the firstfruits of joy: and send unto me also the rest of thine 
apostles, both them that have already come to dwell with thee 
and them that are in this present world, in whatever land they 
may be, by thy holy commandment, that I may behold them and 
bless thy name that is greatly extolled, for I have confidence that 
thou hearest thine handmaid in every thing. 

6 And as she prayed I, John, came unto her, for the Holy Ghost 
caught me up by a cloud from Ephesus and set me in the place 
where the mother of my Lord lay. And I entered in unto her 
and gave glory to him that was born of her and said: Hail, thou 
mother of my Lord, that didst bear Christ our God: rejoice for 
that thou departest out of this life with great glory. 

7 And the holy mother of God glorified God that I, John, was 
come to her, remembering the word of the Lord which he spake: 
Behold thy mother, and behold thy son. And the three virgins 
came and worshipped. 

8 And the holy mother of God said unto me: Pray thou and 
put on incense. And I prayed thus: O Lord Jesu Christ that 
doest marvellous things, do now marvellous things before her 
that bare thee, and let thy mother depart out of this life, and let 
them that crucified thee and believed not in thee be troubled. 

9 And after I had finished the prayer the holy Mary said unto 
me: Bring me the censer. And she cast in incense and said: 
Glory be to thee, my God and my Lord, because in me are fulfilled 
all things that thou didst promise me before thou didst ascend 
into the heavens, that whenever I should depart out of this world 
thou wouldest come unto me in glory, thou and the multitude of 
thine angels. 

10 And I, John, said unto her: Our Lord and our God Jesus 
Christ cometh, and thou beholdest him according as he promised 
thee. And the holy mother of God answered and said tome: The 
Jews have sworn that when mine end cometh they will burn my 
body. And JI answered and said unto her: Thy holy and precious 
body shall not see corruption. And she answered and said unto 
me: Bring a censer and put incense therein and pray. And there 
came a voice from heaven and said the Amen. 

11 And I, John, listened unto that voice, and the Holy Ghost 
said unto me: John, heardest thou this voice which was uttered 
in heaven after the ending of the prayer? And I answered and 
said: Yea, I heard it. And the Holy Ghost said unto me: This 
voice which thou heardest signifieth the coming of thy brethren 
the apostles and of the holy powers which is to be: for to-day 
they are coming hither. 

12 And thereupon I, John, fell to prayer. And the Holy Ghost 
said unto the apostles: All of you together mount up upon 


GREEK NARRATIVE 203 


clouds from the ends of the world and gather yourselves together 
at Bethlehem the holy because of the mother of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, in a moment of time: Peter from Rome, Paul from 
Tiberia, Thomas out of the inmost Indies, James from Jerusalem: 
13 Andrew the brother of Peter, and Philip, Luke and Simon the 
Canaanite, and Thaddaeus, which were fallen asleep, were raised 
up by the Holy Ghost out of their sepulchres; unto whom said 
the Holy Ghost: Think not that the resurrection is now; but for 
this cause are ye risen up out of your graves, that ye may go to 
salute for an honour and a wonderful sign for the mother of your 
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ: for the day is come near of her 
departure and going to abide in heaven. 14 And Mark, who was 
yet alive, came also from Alexandria with the rest, as hath been 
said, from their several countries. 

15 But Peter when he was lifted up by the cloud stood between 
the heaven and the earth, for the Holy Ghost sustained him, and 
beheld? while the rest of the apostles also were caught up in the 
clouds to be present with Peter. And so all came together by the 
means of the Holy Ghost, as hath been said. 

15* ? And we entered in unto the mother of our Lord and God 
and did her worship and said: Fear not, neither be grieved: the 
Lord God that was born of thee shall bring thee out of this world 
with glory. And she rejoicing in God her Saviour sat up in the 
bed and said to the apostles: Now believe I that our teacher and 
our God cometh from heaven, and I shall behold him, and so 
depart out of this life, even as I have seen you come unto me. 
And I would that you would tell me whence ye knew that I was 
departing and came unto me, and from what lands and how far 
ye are come hither, that ye have been so quick to visit me: for 
neither hath he that was born of me, even our Lord Jesus Christ, 
hidden it from me. For I have believed now also that he is the 
Son of the Most High. 

16 And Peter answered and said unto the apostles: Let each 
one certify the mother of our Lord, in what manner the Holy 
Ghost announced it unto us and charged us. 

17 And I, John, answered and said: I, whenas I was entering 
in unto the holy altar in Ephesus to minister, the Holy Ghost 
said unto me: The time of the departure of the mother of thy 
Lord is come near: go unto Bethlehem to salute her. Anda cloud 
of light caught me up and set me at the door of the house where 
thou liest. 18 And Peter also answered: I also was in Rome, 
and about the dawn I heard a voice by the Holy Ghost saying 
unto me: The mother of thy Lord must depart, for the time is 
come nigh: go thou unto Bethlehem to salute her: and lo, 
a cloud of light caught me up, and I beheld the rest of the 

1 Greek, corruptly, ovvoda: probably ovvopé, for the Syriac has 


‘beheld the apostles’, or the like. 
2 The number 15 is, by an error, repeated in Tischendorf. 


204 THE ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN 


apostles also coming unto me upon clouds, and a voice saying to 
me: Go all of you unto Bethlehem. 19 Paul also answered and 
said: I also was abiding in a city not very far off from Rome; 
and the place is called Tiberia. And I heard the Holy Ghost 
saying unto me: The mother of thy Lord leaveth this world to 
go unto the heavenly places, and endeth (maketh) her course by 
departure: but go thou also unto Bethlehem to salute her. And 
lo, a cloud of light caught me up and set me where it did set you 
also. 20 Thomas also answered and said: I also had passed 
through the land of the Indians, and my preaching was increased 
in strength by the grace of Christ, and the son of the king’s sister, 
by name Labdanes, was about to be sealed (baptized) by me in 
the palace, and suddenly the Holy Ghost saith unto me: Thou 
also, Thomas, go unto Bethlehem to salute the mother of thy 
Lord, for she maketh her removal unto heaven. And a cloud of 
light caught me up and set me with you. 21 And Mark also 
answered and said: As I also was finishing the service (canon) 
of the third hour in the city of Alexandria, while I prayed, the 
Holy Ghost caught me up and brought me unto you. 

22 And James also answered and said: While I was in 
Jerusalem the Holy Ghost admonished (permitted) me, saying: 
Be thou present at Bethlehem, for the mother of thy Lord maketh 
her departure. And lo, a cloud of light caught me up and brought 
me unto you. 

23 And Matthew also answered and said: I glorified and do 
glorify God, for that as I was in a ship and it was tossed, for the 
sea was boisterous with waves, suddenly a cloud of light over- 
shadowed us, and overcame (shook off) the billows of the tempest 
and made them calm, and me it caught up and brought me unto 
you. 24 Likewise they that had departed this life before told 
how they were come. And Bartholomew said: I was preaching 
the word in the country of Thebes, and lo, the Holy Ghost said 
to me: The mother of thy Lord maketh her departure: go there- 
fore to salute her at Bethlehem. And lo, a cloud of light caught 
me up and brought me unto you. 

25 All these things spake the apostles unto the holy mother of 
God, how and in what fashion they came. And she spread forth 
her hands unto heaven and prayed, saying: I worship and praise 
and glorify thy name, which is greatly extolled, O Lord, because 
thou hast regarded the lowliness of thine handmaiden, and thou 
that art mighty hast magnified me, and behold all genera- 
tions shall call me blessed. 26 And after the prayer she said 
unto the apostles: Cast on incense and pray. And when they 
had prayed there came a thunder from heaven and a terrible 
sound as of chariots, and lo, a multitude of the host of angels 
and powers, and a voice as of the Son of man was heard, and the 
Seraphim came round about the house wherein the holy and 
spotless mother of God, the virgin, lay: so that all that were in 


GREEK NARRATIVE 205 


Bethlehem beheld all the marvellous sights, and went to Jerusalem 
and declared all the wonderful things that were come to pass. 

27 And it came to pass after that sound that the sun and the 
moon appeared about the house, and an assembly of the first- 
begotten saints came unto the house where the mother of the 
Lord lay, for her honour and glory. And I saw also many signs 
come to pass, blind receiving sight, deaf hearing, lame walking, 
lepers cleansed, and them that were possessed of unclean spirits 
healed. And every one that was under any sickness or disease 
came and touched the wall where she lay, and cried: Holy Mary, 
thou that didst bear Christ our God, have mercy on us. And 
forthwith they were cured. 

28 And many multitudes that were dwelling in Jerusalem out 
of every country because of a vow, when they heard the signs 
that were being done in Bethlehem by means of the Lord’s 
mother, came unto the place seeking to be healed of divers 
diseases; and they obtained health. And there was joy unspeak- 
able on that day of the multitude of them that were healed, with 
them also that beheld, glorifying Christ our God and his mother. 
And all Jerusalem returned from Bethlehem, keeping holiday with 
singing of psalms and spiritual songs. 

29 But the priests of the Jews, together with their people, 
were amazed at that which was done, and were taken with bitter 
(heavy) envy, and again with vain thoughts they gathered 
a council and advised themselves to send men against the holy 
mother of God and the holy apostles which were there at Beth- 
lehem. And when the multitude of the Jews were now set forward 
toward Bethlehem, as it were about a mile therefrom, it came to 
pass that they saw a terrible vision, and their feet were bound: 
and they departed thence to them of their nation, and declared 
all the fearful vision unto the chief priests. 80 But they being 
yet more inflamed in spirit went unto the governor, crying out 
and saying: The nation of the Jews is destroyed because of this 
woman: drive thou her away from Bethlehem and from the 
province of Jerusalem. But the governor was astonied at the 
wonders and said unto them: I will not drive her out from 
Bethlehem nor from any other place. But the Jews continued 
crying out and adjuring him by the safety of Tiberius Caesar 
that he should lead the apostles out of Bethlehem: and if thou 
doest it not we will report it unto Caesar. And being now com- 
pelled he sent a captain of a thousand against the apostles unto 
Bethlehem. 

81 But the Holy Ghost said unto the apostles and the mother 
of the Lord: Behold, the governor hath sent a captain of a 
thousand against you, because the Jews have made a tumult. 
Go out therefore from Bethlehem, and fear not; for behold, 
I will bring you by a cloud unto Jerusalem; for the power of the 
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost is with you. 


206 THE ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN 


82 The apostles therefore rose up straightway and went out 
of the house, bearing the bed of their lady the mother of God, 
and set forward toward Jerusalem: and immediately, according 
as the Holy Ghost said, they were lifted up by a cloud and were 
found at Jerusalem in the house of their lady. And we stood up 
and for five days we sung praise without ceasing. 

83 But when the captain came unto Bethlehem and found not 
there the mother of the Lord, neither the apostles, he laid hold 
upon the Bethlehemites, saying unto them: Did ye not come 
and tell the governor and the priests all the signs and wonders 
which were come to pass, and how the apostles came out of every 
land? where then are they? come ye hither to Jerusalem unto 
the governor. For the captain knew not of the departure of the 
apostles and the mother of the Lord unto Jerusalem. So the 
captain took the Bethlehemites and went unto the governor, 
saying that he had found no man. 

34 Now after five days it was made known to the governor and 
to the priests and to all the city that the mother of the Lord 
was in her own house in Jerusalem with the apostles, by means 
of the signs and wondrous things that came to pass there; and 
a multitude of men and women were assembled, crying out: 
O holy virgin that didst bear Christ our God, forget not the race 
of men. 35 And because of this the people of the Jews, moved 
yet more with envy, together with the priests, took wood and 
fire and came on, desiring to burn the house where the mother of 
the Lord lay, together with the apostles. But the governor 
stood beholding the sight afar off. And when the people of the 
Jews were come unto the door of the house, behold, suddenly 
a force of fire came from within it by means of an angel and burnt 
a great multitude of the Jews, and there was great fear through- 
out all the city and they glorified God which was born of her. 
86 But when the governor saw what was done, he cried aloud 
before all the people, saying: Of a truth he is the Son of God, 
which was born of the virgin whom ye thought to drive out: for 
these signs are of a true God. And there was a division betwixt 
the Jews, and many believed on the name of our Lord Jesus 
Christ because of the signs which came to pass. 

87 Now after all these wonders were come to pass because of 
Mary the mother of God and ever virgin, the mother of the 
Lord, as we the apostles were with her in Jerusalem, the Holy 
Ghost said unto us: Ye know that on the Lord’s day the good 
tidings were told unto the Virgin Mary by the archangel Gabriel, 
and on the Lord’s day the Saviour was born in Bethlehem, and 
on the Lord’s day the children of Jerusalem went forth with 
palm-branches to meet him, saying: Hosanna in the highest: 
blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. And on the 
Lord’s day he rose from the dead, and on the Lord’s day he shall 
come to judge the quick and the dead, and on the Lord’s day he 


GREEK NARRATIVE 207 


shall come from heaven for the glory and honour of the departure 
of the holy and glorious virgin which bare him. 88 And upon the 
same Lord’s day the mother of the Lord said unto the apostles: 
Cast on incense, for Christ cometh with an host of angels: and 
behold Christ cometh sitting upon the throne of the Cherubim. 
And as we all prayed there appeared innumerable multitudes of 
angels, and the Lord riding upon the Cherubim in great power. 
And lo, an appearance of light going before him and lighting upon 
the holy virgin because of the coming of her only-begotten Son: 
and all the powers of the heavens fell down and worshipped him. 
39 And the Lord called unto his mother and said: Mary. And 
she answered and said: Behold, here am I, Lord. And the Lord 
said unto her: Be not grieved, but let thine heart rejoice and be 
glad; for thou hast found grace to behold the glory that was 
given me of my Father. And the holy mother of God looked up 
and saw in him glory which the mouth of man cannot utter nor 
comprehend. And the Lord abode by her, saying: Behold, 
henceforth shall thy precious body be translated unto paradise, 
and thine holy soul shall be in the heavens in the treasuries of 
my Father in surpassing brightness, where is peace and rejoicing 
of the holy angels, and continuance thereof. 40 And the mother 
of the Lord answered and said unto him: Lay thy right hand 
upon me, Lord, and bless me. And the Lord spread out his 
unstained right hand and blessed her: and she, holding his 
unstained right hand, kissed it, saying: I worship this right hand 
which made the heaven and the earth; and I beseech thy name 
which is greatly extolled, O Christ, God, King of the ages, only- 
begotten of the Father, receive thine handmaid, thou that didst 
vouchsafe to be born of me the lowly one to save mankind by 
thine unutterable dispensation. Every man that calleth upon 
or entreateth or nameth the name of thine handmaid, grant him 
thine help. 41 And as she thus spake, the apostles came near 
unto her feet and worshipped the Lord and said: O mother of 
the Lord, leave unto the world a blessing, for thou departest out 
of it: for thou didst bless it and raise it up from destruction 
when thou barest the light of the world. And the mother of the 
Lord prayed, and thus spake she in her prayer: O God, who of 
thy great goodness didst send thine only-begotten Son to dwell 
in my lowly body, who didst vouchsafe to be born of me the 
lowly one, have mercy upon the world and upon every soul that 
calleth upon thy name. 

42 And again she prayed and said: O Lord, King of the 
heavens, Son of the living God, accept every man that calleth 
upon thy name, that thy birth may be glorified. And again she 
prayed and said: O Lord Jesu Christ, that hast all power in 
heaven and on earth, I entreat thine holy name with this sup- 
plication: At every time and in every place where there is a 
memorial of my name, sanctify thou that place, and glorify them 


208 THE ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN 


that glorify thee through my name, accepting every offering of 
such, and every supplication and every prayer. 43 And when 
she had thus prayed, the Lord said unto his own mother: Let 
thine heart be glad and rejoice; for every grace and every gift 
hath been given thee of my Father which is in heaven and of me 
and of the Holy Ghost. Every soul that calleth upon thy name 
shall not be put to shame, but shall find mercy and consolation 
and succour and confidence, both in this world and in that which 
is to come, before my Father which is in heaven. 44 And the 
Lord turned and said unto Peter: The time is come to begin the 
song of praise. And when Peter began the song of praise, all the 
powers of the heavens answered Alleluia. And then the coun- 
tenance of the mother of the Lord did shine above the light. And 
she rose up and with her own hand blessed every one of the 
apostles, and all of them gave glory to God; and the Lord spread 
forth his unstained hands and received her holy and spotless soul. 
45 And at the going forth of her spotless soul the place was filled 
with sweet odour and light unspeakable, and lo, a voice from 
heaven was heard, saying: Blessed art thou among women. And 
Peter ran, and I, John, and Paul and Thomas, and embraced her 
precious feet to receive sanctification: and the twelve apostles 
laid her honourable and holy body upon a bed and bare it forth. 

46 And behold as they bare her, a certain Hebrew named 
Jephonias, mighty of body, ran forth and set upon the bed, as 
the apostles bare it, and lo, an angel of the Lord with invisible 
power smote his two hands from off his shoulders with a sword 
of fire and left them hanging in the air about the bed. 47 And 
when this miracle came to pass, all the people of the Jews that 
beheld it cried out: Verily he is the true God that was born of 
thee, Mary, mother of God, ever virgin. And Jephonias him- 
self, being commanded by Peter, that the wonderful works of 
God might be showed, stood up behind the bed and cried: Holy 
Mary that didst bear Christ which is God, have mercy on me. 
And Peter turned and said unto him: In the name of him that 
was born of her thine hands which were taken from thee shall 
cleave to their place. And immediately at the word of Peter the 
hands that did hang beside the bed of our lady went back and 
clave unto Jephonias: and he also believed and glorified Christ, 
even God, that was born of her. 

48 And after this miracle the apostles bare the bed and laid 
her precious and holy body in Gethsemane in a new tomb. And 
lo, an odour of sweet savour came out of the holy sepulchre of 
our lady the mother of God: and until three days were past the 
voices of invisible angels were heard glorifying Christ our God 
which was born of her. And when the third day was fulfilled the 
voices were no more heard, and thereafter we all perceived that 
her spotless and precious body was translated into paradise. 

{Other MSS.: When the apostles went forth from the city of 


GREEK NARRATIVE 209 


Jerusalem bearing the bed, suddenly twelve clouds of light 
caught them up, together with the body of our lady, and translated 
them into paradise.] 

49 Now after it was translated, lo, we beheld Elisabeth the 
mother of the holy John the Baptist, and Anna the mother of 
our lady, and Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, and David singing 
Alleluia, and all the choirs of the saints worshipping the precious. 
body of the mother of the Lord, and we saw a place of light, than 
which light nothing is brighter, and a great fragrance came from 
that place whereto her precious and holy body was translated 
in paradise, and a melody of them that praised him that was born 
of her: and unto virgins only is it given to hear that sweet 
melody wherewith no man can be sated. 

50 We, therefore, the apostles, when we beheld thus suddenly 
the translation of her holy body, glorified God who had shown 
unto us his wonders at the departure of the mother of our Lord 
Jesus Christ: by the prayer and intercession of whom may we 
all be accounted worthy to come into her protection and succour 
and guardianship, both in this world and in that which is to come: 
at all times and in all places glorifying her only-begotten Son, 
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, world without end. Amen. 

[For 49 and 50 one manuscript has only: And we all glorified 
God: unto whom be glory and power, world without end. Amen.} 


The other Greek narrative of the Assumption is not yet fully 
known. It is that which is embodied in a sermon of John, arch- 
bishop of Thessalonica. 

Tischendorf gives only extracts, from several manuscripts, 
which show that the story begins with the bringing of a palm to. 
the Virgin by the angel as a token of her approaching departure. 

We have the same gathering of the apostles, who do not know 
why they have been summoned. They tell of the manner in 
which they were brought. 

The Jews are blinded and burnt, and healed by the palm- 
branch. 

The apostles lay the body in the tomb and remain there 
watching until it is translated. In one text Christ appears and. 
takes the body. 


THE ASSUMPTION: LATIN NARRATIVE OF 


PSEUDO-MELITO 

This is Tischendorf’s B text, but though he places it second, it is: 

the leading Latin authority, the other being a late Italian fiction. 
I. Prologue. 

Melito, servant of God, bishop of the church of Sardis, unto 
the brethren which are established in peace at Laodicea, reverend 
in the Lord, greeting. 

870 Pp 


210 THE ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN 


I remember that I have oft-times written concerning a certain 
Leucius, who, after that with us he had been a companion of the 
apostles, with alienated sense and rash mind departed from the 
way of righteousness and put into his books many things con- 
cerning the acts of the apostles, and spake many and diverse 
things of their mighty deeds, but concerning their teaching lied 
much, affirming that they taught otherwise, and establishing his 
own wicked position as if by their words. Nor did he account 
this sufficient, but also corrupted with so evil a pen the departure 
of the blessed Mary ever virgin, the mother of God, that it is 
unlawful not only to read but even to hear it in the church of 
God. We therefore at your petition have written simply those 
things which we heard from the apostle John, and have sent 
them unto your brotherhood: believing no alien doctrines which 
sprout out from heretics, but that the Father is in the Son, the 
Son in the Father, the triune person of godhead and undivided 
essence abiding: and that not two natures of man were created, 
a good and a bad, but that one good nature was created by a good 
God, which by the fraud of the serpent was corrupted through 
sin, and restored by the grace of Christ. 

II. When therefore the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ for the 
life of the whole world hung on the tree of the cross pierced with 
nails, he saw standing beside the cross his mother and John the 
evangelist, whom he more especially loved beyond the other 
apostles because he alone of them was a virgin in body. Unto 
him therefore he committed the charge of the holy Mary, saying 
to him: Behold thy mother; and to her: Behold thy son. From 
that hour the holy mother of God continued in the especial care 
of John so long as she endured the sojourn of this life. And 
when the apostles had taken the world by their lots for preaching, 
she abode in the house of his parents beside the Mount of Olivet. 

Ill. In the second year after Christ having overcome death 
had ascended into heaven, upon a certain day, Mary fervent with 
desire of Christ betook herself alone into the refuge of her dwelling 
to weep. And lo, an angel shining in a garment of great brightness 
stood before her and came forth with words of greeting, saying: 
Hail thou blessed of the Lord, receive the greeting of him that 
granted salvation to Jacob by his prophets. Behold, said he, 
this palm-branch. I have brought it to thee from the paradise of 
the Lord, and thou shalt cause it to be carried before thy bier on 
the third day when thou shalt be taken up out of the body. For 
behold thy Son with the thrones and the angels and all the powers 
of heaven awaiteth thee. 2 Then Mary said to the angel: I ask 
that all the apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ be gathered together 
to me. And the angel said: Lo, this day by the power of my 
Lord Jesus Christ all the apostles shall come to thee. And Mary 
said to him: I ask that thou wouldest put thy blessing upon me, 
that no power of hell may meet me in that hour wherein my soul 


LATIN NARRATIVE OF PSEUDO-MELITO 211 


goeth out of the body, and that I may not see the prince of 
darkness. And the angel said: The power of hell shall not hurt 
thee; but an eternal blessing hath the Lord thy God given thee, 
of whom I am the servant and messenger: but think not that 
the power not to see the prince of darkness can be given by me, 
but by him whom thou didst bear in thy womb: for his is all 
power, world without end. And thus saying, the angel departed 
with great light. 3 Now the palm-branch shone with exceeding 
brightness. Then Mary put off her garments and clothed herself 
in her best raiment, and taking the palm which she had received 
of the angel’s hand she went out into the Mount of Olivet and 
began to pray and to say: I was not worthy to receive thee, Lord, 
if thou hadst not had mercy on me; nevertheless I kept the 
treasure which thou didst commit to me. Therefore I pray thee, 
O king of glory, that no power of hell may hurt me. For if the 
heavens and the angels quake before thee every day, how much 
more a man created of the earth, in whom is no good save what 
he hath received of thy bounty. Thou, Lord, art God, blessed for 
ever, world without end. And having thus said, she returned 
to her dwelling. 

IV. And behold, suddenly, while Saint John was preaching at 
Ephesus, on the Lord’s day, at the third hour, there was a great 
earthquake, and a cloud raised him up and took him out of the 
sight of all and brought him before the door of the house where 
Mary was. And he knocked at the door and straightway went 
in. But when Mary saw him she rejoiced greatly and said: 
I pray thee, my son John, remember the words of my Lord Jesus 
Christ wherewith he commended me to thee. For behold on the 
third day, [when] I am to depart out of the body—and I have 
heard the counsels of the Jews who say: Let us wait until the 
day when she shall die who bore that deceiver, and let us burn 
her body with fire. 2 So she called Saint John and took him 
into the secret part of the house and showed him her grave-clothes 
and that palm of light which she had received from the angel, 
and charged him to cause it to be borne before her bed when she 
should go to the tomb. 

V. And Saint John said to her: How shall I alone prepare 
thy burial unless my brethren and fellow apostles of my Lord 
Jesus Christ come to pay honour to thy body? 

And Jo, suddenly by the commandment of God all the apostles 
were lifted up on a cloud and caught away from the places where 
they were preaching and set down before the door of the house 
wherein Mary dwelt. And they greeted each other and marvelled, 
saying: What is the cause wherefore the Lord hath gathered us 
together here? 

[In another text is this addition. And Paul came with them 
who was turned from the circumcision and taken with Barnabas 
to minister to the Gentiles. And when there arose among them 


212 THE ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN 


a godly contention, which of them should first pray the Lord to 
show them the cause of their coming, and Peter exhorted Paul to 
pray first, Paul answered, saying: That is thine office, to begin 
first, since thou wast chosen of God to be a pillar of the church, 
and thou art before all in the apostleship: but me it befits not 
at all, for I am the least of all you, and Christ was seen of me as 
of one born out of due time, neither presume I to even myself with 
you; yet by the grace of God I am what I am.] 

VI. Then all the apostles rejoicing with one mind finished 
their prayer: and when they had said Amen, lo, suddenly the 
blessed John came and showed them all these things. And the 
apostles entered the house and found Mary and saluted her, 
saying: Blessed be thou of the Lord which made heaven and 
earth. And she said to them: Peace be unto you my most 
beloved brethren. How came ye hither? And they told her 
how they had come, each one of them being lifted up on a cloud 
by the Spirit and set down in that place. And she said to them: 
God hath not deprived me of the sight of you. Behold I go 
the way of all the earth, and I doubt not that the Lord hath 
now brought you hither to give me comfort in the anguish that 
is to come upon me. Now therefore I beseech you that we all 
keep watch together without ceasing, until the hour when the 
Lord shall come and I shall depart out of the body. 

VII. And as they sat about her comforting her, and for three 
days gave themselves to the praises of God, lo, on the third 
day, about the third hour of the day, sleep fell upon all that 
were in that house, and no man at all could keep waking save 
only the apostles and three virgins that were there. And behold, 
suddenly the Lord Jesus Christ came with a great multitude of 
angels, and a great light came down upon that place, and the 
angels were singing hymns and praising the Lord. Then the 
Saviour spake, saying: Come, thou most precious pearl, enter 
into the treasury (receptacle) of eternal life. 

VIII. Then Mary fell on her face on the pavement, worship- 
ping God, and said: Blessed be the name of thy glory, O Lord 
my God, who hast vouchsafed to choose me thy handmaid and 
to commit to me thy secret mystery. Remember me, therefore, 
O king of glory; for thou knowest that with all my heart I have 
loved thee and have kept the treasure committed unto me. 
Receive me therefore thy servant and deliver me from the power 
of darkness, and let not any assault of Satan meet me, neither 
let me see ugly spirits coming to meet me. 2 And the Saviour 
answered her: When I was sent by the Father and for the 
salvation of the world was hung on the cross, the prince of 
darkness came to me: but whereas he prevailed not to find in 
me any sign of his work, he departed vanquished and trodden 
down. Thou when thou seest him shalt see him indeed according 
to the law of mankind whereby the end, even death, is allotted 


LATIN NARRATIVE OF PSEUDO-MELITO 213 


thee: but he cannot hurt thee, for I am with thee to help thee. 
Come thou without fear, for the heavenly host awaiteth thee 
to bring thee into the joy of paradise. 8 And as the Lord thus 
spake, Mary arose from the pavement and laid herself on her 
bed, and giving thanks to God she gave up the ghost. But the 
apostles saw her soul, that it was of such whiteness that no 
tongue of mortal men can worthily express it; for it excelled 
all whiteness of snow and of all metal and silver that glistereth 
with great brightness of light. 

IX. Then the Saviour spake, saying: Arise, Peter, and 
take the body of Mary and bear it unto the right-hand side of 
the city toward the east, and thou wilt find there a new sepulchre 
wherein ye shall place it, and wait till I come unto you. 

2 And when the Lord had so said, he delivered the soul of 
the holy Mary to Michael which was set over paradise and is the 
prince of the people of the Jews: and Gabriel went with them. 
And immediately the Saviour was received up into heaven 
with the angels. 

X. Now the three virgins that were there and watched took 
the body of the blessed Mary to wash it after the custom of 
burials. And when they had stripped it of its apparel, that 
holy body shone with such brightness that it could indeed be 
touched to do the service thereof, but the appearance could 
not be looked upon for the exceeding flashing of light: and 
a great splendour appeared in it, and nothing was perceived 
by the sense when the body was washed, but it was most pure 
and not stained with any manner of defilement. And the body 
of the blessed Mary was like the flowers of the lily, and a great 
sweetness of fragrance issued from it, so that nothing like that 
sweetness could elsewhere be found. 

XI. Then therefore the apostles laid the holy body upon 
a bier and said one to another: Who shall bear the palm before 
her bier? Then John said to Peter: Thou who art before us 
in the apostleship oughtest to bear this palm before her bed. 
And Peter answered him: Thou only of us art a virgin chosen 
of the Lord, and hast found such favour that thou didst lie 
on his breast: and he when he hung for our salvation on the 
tree of the cross committed her unto thee with his own mouth. 
Thou therefore oughtest to carry this palm; and let us take 
up the body to bear it unto the place of the sepulchre. 2 There- 
after Peter lifted up the head of the body and began to sing, 
saying: Israel is come out of Egypt. Alleluia. And with him 
the other apostles bore the body of the blessed Mary, and John 
carried the palm of light before the bier. And the rest of the 
apostles sang with exceeding sweet voices. 

XII. And behold a new miracle. There appeared a very 
great cloud over the bier like the great circle that useth to be 
seen about the splendour of the moon: and an host of angels 


214 THE ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN 


was in the cloud sending forth a song of sweetness, and the 
earth resounded with the noise of that great melody. Then 
the people came out of the city, about fifteen thousand, and 
marvelled and said: What is this sound of such sweetness? 
2 Then there stood one and told them: Mary is gone out of 
the body, and the disciples of Jesus are singing praises about 
her. And they looked and saw the bier crowned with great 
glory and the apostles singing with a loud voice. And behold, 
one of them who was a prince of the priests of the Jews in his 
degree was filled with fury and wrath and said to the rest: Behold 
the tabernacle of him that hath troubled us and all our nation, 
what glory it hath received. And he came near and would 
have overthrown the bier and cast the body on the earth. And 
forthwith his hands dried up from his elbows and clave to the 
bier. And when the apostles lifted the bier, part of him was 
hanging and part clave to the bier, and he was wrung with 
extreme torment as the apostles went on and sang. But the 
angels that were in the clouds smote the people with blindness. 

XIII. Then that prince cried out, saying: I beseech thee, 
holy Peter, despise me not in this so great necessity, for I am 
sore tormented with great pains. Kemember that when the 
damsel that kept the door knew thee in the judgement hall 
and told the rest, that they might challenge thee, then I spake 
good on thy behalf. Then Peter answered and said: It is not 
mine to give thee ought: but if thou believest with thy whole 
heart on the Lord Jesus Christ, whom this woman bare in her 
womb and continued a virgin after the birth, the mercy of the 
Lord, which by his great pity saveth the unworthy, shall give 
thee healing. 

2 Whereunto he answered: Do we not believe? but what 
shall we do? The enemy of mankind hath blinded our hearts, 
and shame hath covered our faces that we should not confess 
the mighty works of God; especially when we did curse our- 
selves, crying out against Christ: His blood be on us and on 
our children. Then said Peter: See, that curse will hurt him 
that continueth unbelieving in him, but unto them that turn 
to God mercy is not denied. And he said: I believe all that 
thou sayest to me: only I beseech thee, have mercy on me 
lest I die. 

XIV. Then Peter made the bier stand still and said to him: 
If thou believest with thy whole heart in Jesus Christ, thine 
hands shall be loosed from the bier. And when he had so said, 
straightway his hands were loosed from the bier and he began 
to stand on his feet: but his arms were yet withered, neither did 
the pain depart from him. 2 Then Peter said to him: Go near 
to the body and kiss the bed and say: I believe in God and in 
the Son of God whom this woman bare, even Jesus Christ, and 
I believe all things whatsoever Peter the apostle of God hath 


LATIN NARRATIVE OF PSEUDO-MELITO 215 


told me. And he came near and kissed the bed, and forthwith 
all pain left him and his hands were made whole. 8 Then began 
he to bless God greatly and to speak out of the books of Moses 
testimonies unto the praise of Christ, so that even the apostles 
themselves marvelled and wept for gladness, praising the name 
of the Lord. 

XV. But Peter said to him: Take this palm at the hand 
of our brother John, and go into the city and thou wilt find 
much people blinded; and declare unto them the mighty works 
of God, and whosoever believeth on the Lord Jesus Christ, 
lay this palm upon their eyes and they shall see: but whoso 
believe not shall continue blind. 2 And when he had so done, 
he found much people blinded and lamenting thus: Woe unto 
us, for we are become like the men of Sodom that were stricken 
with blindness. Nothing remaineth for us now save to perish. 
But when they had heard the words that the prince spake which 
was healed, they believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, and when 
he laid the palm upon their eyes, they recovered sight; but 
whoso of them continued in hardness of heart died. And the 
prince of the priests went forth to the apostles and gave back 
the palm and declared all that had come to pass. 

XVI. But the apostles carrying Mary came into the place 
of the valley of Josaphat which the Lord had showed them, 
and laid her in a new tomb and shut the sepulchre. But they 
sat down at the door of the tomb as the Lord had charged them: 
and lo, suddenly the Lord Jesus Christ came with a great multitude 
of angels, and light flashing with great brightness, and said to 
the apostles: Peace be with you. And they answered and 
said: Let thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, like as we have hoped 
in thee. 

2 Then the Saviour spake unto them, saying: Before I 
ascended up unto my Father I promised you, saying, that ye 
which have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of 
man shall sit on the throne of his majesty, ye also shall sit on 
twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. Now this 
woman did I choose out of the tribes of Israel by the com- 
mandment of my Father, to dwell in her. What then will ye 
that I do with her? 8 Then said Peter and the other apostles: 
Lord, thou didst before choose this thine handmaid to become 
thine immaculate chamber, and us thy servants for thy ministry. 
All things didst thou foreknow before the worlds with thy 
Father, with whom to thee and the Holy Ghost there belongeth 
equal Godhead and infinite power. If therefore it might come 
to pass before the power of thy grace, it hath appeared right 
to us thy servants that, as thou having overcome death dost 
reign in glory, so thou shouldest raise up the body of thy mother 
and take her with thee rejoicing into heaven. 

XVII. Then said the Saviour: Be it done according to your 


216 THE ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN 


will. And he commanded Michael the archangel to bring the 
soul of the holy Mary. And behold, Michael the archangel rolled 
away the stone from the door of the sepulchre, and the Lord 
said: Rise up, my love and my kinswoman: thou that didst 
not suffer corruption by union of the flesh, shalt not suffer 
dissolution of the body in the sepulchre. 2 And immediately 
Mary rose up from the grave and blessed the Lord, and fell 
at the Lord’s feet and worshipped him, saying: I am not able 
to render thee worthy thanks, O Lord, for thine innumerable 
benefits which thou hast vouchsafed to grant unto me thy hand- 
maid. Let thy name be blessed for ever, redeemer of the world, 
thou God of Israel. 

XVIII. And the Lord kissed her and departed, and delivered 
her to the angels to bear her into paradise. And he said to the 
apostles: Come near unto me; and when they had come near, 
he kissed them and said: Peace be unto you; as I have been 
always with you, so will I be even unto the end of the world. 

2 And immediately when the Lord had so said he was 
lifted up in a cloud and received into heaven, and the angels 
with him, bearing the blessed Mary into the paradise of God. 

But the apostles were taken up upon clouds and returned 
every one unto the lot of his preaching, declaring the mighty 
works of God and praising the Lord Jesus Christ, who liveth 
and reigneth with the Father and the Holy Ghost in a perfect 
unity and in one substance of the Godhead, world without 
end. Amen. 


THE ASSUMPTION: NARRATIVE BY JOSEPH 
OF ARIMATHAEA 


This is Tischendorf’s A text. It is of late complexion, and one of 
the three manuscripts used by Tischendorf (C) presents a very divergent 
text throughout. An analysis will suffice. 


1 Before the Passion the Virgin asked Jesus to certify her 
of her death on the third day before it, and to receive her with 
his angels. 2, 3 He promised that this should be so (the speech 
is fairly long). 

4 In the second year after the ascension she was constantly 
praying. On the third day before her death an angel (Gabriel, C) 
came and gave her a palm and told her of her departure. 

5 She sent for Joseph of Arimathaea and other disciples, 
and told them, and then washed and arrayed herself as a 
queen. Three virgins were with her—Sepphora, Abigea, and 
Zael. The apostles were already dispersed about the world. 

6 At the third hour, thunder, rain, earthquake. John was 
suddenly brought from Ephesus and entered the chamber and 


NARRATIVE BY JOSEPH OF ARIMATHAEA 217 


greeted her. She said: Dearest son, why have you left me for 
so long? 

7 All the disciples except Thomas now arrived on clouds, 
and greeted her. 

8 They were John, James his brother, Peter, Paul, Andrew, 
Philip, Luke, Barnabas, Bartholomew, Matthew, Matthias sur- 
named Justus, Simon the Canaanite, Jude and his brother, 
Nicodemus, Maximianus (this must be the legendary Maximin of 
Aix en Provence who figures in the late legend of Mary Mag- 
dalene’s mission to Marseilles). 

9 Mary asked: why have you all come? Peter said: It 
is for us to ask thee. None of us know. I was at Antioch, 
and now Iam here. And all told where they had been. 10 Mary 
told them the reason, that she was to depart on the morrow, 
and asked them to watch and pray with her. So they did, all 
night, with lights and psalmody. 

11 On the Sunday at the third hour Christ came down with 
a host of angels and took the soul of his mother. Such was the 
light and fragrance that all fell on their faces (as at Mount 
Tabor) and none could rise for an hour and a half. 12 As the 
light receded, the soul of Mary was taken up with it, with singing: 
and as the cloud went up, the earth shook, and all in Jerusalem 
saw the death of Mary in one instant. 

13 Then Satan entered into them and they took arms to 
burn the body and kill the apostles; but they were struck 
blind, and smote their heads against walls, and hit one another. 

14 The apostles took up the body to bear it from Mount 
Sion to the valley of Josaphat. As they went, a Jew named 
Ruben tried to upset the bier, but his hands withered to the 
elbow and willy-nilly he had to go on into the valley weeping 
and crying, for his hands clave to the bier. 15 He began to 
ask the apostles to pray for him that he might be saved and 
become a Christian. They knelt and prayed, and his hands 
were loosed and he was healed. He was baptized at once, and 
began to proclaim Christ. 

16 ‘Then the apostles laid the body in the tomb with great 
honour, weeping and singing for pure love and sweetness. And 
suddenly a light from heaven shone round about them, and 
as they fell to the earth, the holy body was taken up by angels 
into heaven’ (the apostles not knowing it). 

17 Thomas was suddenly brought to the Mount of Olives and saw 
the holy body being taken up, and cried out to Mary: ‘make thy 
servant glad by thy mercy, for now thou goest to heaven’. And 
the girdle with which the apostles had girt the body was thrown 
down to him; he took it and went to the valley of Josaphat. 
18 When he had greeted the apostles, Peter said: ‘Thou wast 
always unbelieving, and so the Lord hath not suffered thee to 
be at his mother’s burial.’ He smote his breast and said: ‘I know 


218 THE ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN 


it and I ask pardon of you all,’ and they all prayed for him. 
19 Then he said: ‘Where have ye laid her body?’ and they 
pointed to the sepulchre. But he said: ‘The holy body is not 
there.’ Peter said: ‘Formerly you would not believe in the 
resurrection of the Lord before you touched him: how should 
you believe us?’ Thomas went on saying: ‘It is not here.’ 
Then in anger they went and took away the stone, and the body 
was not there ; and they knew not what to say, being vanquished 
by Thomas’s words. 20 Then Thomas told them how he had 
been saying mass in India (and he still had on his priestly vest- 
ments), how he had been brought to the Mount of Olives and 
seen the ascension of Mary and she had given him her girdle: 
and he showed it. 21 They all rejoiced and asked his pardon, 
and he blessed them and said: Behold how good and pleasant 
a thing it is, brethren, to dwell together in unity. 

22 The same clouds which had brought them, now carried 
them back, as we read in the Acts about Philip who baptized 
the eunuch, and as Abacuc was brought to Daniel and taken 
back. 

23 Nor is it wonderful that Christ should do such things 
(miracles are enumerated). 

24 I am that Joseph who laid the body of the Lord in my 
tomb and saw him rise again, and always watched over his 
most holy temple, even the blessed Mary, ever virgin, before 
the ascension of the Lord and after it: and upon this page 
and in my heart have I written the things that came out of the 
mouth of God, and how the aforesaid matters came to pass, 
and I have made known to all the Jews and Gentiles what I saw 
with my eyes and heard with my ears, and as long as I live 
I shall not cease to proclaim them. 

“Whose assumption is this day reverenced and honoured 
throughout all the world: let us constantly pray her that she 
remember us before her most merciful son in heaven: to whom 
is praise and glory for infinite ages. Amen.’ 

(C has a statement that any Christian who has this writing in 
his house will be safe from various afflictions—lunacy, deafness, 
blindness, sudden death—and he will have the protection of the 
Virgin at his end.) 


The episode of Thomas and the girdle is peculiar to this writing. 
The girdle is the great relic of Prato; and the prominence given to 
this incident is another indication that we have here a mediaeval 
Italian composition, not earlier, I imagine, than the thirteenth century. 


219 


THE SYRIAC NARRATIVES 


The Syriac narratives of the Assumption of the Virgin form a very 
large mass of writing. 

The principal texts are: 

1. That edited by W. Wright in the Journal of Sacred Literature for 
1865, and again by Mrs. Agnes Smith Lewis in Studia Sinaitica, XI. 
Apocrypha Syriaca, 1902. In the latter the translation fills pp. 12-69 
in quarto. 

2, 2a, Edited by Wright in Contributions to the Apocryphal Literature 
of the N.T., 1865, pp. 18-24 (2), and 24-41 (2a). These are pieces of 
two distinct works, which he has put together under one heading. 
Both are fragmentary: the first is the simplest of the Syriac versions. 
The second (2a) is akin to 1. 

3. That in Sir E. A. Wallis Budge’s History of the B. V. M., Luzac’s 
Semitic Text and Translation Series, vol. v, 1899, pp. 97-158. 

4. The fragments in Wright’s Contributions called Obsequies of the 
Holy Virgin (pp. 42-51 and Preface, 10-15). 

Of these nos. 1, 2, 2a, 3 have much in common; 4 is very peculiar. 
Some account of each shall be given. 


No. 1 (Wright and Lewis) is a congeries of documents divided 
into six books (really five, but six are promised). 

Book I, after a panegyrical introduction, tells how the 
narrative was found. It was attested in autograph by James, 
bishop of Jerusalem. Two apostles wrote each of the six books, 
and they were entrusted to John. 

His copy was found at Ephesus, attested by the Twelve and the 
Seventy-two, and written in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin. 

Book II. In the year 344 (of the era of the Greeks), on the third 
day of the latter Teshrin (September), being the third day of the 
week at the third hour, Mary went to the tomb. 

The Jews immediately after the Passion had closed it with 
great stones, and forbidden resort to it on pain of death. They 
also hid the cross, spear, sponge, robe, crown of thorns, and nails. 

The priests told the guardians of the tomb to stone Mary if she 
came there again. They said, ‘Do it yourselves’. On the Friday 
Mary burnt incense there: Gabriel came down and told her of 
her approaching death. (There is no mention of a palm.) 

The guards informed the priests that Mary had come again. 
The priests asked the governor to forbid her. 

At this time Abgar of Edessa (converted by Addai) wished to 
destroy Jerusalem because of Christ’s death, and came as far as 
Euphrates, but hesitated to cross it. He wrote to the procurator 
Sabinus, who sent the letter to Tiberius,! who was greatly moved 


1 A letter of Abgar to Tiberius on the subject, and the answer of 
Tiberius, are given by Moses of Chorene in his History of Armenia 
(ii. 83). 


220 THE ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN 


against the Jews. The Jews were alarmed. They said to the 
governor: Forbid Mary to go to the tomb. He said: Forbid her 
yourselves. A long abusive speech of the Jews to Mary follows. 

She left Jerusalem and went to Bethlehem with her three 
virgins, Callétha, daughter of Nicodemus, Neshra, daughter of 
Gamaliel, Tabitha, daughter of Archelaus. (There is a descrip- 
tion of the service which these did to Mary: Gabriel tells her to go 
to Bethlehem.) 

On Friday Mary burnt incense and prayed that John might 
be sent to her. John was brought from Ephesus. His arrival and 
conversation with Mary. 

The other apostles were brought. Here we are following the 
Greek text pretty closely. 

John received the apostles. They each told Mary how they 
had come. The correspondence with the Greek is curiously 
exact. Mark was performing the service of the third hour. 
Matthew says: ‘I have given and am giving glory to God,’ and 
so on. The Greek, however, does not give the speeches of those 
who had been raised from the grave to come, but the Syriac 
does, for Philip, Simon, Luke, and Andrew. And after Andrew, 
Bartholomew (not already dead) follows, as in the Greek. 

There was a great concourse of angels, and the Bethlehemites 
in fear went and told the governor and the priests. 

Book III. All the great signs attracted people from many 
quarters. Before this many used to come to the Virgin to be 
healed. (Five instances are given of cures.) 

There was now a festival at Jerusalem, and many sick went 
out to Bethlehem to be healed. 2,800 were cured. = Gk. 28, but 
more diffuse. 

On the 21st of Teshrin II in the night, men rose up to attack 
the house. Angels of fire descended from heaven. = Gk. 29, but 
there the attackers are confounded and turned back. Syr. has 
nothing of this. 

The priests insisted on Mary’s banishment by the governor. 
He sent a chiliarch to Bethlehem with thirty men. The Spirit told 
the apostles to take Mary to Jerusalem. They did so and held 
a five days’ service. 

Meanwhile the chiliarch found nothing at Bethlehem, and the 
priests said this was due to magic. This last is not in Gk. 31-3, 
which is, otherwise, represented well. 

After the five days, Mary’s presence in Jerusalem was realized. 
The Jews wished the governor to burn the house: he told them 
to do so themselves, and watched from a distance. The attackers 
were scorched and burnt. The governor declared his belief in 
Christ. = Gk. 34-5. Here the Syriac has a very long digression not 
represented in the Greek, and belonging properly, it seems, to the 
story of the Cross (pp. 89-50). 

Caleb the Sadducee, who was a secret believer, whispered to 


THE SYRIAC NARRATIVES 221 


the governor that he should adjure the Jews by the God of Israel 
to tell him their real opinion about Jesus. 

So all Jerusalem was assembled: and there follows a long 
altercation between the believers and unbelievers before the 
governor. Eventually some of the latter are forced by scourging 
to tell how they had hidden the cross, &e. The governor (rather 
inconsequently) has the place obstructed with great stones. 

He then goes to see Mary. He greets the apostles (and they 
tell him how they came there. This is only in 2). Mary at his 
request tells him the story of the Annunciation. The governor 
left Jerusalem and went to Rome and told the emperor, and the 
account of all this was written down by disciples at Rome, who 
also wrote to the apostles telling them of various miracles (seven 
are told) which Mary had wrought. 

The text then leaps to § 45 of the Greek, omitting (in this 
place) all notice of the death of the Virgin. 

The Spirit told the apostles to bear her to a place where were three 
caves, and to lay her on a bench there and await his bidding. 

Jephonias, ‘strong and tall, and handsome of figure’, attacked 
them—was smitten and healed (but Mary is not dead yet, for 
she speaks to him). Peter gave a dry rod to Jephonias and sent 
him to the Jews. The rod blossomed. He healed a man born 
blind, and many others. = Gk. 45-7, and Lat. xii-xv. The Greek 
has not the healing of the Jews, and the Syriac has distorted it. 

The apostles laid Mary in the eastern cave and held a service 
of three days and nights. Some Jews came to the cave: three 
ventured in, and were burnt and swallowed up. Many believed, 
but the priests threatened and bribed them. 

This, which concludes Book III, is badly confused in the Syriac, 
which has made the great mistake of saying that the apostles 
bore the Virgin to the cave before she was dead. 

Book IV. While the apostles were ministering about Mary in 
the cave the Spirit spoke to them, and told the story of the Annun- 
ciation. He spoke also of the date of her death, and then told 
how Sunday is the day of the Annunciation, the Nativity, the 
Entry, Resurrection, Ascension, and Judgement. = Gk. 36. 

Eve, Anna, Elisabeth, Adam, and other patriarchs now came 
and greeted Mary, and then the procession of heavenly chariots, 
and then Christ. His words toher, and her answer. Her kissing of 
his hand, and prayers and blessing and death, are as in Gk. 38-44, 
but the blessing is far longer. 

Then the body was prepared for burial. Twelve chariots took 
up the apostles and bore them all to Paradise (cf. the alternative 
text of Gk. 48): and they returned thence and ordained a com- 
memoration of her three times a year. Cf. Gk. 49. : 

After this is a very long disquisition on the rules which the 
apostles made about the commemoration: it need not even be 
summarized here (pp. 59-62). 


222 THE ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN 


When they had come back to the cave they agreed to write 
a book in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and commit it to John: and, 
with more unimportant matter following on this, the book ends. 

Book V, pp. 64-9. This is a diffuse account of the Virgin’s 
visit to Paradise. One paragraph tells of her seeing Gehenna. 

John and Peter were with her, and she revealed everything to 
John and told him to write it: it would be made public at the 
end of the world. 

Christ then says he will tell her what is to happen at his second 
coming: but nothing is told. Mary answers with thanksgiving 
and prayer—and Book V ends. Book VI does not appear. 

2. (Wright: Contributions, p. 18.) 

A prefatory section declares the apostles to be the witnesses 
and authors of what follows. 

The story then begins, and gives a shorter form of what we have 
had, in this order: 

Mary goes to the tomb. 

The Jews threaten to stone her. 

She asks Jesus to take her out of the world. 

The angel comes to tell her her prayer is heard. 

The guards of the tomb report this. 

The Jews ask Sabinus the governor to banish her. 

He refers them to her. They come and abuse her. 

She goes to Bethlehem with the three virgins (named as in 1). 

She prays that John may be sent. He comes. 

The other apostles arrive. 

They begin to tell how they came. The first fragment ends 
in John’s narrative. It was left unfinished by the scribe. 

2a. p. 24. This begins in the midst of the dispute between 
believers and unbelievers before the governor, and the story 
follows the course of 1 down to the point where the apostles lay 
Mary in the cave. Here the first fragment of 2a ends. 

p. 39. The second fragment of 2a does not seem to have an 
exact textual equivalent in 1. 

Chariots of light and saints arrive, and Mary is borne to 
paradise. 

The apostles return to the Mount of Olives, and pray to be 
allowed to ordain a commemoration of Mary. 

And so with rather a long doxology the book ends. 

It is, so far as we have it, far more compact and coherent than 
1 or 3. 

3. (Budge.) 

This is mainly identical in content with 1, but has points of 
its own. 

Mary goes to the tomb. 

The Jews plot to kill her, close the cave, set guards on it. 

Gabriel comes. 

The guards report it. 


THE SYRIAC NARRATIVES 223 


Mary goes to Bethlehem with the three virgins (as above). 

The Jews hid the cross, &c., and asserted that ‘here are buried 
the Book of Moses and the box of manna and the rod of Aaron 
and the mantle of Elijah’, so that if miracles did happen there, 
they could be attributed to those relics. 

Abgar’s letter. Sabinus is angry with the Jews. Mary prayed 
that the apostles might be sent. 

John came. 

Then the others. The statement that they came and the 
circumstances of their doing so are put into one narrative, not 
repeated as in 1. 

After the apostles had greeted Mary, Anne, Elisabeth, Adam, 
&c., came, and all the various orders of saints and angels: and 
Christ. This dialogue and her prayers are rather shortened, but 
essentially as in 1. 

Mary died and her soul was taken up. 

Then we have a bad dislocation. 

The believers in the city went to the governor and told him 
the truth about Jesus and the Jews. He was angry with the 
chiefs, and smote them and told them not to harm the Christians. 
This is a condensation into a few lines of the dispute before the 
governor. Yet this dispute occurs later on. Here, however, we 
have the sequel. 

The governor visited Mary with his sick son (who was healed). 
The apostles told him of their miraculous coming. The governor 
went to Rome and told the emperor, and the believers there wrote 
down the wonderful record. This is a shorter form of 1. 

A paragraph on the age of Mary (52) follows. 

The apostles said, ‘Let us make a distinction between the 
burial of believers and non-believers, and make a beginning with 
Mary’. They prepared her body for burial, and set out in 
procession. 

The Jews saw it and bribed the governor not to interfere with 
them. They also bribed a gigantic soldier of his, Yophana, to go 
with them and attack the bier. 

Then we have the affliction and cure of Yophana, who goes 
back to the governor, and he laughs at the Jews. 

The apostles laid the body in the cave. 

Peter asked the multitude to set guards over it. He also 
spoke to the believers of the glory of Mary. ; 

The Jews plotted and put a number of dead bodies in the cave, 
but in vain: and then tried to burn the body but were burnt 
themselves. ’ 

Then the apostles brought out the body and laid it on a bier. 

Then came all the chariots of light, and the body was put in 
a chariot of light, and it and all the apostles went up to Paradise. 

And the cloud took them back to Jerusalem. And they wrote 
down all the triumphs of the Virgin and sent the books every- 


224 THE ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN 


where, and ordained three yearly commemorations; and were 
taken back to the places whence they had come. 

Then a homiletical paragraph. It introduces the revelation of 
John about the Virgin in Paradise. = No. 1, Book V. 

The Jews thought the body was still in the cave, and they went 
in and found it not. Many believed. 

The unbelievers (again?) put dead bodies in the cave. 

The believers told the governor, and he sent Yophana, who 
confiscated all the goods of the offenders. 

‘Here I will write of the miracles which the Bethlehemites saw 
wrought in the upper chamber where Mary lay.’ 

Visions of angels, multitudes of sick healed: six miracles 
narrated, asin 1. The healing of 2,800 people. 

Plot to attack the house. Descent of angels of fire. All this 
is in 1. 

The priests insisted on the banishment of Mary. The chiliarch 
sent. The apostles bore Mary to Bethlehem (read Jerusalem). 
The five days’ service. The house in Jerusalem attacked, the 
besiegers burnt, the governor’s declaration of belief. 

The dispute between believers and unbelievers before the 
governor. The hiding-place of the cross obstructed. 

Then afterwards the disciples of the apostles wrote (to various 
places), and wrote an account of the departure of Mary, and took 
it with them to Byzantium. 

And then a series of miracles is narrated, which are nearly all 
identical with those in 1. 

4. Wright. (Obsequies of the Holy Virgin, Contributions, p. 42.) 

The fragments printed and summarized by Wright in the 
Preface contain these incidents: 

The appearance of the Lord to his mother: her last words and 
death. Her soul is delivered to Michael. Peter begins to speak 
to Christ. 

The funeral procession. Jews are blinded, and he who tries to 
overset the bier has his arms fixed to it. They are restored. 
Peter gives him a staff with which he heals 5,000 blinded 
people. 

p. 42. First long fragment. Paul is speaking, and telling 
a long story about Solomon, who had been told by a demon that 
a certain young man would die. A form of this story occurs in 
the Testament of Solomon. 

The apostles ask Paul to go on speaking, ‘for our Lord hath 
sent thee to gladden us during these three days’. Paul asks them 
what they will preach when they go forth: and is answered by 
Peter, John, and Andrew. He criticizes them as too severe, and 
recommends a gentler policy. They are angry. 

And as they were all sitting disputing before the entrance to 
ee tomb, Jesus appeared and justified Paul’s view, as against 
the others. 


THE SYRIAC NARRATIVES 225 


He summoned Michael and bade him bring forth the body of 
Mary into the clouds. They were all carried to Paradise. 

The apostles then asked the Lord to show them the place of 
torment, reminding him of his promise that on the day of the 
departure of Mary they should see it. 

They were all taken on a cloud to the west. The Lord spoke 
to the angels of the pit, and the earth sprang upwards and they 
saw the pit.t 

The lost saw Michael and begged for respite. Mary and the 
apostles fell down and interceded for them. Michael spoke to 
them, telling them that at all the twelve hours of the day and of 
the night the angels intercede for creation. The angel of the 
waters intercedes for the waters. Here the fragment ends. 

p. 48. The next fragment is a story told by Michael to Mary, 
of the concealing of the bones of Joseph in the Nile by Pharaoh 
and their discovery by Moses. It seems as if this must have been 
told in answer to some inquiry of Mary’s about her own body, 
and therefore it should be placed earlier in order. 

p. 50. The last fragment is a curious story about Jesus testing 
the apostles, evidently during his life on earth. It is so puzzling 
and uncommon as to be worth quoting in full: 

‘them according to their wish. And he sent by the hand of 
the apostles to them? (to ask) were these things not so? 

And he said: These are the shepherds of the house of Israel, 
who are praying for the sheep, that they may be sanctified and 
made glorious before the sons of men: and themselves they are 
not able to sanctify, because they exalt themselves like the 
strong. Did I not give them many signs? 

And the apostles said: Lord, lo they beseech and pray, and 
repent, and kneel upon their knees. Why dost thou not hear 
them? Our Lord says unto them: I too was willing to hear 
them, but there is deception in them (as) ye too know. 

And when Jesus wished to show the apostles for what reason 
he did not hear them, he took them up into a mountain and let 
them become hungry. And when the apostles had gone, they 
asked of him, and say unto him: Lord we are hungry; what 
have we then to eat in this desert? And Jesus told them to 
go to the trees which were before them. And he said to them: 
Go to those trees which are over against us, whose branches are 
many and fair and beautiful at a distance, and from them ye shall 
get food. And when the apostles went, they did not find fruit 
on the trees. 

And they returned to Jesus, and said: Good Teacher, thou 

1 IT have pointed out, and the Rev. St. J. Seymour has elaborated 
the thesis, that this visit of the apostles to Hell was known in Ireland 
at an early date, and that the Irish form must be derived somehow 
from this Syriac text. 

® Evidently the leaders of the Jews. 


870 Q 


226 THE ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN 


didst send us to those trees which are over against us, and we 
went and found on them no fruit, but only branches which were 
fair and beautiful, but there was no fruit on them. 

And Jesus said to them: Ye have not seen them, because the 
trees grow straight upwards. Go therefore at once, because the 
trees are bending themselves, and ye shall find on them fruit, and 
get yourselves food. And when they went, they found the trees 
bending down, but they did not find fruit upon them. 

And they returned again to Jesus in great distress, and say to 
him: What is this, Teacher, that we are mocked? For at first 
thou didst say to us, ‘ Ye shall find trees which are straight, and 
there is fruit on them,’ and we found none. Why are we mocked ? 
But it is fitting that thou shouldest teach us what this is that 
has happened; for we think that what thou didst wish to teach 
us is false; for by a visible power the trees were laid hold of and 
bent down. If this be a temptation, make known to us what it is. 

And Jesus said to them: Go and sit under them, and ye shall 
see what it is that abides on them, but ye shall not be able to 
bend them again. And when the apostles went and sat under 
the trees, straightway the trees threw down stinking worms. And 
the apostles came again to Jesus and say to him: Teacher, dost 
thou wish to lead us astray or to turn us away from thee.’ ... 


The trees of course represent the leaders or priests of the Jews 
whose prayers are ineffectual because of their moral defects. The 
story has no parallel that I know of, and to my mind has a rather 
ancient complexion. 

This whole book of the Obsequies stands quite apart from the rest 
of the narratives: it had, we see, the framework, with the Jew attacking 
the bier and so forth; but this framework was evidently used for the 
insertion of a number of quite extraneous discourses and stories, and 
what we have of these is so unusual that we must greatly regret the loss 
of the rest. The undoubted fact that this form of the story somehow 
penetrated to Ireland gives additional interest to the book. 

Wright assigned the manuscript to the latter part of the fifth 
century. 

Besides the forms we have reviewed there are versions in Arabic 
(ed. Enger, 1854), Aethiopic (Chaine, Corpus script. christ. Orient., 
1909), Armenian (Vetter, Theol. Quartalschrift, 1902). These agree in 
their main features with the Syriac books and do not demand a detailed 
analysis. The Armenian, as usual, has its own peculiar and ‘unau- 
thorized’ additions. 

Our survey of the narratives shows that there are two great groups, 
one of which is represented in Coptic only—but not uniformly by all 
the Coptic authorities. In this there is a long interval between the 
death of Mary and her corporal assumption—206 days, from 21 Tobi 
to 16 Mesore (one authority gives only seven days, and one excludes a 
corporal assumption). Also we hear nothing of the summoning of the 
apostles from their missionary work: Peter and John are the only 
two who are prominent. Further, only one fragment (Copt. 4) has 
the story of a Jew smitten for touching the bier, and healed. 


THE SYRIAC NARRATIVES 227 


Also in all Mary is warned of her death by her Son, not by an 
angel. 

In the Greek, Latin, and Syriac (1, 2, 8) the death is announced by 
an angel; in Greek and Latin he brings a palm-branch (and so, too, in 
Copt. 4), but not in Syriac. 

The apostles are summoned from all parts of the world and from 
their graves, and tell how they came. 

The ‘governor’ figures largely in Syriac and appears in Greek. The 
controversy before him, which is only in the oriental versions, seems 
to have been borrowed from another writing: the real point of it is 
the hiding of the cross at the end. 

The Jew who attacks the bier (usually Jephonias, but Ruben in 
the latest text, Lat. A) is a constant feature: he also figures in the 
Coptic fragment 4. 

In Greek, Latin, and Copt. 4 he heals the blinded people with the palm- 
branch: in Syriac with Peter’s staff. 

The corporal assumption takes place very soon after the death. 
Less emphasis is laid upon it than in the Coptic texts. 


ACTS 


We begin with the five books which were formed into a corpus by 
the Manichaeans and substituted by them for our canonical Acts. 

They are of different dates. 

Earliest are the Acts of John, not later than the middle of the second 
century. 

Next the Acts of Paul, composed by a presbyter of Asia before 
Tertullian’s time: cir. 160-170? 

The Acts of Peter, usually assigned to about the year 200. 

The Acts of Andrew, less well preserved than the rest, and probably 
to be dated well after 200; even after 250, perhaps. 

The Acts of Thomas, composed in Syriac, according to the weight of 
authority, date from the third century. 

Photius (890), who read all five and has written a criticism of them 
in his Bibliotheca or Myriobiblon, found them all attributed to one 
author, Leucius. But it is now agreed that Leucius (a supposed 
‘disciple of John) ! was the ostensible author of the Acts of John only. 


ACTS OF JOHN 


The length of this book is given in the Stichometry of Nicephorus 
as 2,500 lines: the same number as for St. Matthew’s Gospel. We 
have large portions of it in the original, and a Latin version (purged, it is 
important to note, of all traces of unorthodoxy) of some lost episodes, 
besides a few scattered fragments. These will be fitted together in what 
seems the most probable order. 

The best edition of the Greek remains is in Bonnet, Acta Apost. 
Apocr. II. 1, 1898: the Latin is in Book V of the Historia Apostolica 
of Abdias (Fabricius, Cod. Apocr. N. T.: there is no modern edition). 

The beginning of the book is lost. It probably related in 
some form a trial, and banishment of John to Patmos. A dis- 
tinctly late Greek text printed by Bonnet (in two forms) as 
ec. 1-17 of his work tells how Domitian, on his accession, per- 
secuted the Jews. They accused the Christians in a letter to 
him: he accordingly persecuted the Christians. He heard of 
John’s teaching in Ephesus and sent for him: his ascetic habits 
on the voyage impressed his captors. He was brought before 
Domitian, and made to drink poison, which did not hurt him: 
the dregs of it killed a criminal on whom it was tried: and 
John revived him; he also raised a girl who was slain by an 


1 He is once mentioned, without reference to the Acts, as a disciple 
of John, viz. by Epiphanius, Heresy 51.6. The early heretics Cerinthus, 
Ebion, &c., &c., often opposed the Lord’s disciples, and ‘they were 


often opposed by Saint John and his companions, Leucius and many 
others’. 


ACTS OF JOHN 229 


unclean spirit. Domitian, who was much impressed, banished 
him to Patmos. Nerva recalled him. The second text tells 
how he escaped shipwreck on leaving Patmos, swimming on 
a cork ; landed at Miletus, where a chapel was built in his honour, 
and went to Ephesus. All this is late: but an old story, known 
to Tertullian and to other Latin writers, but to no Greek, said 
that either Domitian at Rome or the Proconsul at Ephesus cast 
John into a caldron of boiling oil which did him no hurt. The 
scene of this was eventually fixed at the Latin Gate in Rome 
(hence the St. John Port Latin of our calendar, May 6th). We 
have no detailed account of this, but it is conjectured to have 
been told in the early part of the Leucian Acts. If so, it is 
odd that no Greek writer mentions it. 

Leaving for the time certain small fragments which may 
perhaps have preceded the extant episodes, I proceed to the 
first long episode (Bonnet, c. 18). 


[John is going from Miletus to Ephesus.]} 

18 Now John was hastening to Ephesus, moved thereto by 
a vision. Damonicus therefore, and Aristodemus his kinsman, 
and a certain very rich man Cleobius, and the wife of Marcellus, 
hardly prevailed to keep him for one day in Miletus, reposing 
themselves with him. And when very early in the morning 
they had set forth, and already about four miles of the journey 
were accomplished, a voice came from heaven in the hearing 
of all of us, saying: John, thou art about to give glory to thy 
Lord in Ephesus, whereof thou shalt know, thou and all the 
brethren that are with thee, and certain of them that are there, 
which shall believe by thy means. John therefore pondered, 
rejoicing in himself, what it should be that should befall (meet) 
him at Ephesus, and said: Lord, behold I go according to thy 
will: let that be done which thou desirest. 

19 And as we drew near to the city, Lycomedes the praetor 
of the Ephesians, a man of large substance, met us, and falling 
at John’s feet besought him, saying: Is thy name John? the 
God whom thou preachest hath sent thee to do good unto my 
wife, who hath been smitten with palsy now these seven days 
and lieth incurable. But glorify thou thy God by healing her, 
and have compassion on us. For as I was considering with 
myself what resolve to take in this matter, one stood by me and 
said: Lycomedes, cease from this thought which warreth against 
thee, for it is evil (hard): submit not thyself unto it. For I have 
compassion upon mine handmaid Cleopatra, and have sent 
from Miletus a man named John who shall raise her up and 
restore her to thee whole. Tarry not, therefore, thou servant 
of the God who hath manifested himself unto me, but hasten 
unto my wife who hath no more than breath. And straightway 
John went from the gate, with the brethren that were with 


230 ACTS OF JOHN 


him and Lycomedes, unto his house. But Cleobius said to 
his young men: Go ye to my kinsman Callippus and receive 
of him comfortable entertainment—for I am come hither with 
his son—that we may find all things decent. 

20 Now when Lycomedes came with John into the house 
wherein his wife lay, he caught hold again of his feet and said: 
See, lord, the withering of the beauty, see the youth, see the 
renowned flower of my poor wife, whereat all Ephesus was wont 
to marvel: wretched me, I have suffered envy, I have been 
humbled, the eye of mine enemies hath smitten me: I have 
never wronged any, though I might have injured many, for 
I looked before to this very thing, and took care, lest I should 
see any evil or any such ill fortune as this. What profit, then, 
hath Cleopatra from my anxiety? what have I gained by being 
known for a pious man until this day? nay, I suffer more than 
the impious, in that I see thee, Cleopatra, lying in such plight. 
The sun in his course shall no more see me conversing with 
thee: I will go before thee, Cleopatra, and rid myself of life: 
I will not spare mine own safety though it be yet young. I will 
defend myself before Justice, that I have rightly deserted, for 
I may indict her as judging unrighteously. I will be avenged 
_on her when I come before her as a ghost <bereft> of life. I will 
say to her: Thou didst force me to leave the light when thou 
didst rob me of Cleopatra: thou didst cause me to become 
a corpse when thou sentest me this ill fortune: thou didst compel 
me to insult Providence, by cutting off my joy in life (my con- 
fidence). 

21 And with yet more words Lycomedes addressing Cleopatra 
came near to the bed and cried aloud and lamented: but John 
pulled him away, and said: Cease from these lamentations 
and from thine unfitting words: thou must not disobey him 
that (?) appeared unto thee: for know that thou shalt receive 
thy consort again. Stand, therefore, with us that have come 
hither on her account and pray to the God whom thou sawest 
manifesting himself unto thee in dreams. What, then, is it, 
Lycomedes? Awake, thou also, and open thy soul. Cast off 
the heavy sleep from thee: beseech the Lord, entreat him for 
thy wife, and he will raise her up. But he fell upon the floor 
and lamented, fainting. 

John therefore said with tears: Alas for the fresh (new) 
betraying of my vision! for the new temptation that is prepared 
for me! for the new device of him that contriveth against me! 
the voice from heaven that was borne unto me in the way, 
hath it devised this for me? was it this that it foreshowed me 
should come to pass here, betraying me to this great multi- 
tude of the citizens because of Lycomedes? the man lieth with- 

1 It is evident from what follows that Lycomedes died: but the 
text does not say so; some words may have fallen out. 


ACTS OF JOHN 231 


out breath, and I know well that they will not suffer me to go 
out of the house alive. Why tarriest thou, Lord (or, what wilt 
thou do)? why hast thou shut off from us thy good promise? 
Do not, I beseech thee, Lord, do not give him cause to exult 
who rejoiceth in the suffering of others; give him not cause 
to dance who alway derideth us; but let thy holy name and thy 
mercy make haste. Raise up these two dead whose death is 
against me. 

22 And even as John thus cried out, the city of the Ephesians 
ran together to the house of Lycomedes, hearing that he was 
dead. And John, beholding the great multitude that was come, 
said unto the Lord: Now is the time of refreshment and of 
confidence toward thee, O Christ; now is the time for us who 
are sick to have the help that is of thee, O physician who healest 
freely ; keep thou mine entering in hither safe from derision. 
I beseech thee, Jesu, succour this great multitude that it may 
come to thee who art Lord of all things: behold the affliction, 
behold them that lie here. Do thou prepare, even from them 
that are assembled for that end, holy vessels for thy service, 
when they behold thy gift. For thyself hast said, O Christ, ‘ Ask, 
and it shall be given you’. We ask therefore of thee, O king, 
not gold, not silver, not substance, not possessions, nor aught 
of what is on earth and perisheth, but two souls, by whom 
thou shalt convert them that are here unto thy way, unto thy 
teaching, unto thy liberty (confidence), unto thy most excellent 
(or unfailing) promise: for when they perceive thy power in 
that those that have died are raised, they will be saved, some of 
them. Do thou thyself, therefore, give them hope in thee: and 
so go I unto Cleopatra and say: Arise in the name of Jesus 
Christ. 

23 And he came to her and touched her face and said: Cleo- 
patra, He saith, whom every ruler feareth, and every creature 
and every power, the abyss and all darkness, and unsmiling death, 
and the height of heaven, and the circles of hell [and the resurrec- 
tion of the dead, and the sight of the blind], and the whole power 
of the prince of this world, and the pride of the ruler: Arise, 
and be not an occasion unto many that desire not to believe, 
or an affliction unto souls that are able to hope and to be saved. 
And Cleopatra straightway cried with a loud voice: I arise, 
master: save thou thine handmaid. 

Now when she had arisen <who had lain incurable for) seven 
days, the city of the Ephesians was moved at the unlooked-for 
sight. And Cleopatra asked concerning her husband Lycomedes, 
but John said to her: Cleopatra, if thou keep thy soul unmoved 
and steadfast, thou shalt forthwith have Lycomedes thine 
husband standing here beside thee, if at least thou be not dis- 
turbed nor moved at that which hath befallen, having believed 
on my God, who by my means shall grant him unto thee alive. 


232 ACTS OF JOHN 


Come therefore with me into thine other bedchamber, and thou 
shalt behold him, a dead corpse indeed, but raised again by 
the power of my God. 

24 And Cleopatra going with John into her bedchamber, 
and seeing Lycomedes dead for her sake, had no power to speak 
(suffered in her voice), and ground her teeth and bit her tongue, 
and closed her eyes, raining down tears: and with calmness 
gave heed to the apostle. But John had compassion on Cleo- 
patra when he saw that she neither raged nor was beside her- 
self, and called upon the perfect and condescending mercy, 
saying: Lord Jesus Christ, thou seest the pressure of sorrow, 
thou seest the need; thou seest Cleopatra shrieking her soul 
out in silence, for she constraineth within her the frenzy that 
cannot be borne; and I know that for Lycomedes’ sake she also 
will die upon his body. And she said quietly to John: That 
have I in mind, master, and nought else. 

And the apostle went to the couch whereon Lycomedes lay, 
and taking Cleopatra’s hand he said: Cleopatra, because of 
the multitude that is present, and thy kinsfolk that have come 
in, with strong crying, say thou to thine husband: Arise and 
glorify the name of God, for he giveth back the dead to the dead. 
And she went to her husband and said to him according as she 
was taught, and forthwith raised him up. And he, when he arose, 
fell on the floor and kissed John’s feet, but he raised him, saying: 
O man, kiss not my feet but the feet of God by whose power 
ye are both arisen. 

25 But Lycomedes said to John: I entreat and adjure thee 
by the God in whose name thou hast raised us, to abide with us, 
together with all them that are with thee. Likewise Cleopatra 
also caught his feet and said the same. And John said to them: 
For to-morrow I will be with you. And they said to him again: 
We shall have no hope in thy God, but shall have been raised to no 
purpose, if thou abide not with us. And Cleobius with Aristodemus 
and Damonicus were touched in the soul and said to John: 
Let us abide with them, that they continue without offence 
towards the Lord. So he continued there with the brethren. 

26 There came together therefore a gathering of a great 
multitude on John’s account; and as he discoursed to them 
that were there, Lycomedes, who had a friend who was a skilful 
painter, went hastily to him and said to him: You see me in 
a great hurry to come to you: come quickly to my house and 
paint the man whom I show you without his knowing it. And 
the painter, giving some one the necessary implements and 
colours, said to Lycomedes: Show him to me, and for the rest 
have no anxiety. And Lycomedes pointed out John to the 
painter, and brought him near him, and shut him up in a room 
from which the apostle of Christ could be seen. And Lycomedes 
was with the blessed man, feasting on the faith and the know- 


ACTS OF JOHN 233 


ledge of our God, and rejoiced yet more in the thought that he 
should possess him in a portrait. 

27 The painter, then, on the first day made an outline of him 
and went away. And on the next he painted him in with his 
colours, and so delivered the portrait to Lycomedes to his great 
joy. And he took it and set it up in his own bedchamber and 
hung it with garlands: so that later John, when he perceived 
it, said to him: My beloved child, what is it that thou always 
doest when thou comest in from the bath into thy bedchamber 
alone? do not I pray with thee and the rest of the brethren? 
or is there something thou art hiding from us? And as he said 
this and talked jestingly with him, he went into the bedchamber, 
and saw the portrait of an old man crowned with garlands, 
and lamps and altars set before it. And he called him and said: 
Lycomedes, what meanest thou by this matter of the portrait? 
can it be one of thy gods that is painted here? for I see that 
thou art still living in heathen fashion. And Lycomedes answered 
him: My only God is he who raised me up from death with my 
wife: but if, next to that God, it be right that the men who 
have benefited us should be called gods—it is thou, father, 
whom I have had painted in that portrait, whom I crown and 
love and reverence as having become my good guide. 

28 And John who had never at any time seen his own face 
said to him: Thou mockest me, child: am I like that in form, 
<excelling> thy Lord? how canst thou persuade me that the 
portrait is like me? And Lycomedes brought him a mirror. 
And when he had seen himself in the mirror and looked earnestly 
at the portrait, he said: As the Lord Jesus Christ liveth, the 
portrait is like me: yet not like me, child, but like my fleshly 
image; for if this painter, who hath imitated this my face, desireth 
to draw me in a portrait, he will be at a loss, «needing more than) 
the colours that are now given }to theef, and boards and plaster 
(?) and glue (?), and the position of my shape, and old age and 
youth and all things that are seen with the eye. 

29 But do thou become for me a good painter, Lycomedes. 
Thou hast colours which he giveth thee through me, who painteth 
all of us for himself, even Jesus, who knoweth the shapes and 
appearances and postures and dispositions and types of our 
souls. And the colours wherewith I bid thee paint are these: 
faith in God, knowledge, godly fear, friendship, communion, 
meekness, kindness, brotherly love, purity, simplicity, tran- 
quillity, fearlessness, grieflessness, sobriety, and the whole band 
of colours that painteth the likeness of thy soul, and even 
now raiseth up thy members that were cast down, and levelleth 
them that were lifted up, and tendeth thy bruises, and healeth 
thy wounds, and ordereth thine hair that was disarranged, and 
washeth thy face, and chasteneth thine eyes, and purgeth thy 
bowels, and emptieth thy belly, and cutteth off that which is 


234 ACTS OF JOHN 


beneath it; and in a word, when the whole company and mingling 
of such colours is come together, into thy soul, it shall present 
it to our Lord Jesus Christ undaunted, whole (unsmoothed), 
and firm of shape. But this that thou hast now done is childish 
and imperfect: thou hast drawn a dead likeness of the dead. 

There need be no portion of text lost at this point: but possibly 
some few sentences have been omitted. The transition is abrupt and 
the new episode has not, as elsewhere, a title of its own. 

80 And he commanded Verus (Berus), the brother that 
ministered to him, to gather the aged women that were in all 
Ephesus, and made ready, he and Cleopatra and Lycomedes, 
all things for the care of them. Verus, then, came to John, 
saying: Of the aged women that are here over threescore years 
old I have found four only sound in body, and of the rest some 
. . - (a word gone) and some palsied and others sick. And when 
he heard that, John kept silence for a long time, and rubbed 
his face and said: O the slackness (weakness) of them that dwell 
in Ephesus! O the state of dissolution, and the weakness toward 
God! O devil, that hast so long mocked the faithful in Ephesus! 
Jesus, who giveth me grace and the gift to have my confidence 
in him, saith to me in silence: Send after the old women that 
are sick and come (be) with them into the theatre, and through 
me heal them: for there are some of them that will come unto 
this spectacle whom by these healings I will convert and make 
them useful for some end. 

31 Now when all the multitude was come together to Lyco- 
medes, he dismissed them on John’s behalf, saying: 'To-morrow 
come ye to the theatre, as many as desire to see the power of 
God. And the multitude, on the morrow, while it was yet night, 
came to the theatre: so that the proconsul also heard of it 
and hasted and took his seat with all the people. And a certain 
praetor, Andronicus, who was the first of the Ephesians at that 
time, put it about that John had promised things impossible 
and incredible: But if, said he, he is able to do any such thing 
as I hear, let him come into the public theatre, when it is open, 
naked, and holding nothing in his hands, neither let him name 
that magical name which I have heard him utter. 

32 John therefore, having heard this and being moved by 
these words, commanded the aged women to be brought into 
the theatre: and when they were all brought into the midst, 
some of them upon beds and others lying in a deep sleep, and 
all the city had run together, and a great silence was made, 
John opened his mouth and began to say: 

_ 83 Ye men of Ephesus, learn first of all wherefore I am visiting 
in your city, or what is this great confidence which I have towards 
you, so that it may become manifest to this general assembly 
and to all of you (or, so that I manifest myself to). I have been 
sent, then, upon a mission which is not of man’s ordering, and 


ACTS OF JOHN 235 


not upon any vain journey; neither am I a merchant that. 
make bargains or exchanges; but Jesus Christ whom I preach, 
being compassionate and kind, desireth by my means to convert 
all of you who are held in unbelief and sold unto evil lusts, 
and to deliver you from error; and by his power will I con- 
found even the unbelief of your praetor, by raising up them 
that lie before you, whom ye all behold, in what plight and 
in what sicknesses they are. And to do this (to confound Andro- 
nicus) is not possible for me if they perish: therefore shall they 
tbe healedy+. 

34 But this first I have desired to sow in your ears, even that 
ye should take care for your souls—on which account I am come 
unto you—and not expect that this time will be for ever, for 
it is but a moment, and not lay up treasures upon the earth 
where all things do fade. Neither think that when ye have 
gotten children ye can rest upon them (?), and try not for their 
sakes to defraud and overreach. Neither, ye poor, be vexed 
if ye have not wherewith to minister unto pleasures; for men 
of substance when they are diseased call you happy. Neither, 
ye rich, rejoice that ye have much money, for by possessing 
these things ye provide for yourselves grief that ye cannot be 
rid of when ye lose them; and besides, while it is with you, ye 
are afraid lest some one attack you on account of it. 

35 Thou also that art puffed up because of the shapeliness 
of thy body, and art of an high look, shalt see the end of the 
promise thereof in the grave; and thou that rejoicest in adultery, 
know that both law and nature avenge it upon thee, and before 
these, conscience; and thou, adulteress, that art an adversary 
of the law, knowest not whither thou shalt come in the end. 
And thou that sharest not with the needy, but hast monies 
laid up, when thou departest out of this body and hast need of 
some mercy when thou burnest in fire, shalt have none to pity 
thee; and thou the wrathful and passionate, know that thy 
conversation is like the brute beasts; and thou, drunkard and 
quarreller, learn that thou losest thy senses by being enslaved 
to a shameful and dirty desire. 

86 Thou that rejoicest in gold and delightest thyself with 
ivory and jewels, when night falleth, canst thou behold what 
thou lovest? thou that art vanquished by soft raiment, and 
then leavest life, will those things profit thee in the place whither 
thou goest? And let the murderer know that the condign 
punishment is laid up for him twofold after his departure hence. 
Likewise also thou poisoner, sorcerer, robber, defrauder, sodo- 
mite, thief, and as many as are of that band, ye shall come at 
last, as your works do lead you, unto unquenchable fire, and 
utter darkness, and the pit of punishment, and eternal threaten- 
ings. Wherefore, ye men of Ephesus, turn yourselves, knowing 
this also, that kings, rulers, tyrants, boasters, and they that 


236 ACTS OF JOHN 


have conquered in wars, stripped of all things when they depart 
hence, do suffer pain, lodged in eternal misery. 

37 And having thus said, John by the power of God healed 
all the diseases. 

This sentence must be an abridgement of a much longer narration. 
The manuscript indicates no break at this point: but we must suppose 
a not inconsiderable loss of text. For one thing, Andronicus, who is 
here an unbeliever, appears as a convert in the next few lines. Now 
he is, as we shall see later, the husband of an eminent believer, Dru- 
siana; and his and her conversion will have been told at some length; 
and I do not doubt that among other things there was a discourse of 
John persuading them to live in continence. 


87 continued. Now the brethren from Miletus said unto John: 
We have continued a long time at Ephesus; if it seem good to 
thee, let us go also to Smyrna; for we hear already that the 
mighty works of God have reached it also. And Andronicus said 
to them: Whensoever the teacher willeth, then let us go. But 
John said: Let us first go unto the temple of Artemis, for per- 
chance there also, if we show ourselves, the servants of the Lord 
will be found. 

38 After two days, then, was the birthday of the idol temple. 
John therefore, when all were clad in white, alone put on black 
raiment and went up into the temple. And they took him and 
essayed to killhim. But John said: Ye are mad to set upon me, 
a man that is the servant of the only God. And he gat him up 
upon an high pedestal and said unto them: 

39 Ye run hazard, men of Ephesus, of being like in character 
to the sea: every river that floweth in and every spring that 
runneth down, and the rains, and waves that press upon each 
other, and torrents full of rocks are made salt together by the 
bitter telement+ (MS. promise!) that is therein. So ye also re- 
maining unchanged unto this day toward true godliness are 
become corrupted by your ancient rites of worship. How many 
wonders and healings of diseases have ye seen wrought through 
me? And yet are ye blinded in your hearts and cannot recover 
sight. What is it, then, O men of Ephesus? I have adventured 
now and come up even into this your idol temple. I will convict 
you of being most godless, and dead from the understanding of 
mankind. Behold, I stand here: ye all say that ye have a 
goddess, even Artemis: pray then unto her that I alone may 
die; or else I only, if ye are not able to do this, will call upon 
mine own god, and for your unbelief I will cause every one of 
you to die. 

40 But they who had beforetime made trial of him and had 
seen dead men raised up, cried out: Slay us not so, we beseech 
thee, John. We know that thou canst do it. And John said to 
them: If then ye desire not to die, let that which ye worship be 
confounded, tand wherefore it is confounded,t+ that ye also may 


ACTS OF JOHN 237 


depart from your ancient error. For now is it time that either 
ye be converted by my God, or I myself die by your goddess; 
for I will pray in your presence and entreat my God that mercy 
be shown unto you. 

41 And having so said he prayed thus: O God that art God 
above all that are called gods, that until this day hast been set 
at nought in the city of the Ephesians; that didst put into my 
mind to come into this place, whereof I never thought; that 
dost convict every manner of worship by turning men unto thee; 
at whose name every idol fleeth and every evil spirit and every 
unclean power; now also by the flight of the evil spirit here at 
thy name, even of him that deceiveth this great multitude, show 
thou thy mercy in this place, for they have been made to err. 

42 And as John spake these things, immediately the altar of 
Artemis was parted into many pieces, and all the things that 
were dedicated in the temple fell, and {[MS. that which seemed 
good to him]} was rent asunder, and likewise of the images of the 
gods more than seven. And the half of the temple fell down, so 
that the priest was slain at one blow by the falling of the (? roof, 
? beam). The multitude of the Ephesians therefore cried out: 
One is the God of John, one is the God that hath pity on us, for 
thou only art God: now are we turned to thee, beholding thy 
marvellous works! have mercy on us, O God, according to thy 
will, and save us from our great error! And some of them, lying 
on their faces, made supplication, and some kneeled and besought, 
and some rent their clothes and wept, and others tried to escape. 

43 But John spread forth his hands, and being uplifted in soul, 
said unto the Lord: Glory be to thee, my Jesus, the only God 
of truth, for that thou dost gain (receive) thy servants by divers 
devices. And having so said, he said to the people: Rise up 
from the fioor, ye men of Ephesus, and pray to my God, and 
recognize the invisible power that cometh to manifestation, and 
the wonderful works which are wrought before your eyes. 
Artemis ought to have succoured herself: her servant ought to 
have been helped of her and not to have died. Where is the power 
of the evil spirit? where are her sacrifices? where her birthdays ? 
where her festivals? where are the garlands? where is ali that 
sorcery and the poisoning (witchcraft) that is sister thereto ? 

44, But the people rising up from off the floor went hastily and 
cast down the rest of the idol temple, crying: The God of John 
only do we know, and him hereafter do we worship, since he hath 
had mercy upon us! And as John came down from thence, much 
people took hold of him, saying: Help us, O John! Assist us 
that do perish in vain! Thou seest our purpose: thou seest the 
multitude following thee and hanging upon thee in hope toward 
thy God. We have seen the way wherein we went astray when 
we lost him: we have seen our gods that were set up in vain: 
we have seen the great and shameful derision that is come to 


238 ACTS OF JOHN 


them: but suffer us, we pray thee, to come unto thine house and 
to be succoured without hindrance. Receive us that are in 
bewilderment. 

45 And John said to them: Men (of Ephesus), believe that for 
your sakes I have continued in Ephesus, and have put off my 
journey unto Smyrna and to the rest of the cities, that there also 
the servants of Christ may turn to him. But since tI am not 
yet perfectly assured concerning yout, I have continued praying 
to my God and beseeching him that I should then depart from 
Ephesus when I have confirmed you in the faith: and whereas 
I see that this is come to pass and yet more is being fulfilled, 
I will not leave you until I have weaned you like children from 
the nurse’s milk, and have set you upon a firm rock. 

46 John therefore continued with them, receiving them in the 
house of Andronicus. And one of them that were gathered laid 
down the dead body of the priest of Artemis before the door [of 
the temple], for he was his kinsman, and came in quickly with 
the rest, saying nothing of it. John, therefore, after the discourse 
to the brethren, and the prayer and the thanksgiving (eucharist) 
and the laying of hands upon every one of the congregation, said 
by the spirit: There is one here who moved by faith in God hath 
laid down the priest of Artemis before the gate and is come in, 
and in the yearning of his soul, taking care first for himself, hath 
thought thus in himself: It is better for me to take thought for 
the living than for my kinsman that is dead: for I know that if 
I turn to the Lord and save mine own soul, John will not deny 
to raise up the dead also. And John arising from his place went 
to that into which that kinsman of the priest who had so thought 
was entered, and took him by the hand and said: Hadst thou 
this thought when thou camest unto me, my child? And he, 
taken with trembling and affright, said: Yes, lord, and cast 
himself at his feet. And John said: Our Lord is Jesus Christ, 
who will show his power in thy dead kinsman by raising him up. 

47 And he made the young man rise, and took his hand and 
said: It is no great matter for a man that is master of great 
mysteries to continue wearying himself over small things: or 
what great thing is it to rid men of diseases of the body? And 
yet holding the young man by the hand he said: I say unto thee, 
child, go and raise the dead thyself, saying nothing but this only: 
John the servant of God saith to thee, Arise. And the young man 
went to his kinsman and said this only—and much people was with 
him—and entered in unto John, bringing him alive. And John, 
when he saw him that was raised, said: Now that thou art raised, 
thou dost not truly live, neither art partaker or heir of the true 
life: wilt thou belong unto him by whose name and power thou 
wast raised? And now believe, and thou shall live unto all ages. 
And he forthwith believed upon the Lord Jesus and thereafter 
clave unto John. 


ACTS OF JOHN 239 


{Another manuscript (Q. Paris Gr. 1468, of the eleventh century) 
has another form of this story. John destroys the temple of 
Artemis, and then ‘ we’ go to Smyrna and all the idols are broken: 
Bucolus, Polycarp, and Andronicus are left to preside over the 
district. There were there two priests of Artemis, brothers, and 
one died. The raising is told much as in the older text, but more 
shortly. 

‘We’ remained four years in the region, which was wholly 
converted, and then returned to Ephesus. ] 

48 Now on the next day John, having seen in a dream that he 
must walk three miles outside the gates, neglected it not, but 
rose up early and set out upon the way, together with the brethren. 

And a certain countryman who was admonished by his father 
not to take to himself the wife of a fellow labourer of his who 
threatened to kill him—this young man would not endure the 
admonition of his father, but kicked him and left him without 
speech (sc. dead). And John, seeing what had befallen, said unto 
the Lord: Lord, was it on this account that thou didst bid me 
come out hither to-day? 

49 But the young man, beholding the violence (sharpness) of 
death, and looking to be taken, drew out the sickle that was in 
his girdle and started to run to his own abode; and John met 
him and said: Stand still, thou most shameless devil, and tell me 
whither thou runnest bearing a sickle that thirsteth for blood. 
And the young man was troubled and cast the iron on the ground, 
and said to him: I have done a wretched and barbarous deed 
and I know it, and so I determined to do an evil yet worse and 
more cruel, even to die myself at once. For because my father 
was alway curbing me to sobriety, that I should live without 
adultery, and chastely, I could not endure him to reprove me, 
and I kicked him and slew him, and when I saw what was done, 
I was hasting to the woman for whose sake I became my father’s 
murderer, with intent to kill her and her husband, and myself 
last of all: for I could not bear to be seen of the husband of the 
woman, and undergo the judgement of death. 

50 And John said to him: That I may not by going away and 
leaving you in danger give place to him that desireth to laugh and 
sport with thee, come thou with me and show me thy father, 
where he lieth. And if I raise him up for thee, wilt thou here- 
after abstain from the woman that is become a snare tothee. And 
the young man said: If thou raisest up my father himself for me 
alive, and if I see him whole and jcontinuingt in life, I will here- 
after abstain from her. 

51 And while he was speaking, they came to the place where 
the old man lay dead, and many passers-by were standing near 
thereto. And John said to the youth: Thou wretched man, 
didst thou not spare even the old age of thy father? And he, 
weeping and tearing his hair, said that he repented thereof; and 


240 ACTS OF JOHN 


John the servant of the Lord said: Thou didst show me I was to 
set forth for this place, thou knewest that this would come to pass, 
from whom nothing can be hid of things done in life, that givest 
me power to work every cure and healing by thy will: now 
also give me this old man alive, for thou seest that his mur- 
derer is become his own judge: and spare him, thou only Lord, 
that spared not his father (because he) counselled him for the 
best. 

52 And with these words he came near to the old man and 
said: My Lord will not be weak to spread out his kind pity and 
his condescending mercy even unto thee: rise up therefore and 
give glory to God for the work that is come to pass tat this 
moment}. And the old man said: I arise, Lord. And he rose 
and sat up and said: I was released from a terrible life and had 
to bear the insults of my son, dreadful and many, and his want 
of natural affection, and to what end hast thou called me back, 
O man of the living God? (And John answered him: If) thou 
art raised only for the same end, it were better for thee to die; 
but raise thyself unto better things. And he took him and led 
him into the city, preaching unto him the grace of God, so that 
before he entered the gate the old man believed. 

53 But the young man, when he beheld the unlooked-for 
raising of his father, and the saving of himself, took a sickle and 
mutilated himself, and ran to the house wherein he had his 
adulteress, and reproached her, saying: For thy sake I became 
the murderer of my father and of you two and of myself: there 
thou hast that which is alike guilty of all. For on me God hath 
had mercy, that I should know his power. 

54 And he came back and told John in presence of the brethren 
what he had done. But John said to him: He that put it into 
thine heart, young man, to kill thy father and become the 
adulterer of another man’s wife, the same made thee think it 
a right deed to take away also the unruly members. But thou 
shouldest have done away, not with the place of sin, but the 
thought which through those members showed itself harmful: 
for it is not the instruments that are injurious, but the unseen 
springs by which every shameful emotion is stirred and cometh 
to light. Repent therefore, my child, of this fault, and having 
learnt the wiles of Satan thou shalt have God to help thee in all 
the necessities of thy soul. And the young man kept silence and 
attended, having repented of his former sins, that he should 
obtain pardon from the goodness of God: and he did not separate 
from John. 

55 When, then, these things had been done by him in the city 
of the Ephesians, they of Smyrna sent unto him saying: We 
hear that the God whom thou preachest is not envious, and hath 
charged thee not to show partiality by abiding in one place. 
Since, then, thou art a preacher of such a God, come unto Smyrna 


ACTS OF JOHN 241 


and unto the other cities, that we may come to know thy God, 
and having known him may have our hope in him. 

[Q has the above story also, and continues with an incident 
which is also quoted in a different form (and not as from these 
Acts) by John Cassian. Q has it thus: 

Now one day as John was seated, a partridge flew by and came 
and played in the dust before him; and John looked on it and 
wondered. And a certain priest came, who was one of his hearers, 
and came to John and saw the partridge playing in the dust 
before him, and was offended in himself and said: Can such and 
so great a man take pleasure in a partridge playing in the dust ? 
But John perceiving in the spirit the thought of him, said to him: 
It were better for thee also, my child, to look at a partridge 
playing in the dust and not to defile thyself with shameful and 
profane practices: for he who awaiteth the conversion and 
repentance of all men hath brought thee here on this account: 
for I have no need of a partridge playing in the dust. For the 
partridge is thine own soul. 

Then the elder, hearing this and seeing that he was not hidden, 
but that the apostle of Christ had told him all that was in his 
heart, fell on his face on the earth and cried aloud, saying: Now 
know I that God dwelleth in thee, O blessed John! for he that 
tempteth thee tempteth him that cannot be tempted. And he 
entreated him to pray for him. And he instructed him and 
delivered him the rules (canons) and let him go to his house, 
glorifying God that is over all. 

Cassian, Collation XXIV. 21, has it thus: 

It is told that the most blessed Evangelist John, when he was 
gently stroking a partridge with his hands, suddenly saw one in 
the habit of a hunter coming to him. He wondered that a man 
of such repute and fame should demean himself to such small 
and humble amusements, and said: Art thou that John whose 
eminent and widespread fame hath enticed me also with great 
desire to know thee? Why then art thou taken up with such 
mean amusements? The blessed John said to him: What is 
that which thou carriest in thy hands? A bow, said he. And 
why, said he, dost thou not bear it about always stretched? 
He answered him: I must not, lest by constant bending the 
strength of its vigour be wrung and grow soft and perish, and 
wheu there is need that the arrows be shot with much strength 
at some beast, the strength being lost by excess of continual 
tension, a forcible blow cannot be dealt. Just so, said the blessed 
John, let not this little and brief relaxation of my mind offend 
thee, young man, for unless it doth sometimes ease and relax by 
some remission the force of its tension, it will grow slack through 
unbroken rigour and will not be able to obey the power of the 
spirit. 

The only common point of the two stories is that St. John amuses 

870 R 


242 ACTS OF JOHN 


himself with a partridge, and a spectator thinks it unworthy of him. 
The two morals differ wholly. The amount of text lost here is of quite 
uncertain length. It must have told of the doings at Smyrna, and 
also, it appears, at Laodicea (see the title of the next section). One 
of the episodes must have been the conversion of a woman of evil life 
(see below, ‘ the harlot that was chaste ’).] 
Our best manuscript prefixes a title to the next section: 
From Laodicea to Ephesus the second time. 


58 Now when some long time had passed, and none of the 
brethren had been at any time grieved by John, they were then 
grieved because he had said: Brethren, it is now time for me to go 
to Ephesus (for so have I agreed with them that dwell there) lest 
they become slack, now for a long time having no man to confirm 
them. But all of you must have your minds steadfast towards 
God, who never forsaketh us. 

But when they heard this from him, the brethren lamented 
because they were to be parted from him. And John said: Even 
if I be parted from you, yet Christ is alway with you: whom if 
ye love purely ye will have his fellowship without reproach, for 
if he be loved, he preventeth (anticipateth) them that love him. 

59 And having so said, and bidden farewell to them, and left 
much money with the brethren for distribution, he went forth 
unto Ephesus, while all the brethren lamented and groaned. 
And there accompanied him, of Ephesus, both Andronicus and 
Drusiana and Lycomedes and Cleobius and their families. And 
there followed him Aristobula also, who had heard that her 
husband Tertullus had died on the way, and Aristippus with 
Xenophon, and the harlot that was chaste, and many others, 
whom he exhorted at all times to cleave to the Lord, and they 
would no more be parted from him. 

60 Now on the first day we arrived at a deserted inn, and when 
we were at a loss for a bed for John, we saw a droll matter. There 
was one bedstead lying somewhere there without coverings, 
whereon we spread the cloaks which we were wearing, and we 
prayed him to lie down upon it and rest, while the rest of us all 
slept upon the floor. But he when he lay down was troubled by 
the bugs, and as they continued to become yet more troublesome 
to him, when it was now about the middle of the night, in the 
hearing of us all he said to them: I say unto you, O bugs, be- 
have yourselves, one and all, and leave your abode for this night 
and remain quiet in one place, and keep your distance from the 
servants of God. And as we laughed, and went on talking for 
some time, John addressed himself to sleep; and we, talking low, 
gave him no disturbance (or, thanks to him we were not disturbed). 

61 But when the day was now dawning I arose first, and with 
me Verus and Andronicus, and we saw at the door of the house 
which we had taken a great number of bugs standing, and while 
we wondered at the great sight of them, and all the brethren 


ACTS OF JOHN 243 


were roused up because of them, John continued sleeping. And 
when he was awaked we declared to him what we had seen. 
And he sat up on the bed and looked at them and said: Since 
ye have well behaved yourselves in hearkening to my rebuke, 
come unto your place. And when he had said this, and risen 
from the bed, the bugs running from the door hasted to the bed 
and climbed up by the legs thereof and disappeared into the 
joints. And John said again: This creature hearkened unto the 
voice of a man, and abode by itself and was quiet and trespassed 
not; but we which hear the voice and commandments of God 
disobey and are light-minded: and for how long? 

62 After these things we came to Ephesus: and the brethren 
there, who had for a long time known that John was coming, ran 
together to the house of Andronicus (where also he came to lodge), 
handling his feet and laying his hands upon their own faces and 
kissing them (and many rejoiced even to touch his vesture, and 
were healed by touching the clothes of the holy apostle. So the 
Latin, which has this section ; the Greek has: so that they even 
touched his garments). 

63 And whereas there was great love and joy unsurpassed 
among the brethren, a certain one, a messenger of Satan, became 
enamoured of Drusiana, though he saw and knew that she was 
the wife of Andronicus. To whom many said: It is not possible 
for thee to obtain that woman, seeing that for a long time she 
has even separated herself from her husband for godliness’ sake. 
Art thou only ignorant that Andronicus, not being aforetime that 
which now he is, a God-fearing man, shut her up in a tomb, saying: 
Either I must have thee as the wife whom I had before, or thou 
shalt die. And she chose rather to die than to do that foulness. 
If, then, she would not consent, for godliness’ sake, to cohabit 
with her lord and husband, but even persuaded him to be of the 
same mind as herself, will she consent to thee desiring to be her 
seducer? depart from this madness which hath no rest in thee: 
give up this deed which thou canst not bring to accomplishment. 

64 But his familiar friends saying these things to him did 
not convince him, but with shamelessness he courted her with 
messages; and {when he learnt the insults and disgraces which 
she returned, he spent his life in melancholy} (or better, she, when 
she learnt of this disgrace and insult at his hand, spent her life 
in heaviness). And after two days Drusiana took to her bed 
from heaviness, and was in a fever and said: Would that I had 
not now come home to my native place, I that have become an 
offence to a man ignorant of godliness! for if it were one who was 
filled with the word of God, he would not have gone to such 
a pitch of madness. But now (therefore) Lord, since I am become 
the occasion of a blow unto a soul devoid of knowledge, set me 
free from this chain and remove me unto thee quickly. And in 
the presence of John, who knew nothing at all of such a matter, 


244 ACTS OF JOHN 


Drusiana departed out of life not wholly happy, yea, even 
troubled because of the spiritual hurt of the man. 

65 But Andronicus, grieved with a secret grief, mourned in 
his soul, and wept openly, so that John checked him often and 
said to him: Upon a better hope hath Drusiana removed out of 
this unrighteous life. And Andronicus answered him: Yea, I am 
persuaded of it, O John, and I doubt not at all in regard of trust 
in my God: but this very thing do I hold fast, that she departed 
out of life pure. 

66 And when she was carried forth, John took hold on Andro- 
nicus, and now that he knew the cause, he mourned more than 
Andronicus. And he kept silence, considering the provocation 
of the adversary, and for a space sat still. Then, the brethren 
being gathered there to hear what word he would speak of her 
that was departed, he began to say: 

67 When the pilot that voyageth, together with them that sail 
with him, and the ship herself, arriveth in a calm and stormless 
harbour, then let him say that he is safe. And the husbandman 
that hath committed the seed to the earth, and toiled much in 
the care and protection of it, let him then take rest from his 
labours, when he layeth up the seed with manifold increase in 
his barns. Let him that enterpriseth to run in the course, then 
exult when he beareth home the prize. Let him that inscribeth his 
name for the boxing, then boast himself when he receiveth the 
crowns: and so in succession is it with all contests and crafts, 
when they do not fail in the end, tbut show themselves to be like 
that which they promised} (corrupt). 

68 And thus also I think is it with the faith which each one 
of us practiseth, that it is then discerned whether it be indeed 
true, when it continueth like itself even until the end of life. For 
many obstacles fall into the way, and prepare disturbance for 
the minds of men: care, children, parents, glory, poverty, flattery, 
prime of life, beauty, conceit, lust, wealth, anger, uplifting, 
slackness, envy, jealousy, neglect, fear, insolence, love, deceit, 
money, pretence, and other such obstacles, as many as there 
are in this life: as also the pilot sailing a prosperous course is 
opposed by the onset of contrary winds and a great storm and 
mighty waves out of calm, and the husbandman by untimely 
winter and blight and creeping things rising out of the earth, and 
they that strive in the games ‘just do not win’, and they that 
exercise crafts are hindered by the divers difficulties of them. 

69 But before all things it is needful that the believer should 
look before at his ending and understand it in what manner it 
will come upon him, whether it will be vigorous and sober and 
without any obstacle, or disturbed and clinging to the things that 
are here, and bound down by desires. So is it right that a body 
should be praised as comely when it is wholly stripped, and a 
general as great when he hath accomplished every promise of the 


ACTS OF JOHN 245 


war, and a physician as excellent when he hath succeeded in every 
cure, and a soul as full of faith and worthy (or receptive) of God 
when it hath paid its promise in full: not that soul which began 
well and was dissolved into all the things of this life and fell away, 
nor that which is numb, having made an effort to attain to better 
things, and then is borne down to temporal things, nor that which 
hath longed after the things of time more than those of eternity, 
nor that which exchangeth <enduring things for) those that 
endure not, nor that which hath honoured the works of dishonour 
that deserve shame, nor that which taketh pledges of Satan, nor 
that which hath received the serpent into its own house, nor that 
which suffereth reproach for God’s sake and then is [not] ashamed, 
nor that which with the mouth saith yea, but indeed approveth 
not itself: but that which hath prevailed not to be made weak by 
foul pleasure, not to be overcome by light-mindedness, not to be 
caught by the bait of love of money, not to be betrayed by vigour 
of body or wrath. 

70 And as John was discoursing yet further unto the brethren 
that they should despise temporal things in respect of the eternal, 
he that was enamoured of Drusiana, being inflamed with an 
horrible lust and possession of the many-shaped Satan, bribed 
the steward of Andronicus who was a lover of money with a great 
sum: and he opened the tomb and gave him opportunity to 
wreak the forbidden thing upon the dead body. Not having 
succeeded with her when alive, he was still importunate after her 
death to her body, and said: If thou wouldst not have to do with 
me while thou livedst, I will outrage thy corpse now thou art dead. 
With this design, and having managed for himself the wicked 
act by means of the abominable steward, he rushed with him 
to the sepulchre; they opened the door and began to strip the 
grave-clothes from the corpse, saying: What art thou profited, 
poor Drusiana? couldest thou not have done this in life, which 
perchance would not have grieved thee, hadst thou done it 
willingly ? 

71 And as these men were speaking thus, and only the ac- 
customed shift now remained on her body, a strange spectacle 
was seen, such as they deserve to suffer who do such deeds. 
A serpent appeared from some quarter and dealt the steward 
a single bite and slew him: but the young man it did not strike; 
but coiled about his feet, hissing terribly, and when he fell 
mounted on his body and sat upon him. 

72 Now on the next day John came, accompanied by Andro- 
nicus and the brethren, to the sepulchre at dawn, it being now 
the third day from Drusiana’s death, that we might break bread 
there. And first, when they set out, the keys were sought for 
and could not be found; but John said to Andronicus: It is 
quite right that they should be lost, for Drusiana is not in the 
sepulchre; nevertheless, let us go, that thou mayest not be 


246 ACTS OF JOHN 


neglectful, and the doors shall be opened of themselves, even 
as the Lord hath done for us many such things. 

73 And when we were at the place, at the commandment of 
the master, the doors were opened, and we saw by the tomb of 
Drusiana a beautiful youth, smiling : and John, when he saw him, 
cried out and said: Art thou come before us hither too, beautiful 
one? and for what cause? And we heard a voice saying to 
him: For Drusiana’s sake, whom thou art to raise up—for 
I was within a little of finding her <shamed>—and for his sake 
that lieth dead beside her tomb. And when the beautiful one 
had said this unto John he went up into the heavens in the 
sight of us all. And John, turning to the other side of the 
sepulchre, saw a young man—even Callimachus, one of the chief 
of the Ephesians—and a huge serpent sleeping upon him, and 
the steward of Andronicus, Fortunatus by name, lying dead. 
And at the sight of the two he stood perplexed, saying to the 
brethren: What meaneth such a sight? or wherefore hath 
not the Lord declared unto me what was done here, he who 
hath never neglected me? 

74 And Andronicus seeing those corpses, leapt up and went 
to Drusiana’s tomb, and seeing her lying in her shift only, said 
to John: I understand what has happened, thou blessed servant 
of God, John. This Callimachus was enamoured of my sister; 
and because he never won her, though he often assayed it, he 
hath bribed this mine accursed steward with a great sum, per- 
chance designing, as now we may see, to fulfil by his means the 
tragedy of his conspiracy, for indeed Callimachus avowed this 
to many, saying: If she will not consent to me when living, 
she shall be outraged when dead. And it may be, master, that 
the beautiful one knew it and suffered not her body to be in- 
sulted, and therefore have these died who made that attempt. 
And can it be that the voice that said unto thee, ‘Raise up 
Drusiana’, foreshowed this? because she departed out of this 
life in sorrow of mind. But I believe him that said that this 
is one of the men that have gone astray; for thou wast bidden 
to raise him up: for as to the other, I know that he is unworthy 
of salvation. But this one thing I beg of thee: raise up Calli- 
machus first, and he will confess to us what is come about. 

75 And John, looking upon the body, said to the venomous 
beast: Get thee away from him that is to be a servant of Jesus 
Christ ; and stood up and prayed over him thus: O God whose 
name is glorified by us, as of right: O God who subduest every 
injurious force: O God whose will is accomplished, who alway 
hearest us: now also let thy gift be accomplished in this young 
man; and if there be any dispensation to be wrought through 
him, manifest it unto us when he is raised up. And straightway 
the young man rose up, and for a whole hour kept silence. 

76 But when he came to his right senses, John asked of him 


ACTS OF JOHN 247 


about his entry into the sepulchre, what it meant, and learning 
from him that which Andronicus had told him, namely, that 
he was enamoured of Drusiana, John inquired of him again 
if he had fulfilled his foul intent, to insult a body full of holiness. 
And he answered him: How could I accomplish it when this 
fearful beast struck down Fortunatus at a blow in my sight: 
and rightly, since he encouraged my frenzy, when I was already 
cured of that unreasonable and horrible madness: but me it 
stopped with affright, and brought me to that plight in which ye 
saw me before I arose. And another thing yet more wondrous 
I will tell thee, which yet went nigh to slay and was within 
a little of making me a corpse. When my soul was stirred up 
with folly and the uncontrollable malady was troubling me, 
and I had now torn away the grave-clothes in which she was 
clad, and I had then come out of the grave and laid them as 
thou seest, I went again to my unholy work: and I saw a beautiful 
youth covering her with his mantle, and from his eyes sparks 
of light came forth unto her eyes; and he uttered words to 
me, saying: Callimachus, die that thou mayest live. Now 
who he was I knew not, O servant of God; but that now thou 
hast appeared here, I recognize that he was an angel of God, 
that I know well; and this I know of a truth that it is a true 
God that is proclaimed by thee, and of it I am persuaded. But 
I beseech thee, be not slack to deliver me from this calamity 
and this fearful crime, and to present me unto thy God as a 
man deceived with a shameful and foul deceit. Beseeching 
help therefore of thee, I take hold on thy feet. I would become 
one of them that hope in Christ, that the voice may prove true 
which said to me, ‘Die that thou mayest live’: and that voice 
hath also fulfilled its effect, for he is dead, that faithless, dis- 
orderly, godless one, and I have been raised by thee, I who will 
be faithful, God-fearing, knowing the truth, which I entreat 
thee may be shown me by thee. 

77 And John, filled with great gladness and perceiving the 
whole spectacle of the salvation of man, said: What thy power 
is, Lord Jesu Christ, I know not, bewildered as I am at thy 
much compassion and boundless long-suffering. O what a 
greatness that came down into bondage! O unspeakable liberty 
brought into slavery by us! O incomprehensible glory that 
is come unto us! thou that hast kept the dead tabernacle safe 
from insult; that hast redeemed the man that stained himself 
with blood and chastened the soul of him that would defile the 
corruptible body; Father that hast had pity and compassion 
on the man that cared not for thee; We glorify thee, and praise 
and bless and thank thy great goodness and long-suffering, 
O holy Jesu, for thou only art God, and none else: whose 1s 
the might that cannot be conspired against, now and world 
without end. Amen. 


248 ACTS OF JOHN 


78 And when he had said this John took Callimachus and 
saluted (kissed) him, saying: Glory be to our God, my child, 
who hath had mercy on thee, and made me worthy to glorify 
his power, and thee also by a good course to depart from that 
thine abominable madness and drunkenness, and hath called 
thee unto his own rest and unto renewing of life. 

79 But Andronicus, beholding the dead Callimachus raised, 
besought John, with the brethren, to raise up Drusiana also, 
saying: O John, let Drusiana arise and spend happily that 
short space (of life) which she gave up through grief about 
Callimachus, when she thought she had become a stumbling- 
block to him: and when the Lord will, he shall take her again 
to himself. And John without delay went unto her tomb and took 
her hand and said: Upon thee that art the only God do I call, 
the more than great, the unutterable, the incomprehensible: 
unto whom every power of principalities is subjected: unto 
whom all authority boweth: before whom all pride falleth down 
and keepeth silence: whom devils hearing of tremble: whom 
all creation perceiving keepeth its bounds. Let thy name be 
glorified by us, and raise up Drusiana, that Callimachus may 
yet more be confirmed unto thee who dispensest that which unto 
men is without a way and impossible, but to thee only possible, 
even salvation and resurrection: and that Drusiana may now 
come forth in peace, having about her not any the least hindrance 
—now that the young man is turned unto thee—in her course 
toward thee. 

80 And after these words John said unto Drusiana: Drusiana, 
arise. And she arose and came out of the tomb; and when she 
saw herself in her shift only, she was perplexed at the thing, 
and learned the whole accurately from Andronicus, the while 
John lay upon his face, and Callimachus with voice and tears 
glorified God, and she also rejoiced, glorifying him in like manner. 

81 And when she had clothed herself, she turned and saw 
Fortunatus lying, and said unto John: Father, let this man 
also rise, even if he did assay to become my betrayer. But 
Callimachus, when he heard her say that, said: Do not, I beseech 
thee, Drusiana, for the voice which I heard took no thought 
of him, but declared concerning thee only, and I saw and believed: 
for if he had been good, perchance God would have had mercy 
on him also and would have raised him by means of the blessed 
John: the knewy+ therefore that the man was come to a bad 
end [Lat. he judged him worthy to die whom he did not declare 
worthy to rise again]. And John said to him: We have not 
learned, my child, to render evil for evil: for God, though we 
have done much ill and no good toward him, hath not given 
retribution unto us, but repentance, and though we were ignorant 
of his name he did not neglect us but had mercy on us, and 
when we blasphemed him, he did not punish but pitied us, 


ACTS OF JOHN 249 


and when we disbelieved him he bore us no grudge, and when 
we persecuted his brethren he did not recompense us evil but 
put into our minds repentance and abstinence from evil, and 
exhorted us to come unto him, as he hath thee also, my son 
Callimachus, and not remembering thy former evil hath made 
thee his servant, waiting upon his mercy. Wherefore if thou 
allowest not me to raise up Fortunatus, it is for Drusiana so to do. 

82 And she, delaying not, went with rejoicing of spirit and 
soul unto the body of Fortunatus and said: Jesu Christ, God 
of the ages, God of truth, that hast granted me to see wonders 
and signs, and given to me to become partaker of thy name; 
that didst breathe thyself into me with thy many-shaped counte- 
nance, and hadst mercy on me in many ways; that didst protect 
me by thy great goodness when I was oppressed by Andronicus 
that was of old my husband; that didst give me thy servant 
Andronicus to be my brother; that hast kept me thine handmaid 
pure unto this day; that didst raise me up by thy servant John, 
and when I was raised didst show me him that was made to 
stumble free from stumbling; that hast given me perfect rest in 
thee, and lightened me of the secret madness; whom I have 
loved and affectioned: I pray thee, O Christ, refuse not thy 
Drusiana that asketh thee to raise up Fortunatus, even though 
he assayed to become my betrayer. 

83 And taking the hand of the dead man she said: Rise up, 
Fortunatus, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. And Fortu- 
natus arose, and when he saw John in the sepulchre, and Andro- 
nicus, and Drusiana raised from the dead, and Callimachus 
a believer, and the rest of the brethren glorifying God, he said: 
O, to what have the powers of these clever men attained! I did 
not want to be raised, but would rather die, so as not to see 
them. And with these words he fled and went out of the sepulchre. 

84 And John, when he saw the unchanged mind (soul) of 
Fortunatus, said: O nature that is not changed for the better! 
O fountain of the soul that abideth in foulness! O essence of 
corruption full of darkness! O death exulting in them that are 
thine! O fruitless tree full of fire! O tree that bearest coals 
for fruit! O matter that dwellest with the madness of matter 
(al. O wood of trees full of unwholesome shoots) and neighbour 
of unbelief! Thou hast proved who thou art, and thou art always 
convicted, with thy children. And thou knowest not how to 
praise the better things: for thou hast them not. Therefore, 
such as is thy way (? fruit), such also is thy root and thy nature. 
Be thou destroyed from among them that trust in the Lord: 
from their thoughts, from their mind, from their souls, from 
their bodies, from their acts, their life, their conversation, from 
their {business}, their occupations, their counsel, from the resur- 
rection unto (or rest in) God, from their sweet savour wherein 
thou wilt <not> share, from their faith. their prayers, from the 


250 ACTS OF JOHN 


holy bath, from the eucharist, from the food of the flesh, from 
drink, from clothing, from love, from care, from abstinence, 
from righteousness: from all these, thou most unholy Satan, 
enemy of God, shall Jesus Christ our God and <the judge> of 
all that are like thee and have thy character, make thee to perish. 

85 And having thus said, John prayed, and took bread and 
bare it into the sepulchre to break it; and said: We glorify 
thy name, which converteth us from error and ruthless deceit: 
we glorify thee who hast shown before our eyes that which we 
have seen: we bear witness to thy loving-kindness which ap- 
peareth in divers ways: we praise thy merciful name, O Lord (we 
thank thee), who hast convicted them that are convicted of 
thee: we give thanks to thee, O Lord Jesu Christ, that we are 
persuaded of thy <grace> which is unchanging: we give thanks 
to thee who hadst need of owr nature that should be saved: we 
give thanks to thee that hast given us this sure <faith)>, for thou 
art <God> alone, both now and ever. We thy servants give thee 
thanks, O holy one, who are assembled with <good)> intent and 
are gathered out of the world (or risen from death). 

86 And having so prayed and given glory to God, he went 
out of the sepulchre after imparting unto all the brethren of 
the eucharist of the Lord. And when he was come unto An- 
dronicus’ house he said to the brethren: Brethren, a spirit 
within me hath divined that Fortunatus is about to die of 
blackness (poisoning of the blood) from the bite of the serpent; 
but let some one go quickly and learn if it is so indeed. And 
one of the young men ran and found him dead and the blackness 
spreading over him, and it had reached his heart: and came 
and told John that he had been dead three hours. And John 
said: Thou hast thy child, O devil. 


‘ John therefore was with the brethren rejoicing in the Lord.’ This 
sentence is in the best manuscript. In Bonnet’s edition it introduces 
the last section of the Acts, which follows immediately in the manu- 
script. It may belong to either episode. The Latin has: And that 
day he spent joyfully with the brethren. 

There cannot be much of a gap between this and the next section, 
which is perhaps the most interesting in the Acts. 

The greater part of this episode is preserved only in one very 
corrupt fourteenth-century manuscript at Vienna. ‘Il'wo important 
passages (93-5 (part) and 97-8 (part)) were read at the Second 
Nicene Council and are preserved in the Acts thereof: a few lines of 
the Hymn are also cited in Latin by Augustine (Ep. 237 (253) to 
Ceretius): he found it current separately among the Priscillianists. 
The whole discourse is the best popular exposition we have. of the 
Docetic view of our Lord’s person. 


87 Those that were present inquired the cause, and were 
especially perplexed, because Drusiana had said: The Lord 


ACTS OF JOHN 251 


appeared unto me in the tomb in the likeness of John, and in 
that of a youth. Forasmuch, therefore, as they were perplexed 
and were, in a manner, not yet stablished in the faith, so as to 
endure it steadfastly, John said (or John bearing it patiently, said): 

88 Men and brethren, ye have suffered nothing strange or 
incredible as concerning your perception of the <Lord), inasmuch 
as we also, whom he chose for himself to be apostles, were tried 
in many ways: I, indeed, am neither able to set forth unto you 
nor to write the things which I both saw and heard: and now 
is it needful that I should fit them for your hearing; and accord- 
ing as each of you is able to contain it I will impart unto you 
those things whereof ye are able to become hearers, that ye 
may see the glory that is about him, which was and is, both 
now and for ever. 

For when he had chosen Peter and Andrew, which were 
brethren, he cometh unto me and James my brother, saying: 
I have need of you, come unto me. And my brother hearing 
that, said: John, what would this child have that is upon the 
sea-shore and called us? And I said: What child? And he 
said to me again: That which beckoneth to us. And I answered: 
Because of our long watch we have kept at sea, thou seest not 
aright, my brother James; but seest thou not the man that 
standeth there, comely and fair and of a cheerful countenance ? 
But he said to me: Him I see not, brother; but let us go forth 
and we shall see what he would have. 

89 And so when we had brought the ship to land, we saw 
him also helping along with us to settle the ship: and when 
we departed from that place, being minded to follow him, again 
he was seen of me as having <a head) rather bald, but the beard 
thick and flowing, but of James as a youth whose beard was 
newly come. We were therefore perplexed, both of us, as to 
what that which we had seen should mean. And after that, 
as we followed him, both of us were by little and little <yet more> 
perplexed as we considered the matter. Yet unto me there 
then appeared this yet more wonderful thing: for I would try 
to see him privily, and I never at any time saw his eyes closing 
(winking), but only open. And oft-times he would appear to 
me as a small man and uncomely, and {then againft as one 
reaching unto heaven. Also there was in him another marvel: 
when I sat at meat he would take me upon his own breast; and 
sometimes his breast was felt of me to be smooth and tender, 
and sometimes hard like unto stones, so that I was perplexed 
in myself and said: Wherefore is this so unto me? And as 
I considered this, he... 

90 And at another time he taketh with him me and James 
and Peter unto the mountain where he was wont to pray, and 
we saw in him a light such as it is not possible for a man that 
useth corruptible (mortal) speech to describe what it was like. 


252 ACTS OF JOHN 


Again in like manner he bringeth us three up into the mountain, 
saying: Come ye with me. And we went again: and we saw 
him at a distance praying. I, therefore, because he loved me, 
drew nigh unto him softly, as though he could not see me, and 
stood looking upon his hinder parts: and I saw that he was not 
in any wise clad with garments, but was seen of us naked, and 
not in any wise as a man, and that his feet were whiter than 
any snow, so that the earth there was lighted up by his feet, 
and that his head touched the heaven: so that I was afraid 
and cried out, and he, turning about, appeared as a man of small 
stature, and caught hold on my beard and pulled it and said 
to me: John, be not faithless but believing, and not curious. 
And I said unto him: But what have I done, Lord? And I say 
unto you, brethren, I suffered so great pain in that place where 
he took hold on my beard for thirty days, that I said to him: 
Lord, if thy twitch when thou wast in sport hath given me 
so great pain, what were it if thou hadst given me a buffet? 
And he said unto me: Let it be thine henceforth not to tempt 
him that cannot be tempted. 

91 But Peter and James were wroth because I spake with 
the Lord, and beckoned unto me that I should come unto them 
and leave the Lord alone. And I went, and they both said 
unto me: He (the old man) that was speaking with the Lord 
upon the top of the mount, who was he? for we heard both of 
them speaking. And I, having in mind his great grace, and his 
unity which hath many faces, and his wisdom which without ceasing 
looketh upon us, said: That shall ye learn if ye inquire of him. 

92 Again, once when all we his disciples were at Gennesaret 
sleeping in one house, I alone having wrapped myself in my 
mantle, watched (or watched from beneath my mantle) what 
he should do: and first I heard him say: John, go thou to sleep. 
And I thereon feigning to sleep saw another like unto him 
[sleeping], whom also I heard say unto my Lord: Jesus, they 
whom thou hast chosen believe not yet on thee (or do they not 
yet, &c.?). And my Lord said unto him: Thou sayest well: 
for they are men. 

93 Another glory also will I tell you, brethren: Sometimes 
when I would lay hold on him, I met with a material and solid 
body, and at other times, again, when I felt him, the substance 
was immaterial and as if it existed not at all. And if at any 
time he were bidden by some one of the Pharisees and went 
to the bidding, we went with him, and there was set before each 
one of us a loaf by them that had bidden us, and with us he 
also received one; and his own he would bless and part it among 
us: and of that little every one was filled, and our own loaves 
were saved whole, so that they which bade him were amazed. 
And oftentimes when I walked with him, I desired to see the 
print of his foot, whether it appeared on the earth; for I saw 


ACTS OF JOHN 253 


him as it were lifting himself up from the earth: and I never 
saw it. And these things I speak unto you, brethren, for the 
encouragement of your faith toward him; for we must at the 
present keep silence concerning his mighty and wonderful works, 
inasmuch as they are unspeakable and, it may be, cannot at all 
be either uttered or heard. 

94 Now before he was taken by the lawless Jews, twho also 
were governed by (had their law from) the lawless serpent,} he 
gathered all of us together and said: Before I am delivered up 
unto them let us sing an hymn to the Father, and so go forth 
to that which lieth before us. He bade us therefore make as 
it were a ring, holding one another’s hands, and himself standing 
in the midst he said: Answer Amen unto me. He began, then, 
to sing an hymn and to say: 

Glory be to thee, Father. 

And we, going about in a ring, answered him: Amen. 
Glory be to thee, Word: Glory be to thee, Grace. Amen. 
Glory be to thee, Spirit: Glory be to thee, Holy One: 
Glory be to thy glory. Amen. 

We praise thee, O Father; we give thanks to thee, O Light, 
wherein darkness dwelleth not. Amen. 

95 Now whereas (or wherefore) we give thanks, I say: 

I would be saved, and I would save. Amen. 

I would be loosed, and I would loose. Amen. 

I would be wounded, and I would wound. Amen. 

I would be born, and I would bear. Amen. 

I would eat, and I would be eaten. Amen. 

I would hear, and I would be heard. Amen. 

I would be thought, being wholly thought. Amen. 

I would be washed, and I would wash. Amen. 

Grace danceth. I would pipe; dance ye all. Amen. 

I would mourn: lament ye all.- Amen. 

The number Eight (lit. one ogdoad) singeth praise with 
us. Amen. 

The number Twelve danceth on high. Amen. 

+The Whole on high hath part in our dancing. Amen. 

Whoso danceth not, knoweth not what cometh to pass. 
Amen. 

I would flee, and I would stay. Amen. 

I would adorn, and I would be adorned. Amen. 

I would be united, and I would unite. Amen. 

A house I have not, and I have houses. Amen. 

A place I have not, and I have places. Amen. 

A temple I have not, and I have temples. Amen. 

A lamp am I to thee that beholdest me. Amen. 

A mirror am I to thee that perceivest me. Amen. 

A door am I to thee that knockest at me. Amen. 

A way am I to thee a wayfarer. <Amen). 


254 ACTS OF JOHN 


96 Now answer thou (or as thou respondest) unto my dancing. 

Behold thyself in me who speak, and seeing what I do, keep 
silence about my mysteries. 

Thou that dancest, perceive what I do, for thine is this passion 
of the manhood, which I am about to suffer. For thou couldest 
not at all have understood what thou sufferest if I had not been 
sent unto thee, as the word of the Father. Thou that sawest 
what I suffer sawest me as suffering, and seeing it thou didst 
not abide but wert wholly moved, tmoved to make wise. 
Thou hast me as a bed, rest upon me. Who I am, thou shalt 
know when I depart. What now I am seen to be, that I am not. 
Thou shalt see when thou comest. If thou hadst known how 
to suffer, thou wouldest have been able not to suffer. Learn 
thou to suffer, and thou shalt be able not to suffer. What thou 
knowest not, I myself will teach thee. Thy God am I, not the 
God of the traitor. I would keep tune with holy souls. In 
me know thou the word of wisdom. Again with me say thou: 
Glory be to thee, Father; glory to thee, Word; glory to thee, 
Holy Ghost. +And if thou wouldst know concerning me, what 
I was, know that} with a word did I deceive all things and I was 
no whit deceived. I have leaped: but do thou understand the 
whole, and having understood it, say: Glory be to thee, Father. 
Amen. 

97 Thus, my beloved, having danced with us the Lord went 
forth. And we as men gone astray or dazed with sleep fled 
this way and that. I, then, when I saw him suffer, did not 
even abide by his suffering, but fled unto the Mount of Olives, 
weeping at that which had befallen. And when he was crucified 
on the Friday, at the sixth hour of the day, darkness came upon 
all the earth. And my Lord standing in the midst of the cave 
and enlightening it, said: John, unto the multitude below in 
Jerusalem I am being crucified and pierced with lances and 
reeds, and gall and vinegar is given me to drink. But unto 
thee I speak, and what I speak hear thou. I put it into thy 
mind to come up into this mountain, that thou mightest hear 
those things which it behoveth a disciple to learn from his teacher 
and a man from his God. 

98 And having thus spoken, he showed me a cross of light 
fixed (set up), and about the cross a great multitude, tnot having 
one form: and in it (the cross) was one form and one likeness} 
[so the MS.; I would read: and therein was one form and one 
likeness: and in the cross another multitude, not having one 
form]. And the Lord himself I beheld above the cross, not 
having any shape, but only a voice: and a voice not such as 
was familiar to us, but one sweet and kind and truly of God, 
saying unto me: John, it is needful that one should hear these 
things from me, for I have need of one that will hear. This 
cross of light is sometimes called the (or a) word by me for your 


ACTS OF JOHN 255 


sakes, sometimes mind, sometimes Jesus, sometimes Christ, some- 
times door, sometimes a way, sometimes bread, sometimes 
seed, sometimes resurrection, sometimes Son, sometimes Father, 
sometimes Spirit, sometimes life, sometimes truth, sometimes 
faith, sometimes grace. And by these names it is called as 
toward men: but that which it is in truth, as conceived of in 
itself and as spoken of unto you (MS. us), it is the marking-off 
of all things, and the firm uplifting of things fixed out of things 
unstable, and the harmony of wisdom, and indeed wisdom in 
harmony [this last clause in the MS. is joined to the next: ‘and 
being wisdom in harmony’]. There are <places> of the right 
hand and the left, powers also, authorities, lordships and demons, 
workings, threatenings, wraths, devils, Satan, and the lower 
root whence the nature of the things that come into being pro- 
ceeded. 

99 This cross, then, is that which fixed all things apart (al. 
joined all things unto itself) by the (or a) word, and separate off 
the things that are from those that are below (lit. the things 
from birth and below it), and then also, being one, streamed 
forth into all things (or, made all fiow forth. J suggested: com- 
pacted all into <one>). But this is not the cross of wood which 
thou wilt see when thou goest down hence: neither am I he 
that is on the cross, whom now thou seest not, but only hearest 
his (or a) voice. I was reckoned to be that which I am not, not 
being what I was unto many others: but they will call me 
(say of me) something else which is vile and not worthy of me. 
As, then, the place of rest is neither seen nor spoken of, much 
more shall I, the Lord thereof, be neither seen <nor spoken of). 

100 Now the multitude of one aspect (al. <not> of one aspect) 
that is about the cross is the lower nature: and they whom 
thou seest in the cross, if they have not one form, it is because 
not yet hath every member of him that came down been com- 
prehended. But when the human nature (or the upper nature) 
is taken up, and the race which draweth near unto me and 
obeyeth my voice, he that now heareth me shall be united 
therewith, and shall no more be that which now he is, but above 
them, as I also now am. For so long as thou callest not thyself 
mine, I am not that which I am (or was): but if thou hear me, 
thou, hearing, shalt be as Iam, and I shall be that which I was, 
when I <have> thee as I am with myself. For from me thou 
art that (which I am). Care not therefore for the many, and 
them that are outside the mystery despise; for know thou 
that I am wholly with the Father, and the Father with me. 

101 Nothing, therefore, of the things which they will say of 
me have I suffered: nay, that suffering also which I showed 
unto thee and the rest in the dance, I will that it be called a 
mystery. For what thou art, thou seest, for I showed it thee; 
but what I am I alone know, and no man else. Suffer me then 


256 ACTS OF JOHN 


to keep that which is mine, and that which is thine behold thou 
through me, and behold me in truth, that I am, not what I said, 
but what thou art able to know, because thou art akin thereto. 
Thou hearest that I suffered, yet did I not suffer; that I suffered 
not, yet did I suffer; that I was pierced, yet I was not smitten; 
hanged, and I was not hanged; that blood flowed from me, 
and it flowed not; and, in a word, what they say of me, that 
befell me not, but what they say not, that did I suffer. Now 
what those things are I signify unto thee, for I know that 
thou wilt understand. Perceive thou therefore in me the 
praising (al. slaying al. rest) of the (or a) Word (Logos), the piercing 
of the Word, the blood of the Word, the wound of the Word, 
the hanging up of the Word, the suffering of the Word, the nailing 
(fixing) of the Word, the death of the Word. And so speak I, 
separating off the manhood. Perceive thou therefore in the 
first place of the Word; then shalt thou perceive the Lord, and 
in the third place the man, and what he hath suffered. 

102 When he had spoken unto me these things, and others 
which I know not how to say as he would have me, he was taken 
up, no one of the multitudes having beheld him. And when 
I went down I laughed them all to scorn, inasmuch as he had 
told me the things which they have said concerning him; _hold- 
ing fast this one thing in myself, that the Lord contrived all 
things symbolically and by a dispensation toward men, for their 
conversion and salvation. 

103 Having therefore beheld, brethren, the grace of the Lord 
and his kindly affection toward us, let us worship him as those 
unto whom he hath shown mercy, not with our fingers, nor 
our mouth, nor our tongue, nor with any part whatsoever 
of our body, but with the disposition of our soul—even him who 
became a man apart from this body: and let us watch because 
(or we shall find that) now also he keepeth ward over prisons 
for our sake, and over tombs, in bonds and dungeons, in re- 
proaches and insults, by sea and on dry land, in scourgings, 
condemnations, conspiracies, frauds, punishments, and in a word, 
he is with all of us, and himself suffereth with us when we suffer, 
brethren. When he is called upon by each one of us, he endureth 
not to shut his ears to us, but as being everywhere he hearkeneth 
to all of us; and now both to me and to Drusiana,—forasmuch as 
he is the God of them that are shut up—bringing us help by 
his own compassion. 

104 Be ye also persuaded, therefore, beloved, that it is not a 
man whom I preach unto you to worship, but God unchangeable, 
God invincible, God higher than all authority and all power, 
and elder and mightier than all angels and creatures that are 
named, and all aeons. If then ye abide in him, and are builded 
up in him, ye shall possess your soul indestructible. 

105 And when he had delivered these things unto the brethren, 


ACTS OF JOHN 257 


John departed, with Andronicus, to walk. And Drusiana also 
followed afar off with all the brethren, that they might behold 
the acts that were done by him, and hear his speech at all times 
in the Lord. 

The remaining episode which is extant in the Greek is the conclusion 
of the book, the Death or Assumption of John. Before it must be 
placed the stories which we have only in the Latin (of ‘ Abdias’ and 
another text by ‘ Mellitus’, i.e. Melito), and the two or three isolated 
fragments. 

(Lat. XIV.) Now on the next (or another) day Craton, a 
philosopher, had proclaimed in the market-place that he would 
give an example of the contempt of riches: and the spectacle 
was after this manner. He had persuaded two young men, the 
richest of the city, who were brothers, to spend their whole 
inheritance and buy each of them a jewel, and these they brake 
in pieces publicly in the sight of the people. And while they were 
doing this, it happened by chance that the apostle passed by. 
And calling Craton the philosopher to him, he said: That is 
a foolish despising of the world which is praised by the mouths 
of men, but long ago condemned by the judgement of God. For 
as that is a vain medicine whereby the disease is not extirpated, 
so is it a vain teaching by which the faults of souls and of conduct 
are not cured. But indeed my master taught a youth who desired 
to attain to eternal life, in these words; saying that if he would 
be perfect, he should sell all his goods and give to the poor, and 
so doing he would gain treasure in heaven and find the life that 
has no ending. And Craton said to him: Here the fruit of 
covetousness is set forth in the midst of men, and hath been 
broken to pieces. But if God is indeed thy master and willeth 
this to be, that the sum of the price of these jewels should be given 
to the poor, cause thou the gems to be restored whole, that what 
I have done for the praise of men, thou mayest do for the glory 
of him whom thou callest thy master. Then the blessed John 
gathered together the fragments of the gems, and holding them 
in his hands, lifted up his eyes to heaven and said: Lord Jesu 
Christ, unto whom nothing is impossible: who when the world 
was broken by the tree of concupiscence, didst restore it again 
in thy faithfulness by the tree of the cross: who didst give to one 
born blind the eyes which nature had denied him, who didst 
recall Lazarus, dead and buried, after the fourth day unto the 
light; and has subjected all diseases and all sicknesses unto the 
word of thy power: so also now do with these precious stones 
which these, not knowing the fruits of almsgiving, have broken 
in pieces for the praise of men: recover thou them, Lord, now by 
the hands of thine angels, that by their value the work of mercy 
may be fulfilled, and make these men believe in thee the un- 
begotten Father through thine only-begotten Son Jesus Christ 
our Lord, with the Holy Ghost the illuminator and sanctifier of 

870 s 


258 ACTS OF JOHN 


the whole Church, world without end. And when the faithful 
who were with the apostle had answered and said Amen, the 
fragments of the gems were forthwith so joined in one that no 
mark at all that they had been broken remained in them. And 
Craton the philosopher, with his disciples, seeing this, fell at the 
feet of the apostle and believed thenceforth (or immediately) 
and was baptized, with them all, and began himself publicly to 
preach the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. 

XV. Those two brothers, therefore, of whom we spake, sold 
the gems which they had bought by the sale of their inheritance, 
and gave the price to the poor; and thereafter a very great 
multitude of believers began to be joined to the apostle. 

And when all this was done, it happened that after the same 
example, two honourable men of the city of the Ephesians* sold 
all their goods and distributed them to the needy, and followed 
the apostle as he went through the cities preaching the word of 
God. But it came to pass, when they entered the city of Per- 
gamum, that they saw their servants walking abroad arrayed in 
silken raiment and shining with the glory of this world: whence 
it happened that they were pierced with the arrow of the devil 
and became sad, seeing themselves poor and clad with a single 
cloak while their own servants were powerful and prosperous. 
But the apostle of Christ, perceiving these wiles of the devil, 
said: I see that ye have changed your minds and your coun- 
tenances on this account, that, obeying the teaching of my Lord 
Jesus Christ, ye have given all ye had to the poor. Now, if ye 
desire to recover that which ye formerly possessed of gold, silver, 
and precious stones, bring me some straight rods, each of you 
a bundle. And when they had done so, he called upon the name 
of the Lord Jesus Christ, and they were turned into gold. And 
the apostle said to them: Bring me small stones from the sea- 
shore. And when they had done this also, he called upon the 
majesty of the Lord, and all the pebbles were turned into gems. 
Then the blessed John turned to those men and said to them: 
Go about to the goldsmiths and jewellers for seven days, and 
when ye have proved that these are true gold and true jewels, 
tell me. And they went, both of them, and after seven days 
returned to the apostle, saying: Lord, we have gone about the 
shops of all the goldsmiths, and they have all said that they 
never saw such pure gold. Likewise the jewellers have said the 
same, that they never saw such excellent and precious gems. 

XVI. Then the holy John said unto them: Go, and redeem 
to you the lands which ye have sold, for ye have lost the estates 
of heaven. Buy yourselves silken raiment, that for a time ye 
may shine like the rose which showeth its fragrance and redness 
and suddenly fadeth away. For ye sighed at beholding your 
servants and groaned that ye were become poor. Flourish, there- 

1 Rather, as Pseudo-Mellitus has it, the same two brothers. 


ACTS OF JOHN 259 


fore, that ye may fade: be rich for the time, that ye may be 
beggars for ever. Is not the Lord’s hand able to make riches 
overflowing and unsurpassably glorious? but he hath appointed 
a conflict for souls, that they may believe that they shall have 
eternal riches, who for his name’s sake have refused temporal 
wealth. Indeed, our master told us concerning a certain rich man 
who feasted every day and shone with gold and purple, at whose 
door lay a beggar, Lazarus, who desired to receive even the 
crumbs that fell from his table, and no man gave unto him. And 
it came to pass that on one day they died, both of them, and 
that beggar was taken into the rest which is in Abraham’s bosom, 
but the rich man was cast into flaming fire: out of which he 
lifted up his eyes and saw Lazarus, and prayed him to dip his 
finger in water and cool his mouth, for he was tormented in the 
flames. And Abraham answered him and said: Remember, son, 
that thou receivedst good things in thy life, but this Lazarus 
likewise evil things. Wherefore rightly is he now comforted, 
while thou art tormented, and besides all this, a great gulf is 
fixed between you and us, so that neither can they come thence 
hither, nor hither thence. But he answered: I have five brethren: 
I pray that some one may go to warn them, that they come not 
into this flame. And Abraham said to him: They have Moses 
and the prophets, let them hear them. To that he answered: 
Lord, unless one rise up again, they will not believe. Abraham 
said to him: If they believe not Moses and the prophets, neither 
will they believe, if one rise again. And these words our Lord 
and Master confirmed by examples of mighty works: for when 
they said to him: Who hath come hither from thence, that we 
may believe him? he answered: Bring hither the dead whom 
ye have. And when they had brought unto him a young man 
which was dead (Ps.-Mellitus: three dead corpses), he was waked 
up by him as one that sleepeth, and confirmed all his words. 
But wherefore should I speak of my Lord, when at this present 
there are those whom in his name and in your presence and sight 
I have raised from the dead: in whose name ye have seen palsied 
men healed, lepers cleansed, blind men enlightened, and many 
delivered from evil spirits? But the riches of these mighty 
works they cannot have who have desired to have earthly wealth. 
Finally, when ye yourselves went unto the sick and called upon 
the name of Jesus Christ, they were healed: ye did drive out devils 
and restore light to the blind. Behold, this grace is taken from 
you, and ye are become wretched, who were mighty and great. 
And whereas there was such fear of you upon the devils that at 
your bidding they left the men whom they possessed, now ye 
will be in fear of the devils. For he that loveth money is the 
servant of Mammon: and Mammon is the name of a devil who 
is set over carnal gains, and is the master of them that love the 
world. But even the lovers of the world do not possess riches, 


260 ACTS OF JOHN 


but are possessed of them. For it is out of reason that for one 
belly there should be laid up so much food as would suffice 
a thousand, and for one body so many garments as would furnish 
clothing forathousand men. In vain, therefore, is that stored up 
which cometh not into use, and for whom it is kept, no man 
knoweth, as the Holy Ghost saith by the prophet: In vain is 
every man troubled who heapeth up riches and knoweth not for 
whom he gathereth them. Naked did our birth from women 
bring us into this light, destitute of food and drink: naked will 
the earth receive us which brought us forth. We possess in 
common the riches of the heaven; the brightness of the sun is 
equal for the rich and the poor, and likewise the light of the moon 
and the stars, the softness of the air and the drops of rain, and 
the gate of the church and the fount of sanctification, and the 
forgiveness of sins, and the sharing in the altar, and the eating 
of the body and drinking of the blood of Christ, and the anointing 
of the chrism, and the grace of the giver, and the visitation of the 
Lord, and the pardon of sin: in all these the dispensing of the 
Creator is equal, without respect of persons. Neither doth the 
rich man use these gifts after one manner and the poor after 
another. 

But wretched and unhappy is the man who would have some- 
thing more than sufficeth him: for of this come heats of fevers, 
rigours of cold, divers pains in all the members of the body, and 
he can neither be fed with food nor sated with drink; that covet- 
ousness may learn that money will not profit it, which being laid 
up bringeth to the keepers thereof anxiety by day and night, 
and suffereth them not even for an hour to be quiet and secure. 
For while they guard their houses against thieves, till their 
estate, ply the plough, pay taxes, build storehouses, strive for 
gain, try to baffle the attacks of the strong, and to strip the weak, 
exercise their wrath on whom they can, and hardly bear it from 
others, shrink not from playing at tables and from public shows, 
fear not to defile or to be defiled, suddenly do they depart out 
of this world, naked, bearing only their own sins with them, for 
which they shall suffer eternal punishment. 

XVII. While the apostle was thus speaking, behold there was 
brought to him by his mother, who was a widow, a young man 
who thirty days before had first married a wife. And the people 
which were waiting upon the burial came with the widowed mother 
and cast themselves at the apostle’s feet all together with groans, 
weeping, and mourning, and besought him that in the name of 
his God, as he had done with Drusiana, so he would raise up this 
young man also. And there was so great weeping of them all that 
the apostle himself could hardly refrain from erying and tears. 
He cast himself down, therefore, in prayer, and wept a long time: 
and rising from prayer spread out his hands to heaven, and for 
a long space prayed within himself. And when he had so done 


ACTS OF JOHN 261 


thrice, he commanded the body which was swathed to be loosed, 
and said: Thou youth Stacteus, who for love of thy flesh hast 
quickly lost thy soul: thou youth which knewest not thy creator, 
nor perceivedst the Saviour of men, and wast ignorant of thy 
true friend, and therefore didst fall into the snare of the worst 
enemy: behold, I have poured out tears and prayers unto my 
Lord for thine ignorance, that thou mayest rise from the dead, 
the bands of death being loosed, and declare unto these two, to 
Atticus and Eugenius, how great glory they have lost, and how 
great punishment they have incurred. Then Stacteus arose and 
worshipped the apostle, and began to reproach his disciples, 
saying: I beheld your angels weeping, and the angels of Satan 
rejoicing at your overthrow. For now in a little time ye have 
lost the kingdom that was prepared for you, and the dwelling- 
places builded of shining stones, full of joy, of feasting and 
delights, full of everlasting life and eternal light : and have gotten 
yourselves places of darkness, full of dragons, of roaring flames, 
of torments, and punishments unsurpassable, of pains and 
anguish, fear and horrible trembling. Ye have lost the places 
full of unfading flowers, shining, full of the sounds of instruments 
of music (organs), and have gotten on the other hand places 
wherein roaring and howling and mourning ceaseth not day nor 
night. Nothing else remaineth for you save to ask the apostle 
of the Lord that like as he hath raised me to life, he would raise 
you also from death unto salvation and bring back your souls 
which now are blotted out of the book of life. 

XVIII. Then both he that had been raised and all the people, 
together with Atticus and Eugenius, cast themselves at the 
apostle’s feet and besought him to intercede for them with the 
Lord. Unto whom the holy apostle gave this answer: that for 
thirty days they should offer penitence to God, and in that space 
pray especially that the rods of gold might return to their nature 
and likewise the stones return to the meanness wherein they 
were made. And it came to pass that after thirty days were 
accomplished, and neither the rods were turned into wood nor 
the gems into pebbles, Atticus and Eugenius came and said to the 
apostle: Thou hast always taught mercy, and preached forgive- 
ness, and bidden that one man should spare another. And if 
God willeth that a man should forgive a man, how much more 
shall he, as he is God, both forgive and spare men. We are con- 
founded for our sin: and whereas we have cried with our eyes 
which lusted after the world, we do now repent with eyes that 
weep. We pray thee, Lord, we pray thee, apostle of God, show 
in deed that mercy which in word thou hast always promised. 
Then the holy John said unto them as they wept and repented, 
and all interceded for them likewise: Our Lord God used these 
words when he spake concerning sinners: I will not the death of 
a sinner. but I will rather that he be converted and live. For 


262 ACTS OF JOHN 


when the Lord Jesus Christ taught us concerning the penitent, 
he said: Verily I say unto you, there is great joy in heaven over 
one sinner that repenteth and turneth himself from his sins: 
and there is more joy over him than over ninety and nine which 
have not sinned. Wherefore I would have you know that the 
Lord accepteth the repentance of these men. And he turned 
unto Atticus and Eugenius and said: Go, carry back the rods 
unto the wood whence ye took them, for now are they returned 
to their own nature, and the stones unto the sea-shore, for they 
are become common stones as they were before. And when this 
was accomplished, they received again the grace which they had 
lost, so that again they cast out devils as before time and healed 
the sick and enlightened the blind, and daily the Lord did many 
mighty works by their means. 

XIX tells shortly the destruction of the temple of Ephesus and the 
conversion of 12,000 people. 

Then follows the episode of the poison-cup in a form which probably 
represents the story in the Leucian Acts. (We have seen that the 
late Greek texts place it at the beginning, in the presence of Domitian.) 

XX. Now when Aristodemus, who was chief priest of all those 
idols, saw this, filled with a wicked spirit, he stirred up sedition 
among the people, so that one people prepared themselves to fight 
against the other. And John turned to him and said: Tell me, 
Aristodemus, what can I do to take away the anger from thy 
soul? And Aristodemus said: If thou wilt have me believe in thy 
God, I will give thee poison to drink, and if thou drink it, and die 
not, it will appear that thy God is true. The apostle answered: 
If thou give me poison to drink, when I call on the name of my 
Lord, it will not be able to harm me. Aristodemus said again: 
I will that thou first see others drink it and die straightway, 
that so thy heart may recoil from that cup. And the blessed John 
said: I have told thee already that I am prepared to drink it, 
that thou mayest believe on the Lord Jesus Christ when thou 
seest me whole after the cup of poison. Aristodemus therefore 
went to the proconsul and asked of him two men who were to 
undergo the sentence of death. And when he had set them in 
the midst of the market-place before all the people, in the sight 
of the apostle he made them drink the poison: and as soon as 
they had drunk it, they gave up the ghost. Then Aristodemus 
turned to John and said: Hearken to me and depart from thy 
teaching wherewith thou callest away the people from the worship 
of the gods; or take and drink this, that thou mayest show that 
thy God is almighty, if after thou hast drunk, thou canst remain 
whole. Then the blessed John, as they lay dead which had drunk 
the poison, like a fearless and brave man took the cup, and making 
the sign of the cross, spake thus: My God, and the Father of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whose word the heavens were established, 
unto whom all things are subject, whom all creation serveth, 


ACTS OF JOHN 263 


whom all power obeyeth, feareth, and trembleth, when we call 
on thee for succour: whose name the serpent hearing is still, 
the dragon fleeth, the viper is quiet, the toad (which is called 
a frog) is still and strengthless, the scorpion is quenched, the 
basilisk vanquished, and the phalangia (spider) doth no hurt; 
in a word, all venomous things, and the fiercest reptiles and 
noisome beasts, are pierced (or covered with darkness). [Ps.- 
Mellitus adds: and all roots hurtful to the health of men dry up.] 
Do thou, I say, quench the venom of this poison, put out the 
deadly workings thereof, and void it of the strength which it 
hath in it: and grant in thy sight unto all these whom thou hast 
created, eyes that they may see, and ears that they may hear, 
and a heart that they may understand thy greatness. And 
when he had thus said, he armed his mouth and all his body 
with the sign of the cross and drank all that was in the cup. 
And after he had drunk, he said: I ask that they for whose sake 
I have drunk, be turned unto thee, O Lord, and by thine en- 
lightening receive the salvation which is in thee. And when for 
the space of three hours the people saw that John was of a 
cheerful countenance, and that there was no sign at all of paleness. 
or fear in him, they began to cry out with a loud voice: He is 
the one true God whom John worshippeth. 

XXI. But Aristodemus even so believed not, though the 
people reproached him: but turned unto John and said: This 
one thing I lack—if thou in the name of thy God raise up these 
that have died by this poison, my mind will be cleansed of all 
doubt. When he said that, the people rose against Aristodemus, 
saying: We will burn thee and thine house if thou goest on to 
trouble the apostle further with thy words. John, therefore, 
seeing that there was a fierce sedition, asked for silence, and 
said in the hearing of all: The first of the virtues of God 
which we ought to imitate is patience, by which we are able to 
bear with the foolishness of unbelievers. Wherefore if Aristo- 
demus is still held by unbelief, let us loose the knots of his 
unbelief. He shall be compelled, even though late, to acknow- 
ledge his creator; for I will not cease from this work until 
a remedy shall bring help to his wounds, and like physicians 
which have in their hands a sick man needing medicine, so 
also, if Aristodemus be not yet cured by that which hath now 
been done, he shall be cured by that which I will now do. And 
he called Aristodemus to him, and gave him his coat, and he 
himself stood clad only in his mantle. And Aristodemus said to 
him: Wherefore hast thou given me thy coat? John said to 
him: That thou mayest even so be put to shame and depart 
from thine unbelief. And Aristodemus said: And how shall thy 
coat make me to depart from unbelief? The apostle answered: 
Go and cast it upon the bodies of the dead, and thou shalt say 
thus: The apostle of our Lord Jesus Christ hath sent me tbat 


264 ACTS OF JOHN 


in his name ye may rise again, that all may know that life and 
death are servants of my Lord Jesus Christ. _ Which when 
Aristodemus had done, and had seen them rise, he worshipped 
John, and ran quickly to the proconsul and began to say with 
a loud voice: Hear me, hear me, thou proconsul; I think thou 
rememberest that I have often stirred up thy wrath against John 
and devised many things against him daily, wherefore I fear lest 
I feel his wrath: for he is a god hidden in the form of a man, 
and hath drunk poison, and not only continueth whole, but them 
also which had died by the poison he hath recalled to life by my 
means, by the touch of his coat, and they have no mark of death 
upon them. Which when the proconsul heard he said: And 
what wilt thou have me to do? Aristodemus answered: Let us 
go and fall at his feet and ask pardon, and whatever he com- 
mandeth us let us do. Then they came together and cast them- 
selves down and besought forgiveness: and he received them 
and offered prayer and thanksgiving to God, and he ordained 
them a fast of a week, and when it was fulfilled he baptized them 
in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and his Almighty Father, 
and the Holy Ghost the illuminator. [And when they were 
baptized, with all their house and their servants and their kindred, 
they brake all their idols and built a church in the name of 
Saint John: wherein he himself was taken up, in manner 
following :] 

This bracketed sentence, of late complexion, serves to introduce the 
last episode of the book. 

Here we may insert a notice of three detached fragments of the Acts. 

a. The upper portion of a papyrus leaf of the fourth century, 
Oxyrhynchus papyri, no. 850 (vol. vi, 1908). The order of the two 
pages is doubted by the editors, who suggest that the recto should follow 
the verso. 

Recto 
departure. 
ee Andronicus;andthisiwiteseouse-seae 
(this is the title of the following episode) 

ll. 1, 2 And when a few days had passed, John went forth 
with many of the brethren to Sia ler 

8} 6. c to cross a bridge under which a deep river ran 

4 (and as John) went to the brethren 

5 (behold a man) came towards him clad in the manner of 
a soldier 

6 and standing before him said: John, into 

7 (my) hands thou shall shortly come. And John (in wrath) 

8 (said): the Lord shall quench thy threatening and thy 
wrath and 

9 (thy trans)gression. And lo he vanished away. (When 
therefore) 

10 John was come to those to whom he went, and found 


ACTS OF JOHN 265 


11 (them) gathered together, he said: Rise up my breth- 

12 (ren) let us bow our knees unto the Lord and 

12, 13 brought to nought the unseen working of the great 
enemy 

14 bowed his knees together with them... said 

135. eee OG 


Here is the appearance of a demon disguised as a soldier who 
threatens John, perhaps predicting his arrest, and is routed. John is 
about to pray with the brethren. 


Verso 
for him 
groanings and 
but John 
to Zeuxis, having risen and taken up a (cup) 
ae who didst compel me with 

6, 7 thinking to strangle himself: that dost turn things 
despaired of unto thee: 7, 8 that makest known ... . the 
things that 

8 are known to no man: that weepest for the afflicted 

9 that raisest up those that have been put to death 

10 of the helpless: Jesu the comforter of the 

11 we praise thee and worship and give thanks 

12 for all thy gifts: and for thy present dispensation 

18, 14 and ministry. And unto Zeuxis only he gave of the 
eucharist, and afterward gave to them that would receive 

15 looking on him durst not: but the proconsul 

16 (? sending a) centurion in the midst of the assembly 
(church ?) saith to John 

ile : Servant of the unnameable (God 

18 hath brought letters from Caesar 

19 (?in which is contained: Domitianus Caesar) and the 
SeMBUE 5 a o 6 

Zeuxis has tried to hang himself. He has been delivered and a 
service of thanksgiving is held. The proconsul is already there and 
has seen the miracle: he brings letters from the emperor. 

The editor questions whether there is room in the lower part of the 
recto to finish John’s prayer and introduce the episode of Zeuxis. 
But the author, while often very prolix, can also get over much ground 
in few lines. And it is equally difficult to see how the emperor’s letter 
should be dismissed and done with in half a page and a story about 
Andronicus follow immediately. 

The interest of the fragment for the general course of the story 
lies in this, that it confirms our belief that John was represented as 
coming under the notice of the emperor; and probably either exile 
or the caldron of oil, or both, were the sequels of the transaction: 
I doubt, however, whether the trial was laid at Rome. 

b and c are quotations preserved in a barbarous Latin Apocryphon 
called the Epistle of Titus, mainly a declamation about virginity, which 


Ou Co bo 


266 ACTS OF JOHN 


exists in one manuscript at Wiirzburg (eighth century). Dom Donatien 
de Bruyne printed them in the Revue Bénédictine for 1908 (pp. 149-60). 

b. Or is that outside the law which we are taught, how the 
very devils [when they] confessed to Dyrus (read Verus) the deacon 
as to the coming of John: consider what they said: Many will 
come to us in the last times to turn us out of our vessels (i. e. the 
bodies possessed by them), saying that they are pure and clean 
from women and are not held by desire of them: whom (MS. 
while) if we desired, we (could) possess them also. 

This should come from an early part of the book. I take it to 
precede John’s first visit to Ephesus. My rendering indicates the 
obscurity of the original. 

c is so confused (and wearisome) that it defies translation. It is 
a diatribe of John’s against matrimony and begins thus: 


Receive therefore in thy heart the admonition of the blessed 
John, who, when he was bidden to a marriage, came not save for 
the sake of chastity, and consider what he said: Little children, 
while yet your flesh is pure and ye have your body untouched 
and not destroyed, and are not defiled by Satan, the great enemy 
and shameless (foe) of chastity: know therefore more fully the 
mystery of the nuptial union: it is the experiment of the serpent, 
the ignorance of teaching, injury of the seed, the gift of death, 

. . (thirty-one (!) clauses follow, many of which are quite 
corrupt; the last are) the impediment which separateth from 
the Lord, the beginning of disobedience, the end of life, and 
death. Hearing this, little children, join yourselves together in 
an inseparable marriage, holy and true, waiting for the one true 
incomparable bridegroom from heaven, even Christ, the ever- 
lasting bridegroom. 

If, then, the apostle severed a marriage, lest it should be an 
occasion of sin... &c. 

This is the most avowedly Encratite passage in the Acts: true, 
John persuaded Andronicus and others to dissolve their marriage in 
all but name: but there is nowhere else such a wealth of abuse of the 
institution of marriage as such. The speech belongs to an episode of 
which we know nothing; it cannot refer to Andronicus or Lycomedes, 
who were both married when first we hear of them. 

A third quotation in the Epistle of Titus is taken from an extant 
part of the Acts, the last prayer of John. 

The last episode of these Acts (as is the case with several others of 
the Apocryphal Acts) was preserved separately for reading in church on 
the Saint’s day. We have it in at least nine Greek manuscripts, and in 
many versions: Latin, Syriac, Armenian, Coptic, Ethiopic, Slavonic. 


106 John therefore continued with the brethren, rejoicing 
in the Lord. And on the morrow, being the Lord’s day, and all 
the brethren being gathered together, he began to say unto 
them: Brethren and fellow-servants and coheirs and partakers 
with me in the kingdom of the Lord, ye know the Lord, how 


ACTS OF JOHN 267 


many mighty works he hath granted you by my means, how 
many wonders, healings, signs, how great spiritual gifts, teachings, 
governings, refreshings, ministries, knowledges, glories, graces, 
gifts, beliefs, communions, all which ye have seen given you by 
him in your sight, yet not seen by these eyes nor heard by these 
ears. Be ye therefore stablished in him, remembering him in 
your every deed, knowing the mystery of the dispensation which 
hath come to pass towards men, for what cause the Lord hath 
accomplished it. He beseecheth you by me, brethren, and 
entreateth you, desiring to remain without grief, without insult, 
not conspired against, not chastened: for he knoweth even the 
insult that cometh of you, he knoweth even dishonour, he 
knoweth even conspiracy, he knoweth even chastisement, from 
them that hearken not to his commandments. 

107 Let not then our good God be grieved, the compassionate, 
the merciful, the holy, the pure, the undefiled, the immaterial, 
the only, the one, the unchangeable, the simple, the guileless, 
the unwrathful, even our God Jesus Christ, who is above every 
name that we can utter or conceive, and more exalted. Let 
him rejoice with us because we walk aright, let him be glad 
because we live purely, let him be refreshed because our conversa- 
tion is sober. Let him be without care because we live continently, 
let him be pleased because we communicate one with another, 
let him smile because we are chaste, let him be merry because we 
love him. These things I now speak unto you, brethren, because 
I am hasting unto the work set before me, and already being 
perfected by the Lord. For what else could I have to say unto 
you? Ye have the pledge of our God, ye have the earnest of 
his goodness, ye have his presence that cannot be shunned. If, 
then, ye sin no more, he forgiveth you that ye did in ignorance: 
but if after that ye have known him and he hath had mercy on 
you, ye walk again in the like deeds, both the former will be laid 
to your charge, and also ye will not have a part nor mercy 
before him. 

108 And when he had spoken this unto them, he prayed thus: 
O Jesu who hast woven this crown with thy weaving, who 
hast joined together these many blossoms into the unfading 
flower of thy countenance, who hast sown in them these words: 
thou only tender of thy servants, and physician who healest 
freely: only doer of good and despiser of none, only merciful 
and lover of men, only saviour and righteous, only seer of all, 
who art in all and everywhere present and containing all things 
and filling all things: Christ Jesu, God, Lord, that with thy 
gifts and thy mercy shelterest them that trust in thee, that 
knowest clearly the wiles and the assaults of him that is every- 
where our adversary, which he deviseth against us: do thou 
only, O Lord, succour thy servants by thy visitation. Even 
so, Lord. 


268 ACTS OF JOHN 


109 And he asked for bread, and gave thanks thus: What 
praise or what offering or what thanksgiving shall we, breaking 
this bread, name save thee only, O Lord Jesu? We glorify thy 
name that was said by the Father: we glorify thy name that 
was said through the Son (or we glorify the name of Father that 
was said by thee .. . the name of Son that was said by thee): 
we glorify thine entering of the Door. We glorify the resurrec- 
tion shown unto us by thee. We glorify thy way, we glorify of 
thee the seed, the word, the grace, the faith, the salt, the unspeak- 
able (al. chosen) pearl, the treasure, the plough, the net, the great- 
ness, the diadem, him that for us was called Son of man, that gave 
unto us truth, rest, knowledge, power, the commandment, the 
confidence, hope, love, liberty, refuge in thee. For thou, Lord, 
art alone the root of immortality, and the fount of incorruption, 
and the seat of the ages: called by all these names for us now, 
that calling on thee by them we may make known thy greatness 
which at the present is invisible unto us, but visible only unto the 
pure, being portrayed in thy manhood only. 

110 And he brake the bread and gave unto all of us, praying 
over each of the brethren that he might be worthy of the grace 
of the Lord and of the most holy eucharist. And he partook 
also himself likewise, and said: Unto me also be there a part 
with you, and: Peace be with you, my beloved. 

111 After that he said unto Verus: Take with thee some two 
men, with baskets and shovels, and follow me. And Verus 
without delay did as he was bidden by John the servant of God. 
The blessed John therefore went out of the house and walked 
forth of the gates, having told the more part to depart from him. 
And when he was come to the tomb of a certain brother of ours, 
he said to the young men: Dig, my children. And they dug: 
and he was instant with them yet more, saying: Let the trench 
be deeper. And as they dug he spoke unto them the word of 
God and exhorted them that were come with him out of the 
house, edifying and perfecting them unto the greatness of God, 
and praying over each one of us. And when the young men had 
finished the trench as he desired, we knowing nothing of it, he 
took off his garments wherein he was clad and laid them as it 
were for a pallet in the bottom of the trench: and standing in 
his shift only he stretched his hands upward and prayed thus: 

112 O thou that didst choose us out for the apostleship of the 
Gentiles: O God that sentest us into the world: that didst 
reveal thyself by the law and the prophets: that didst never 
rest, but alway from the foundation of the world savedst them 
that were able to be saved: that madest thyself known through 
all nature: that proclaimedst thyself even among beasts: that 
didst make the desolate and savage soul tame and quiet: that 
gavest thyself to it when it was athirst for thy words: that didst 
appear to it in haste when it was dying: that didst show thyself 


ACTS OF JOHN 269 


to it as a law when it was sinking into lawlessness: that didst 
manifest thyself to it when it had been vanquished by Satan: 
that didst overcome its adversary when it fled unto thee: that 
gavest it thine hand and didst raise it up from the things of 
Hades: that didst not leave it to walk after a bodily sort (in 
the body): that didst show to it its own enemy: that hast made 
for it a clear knowledge toward thee: O God, Jesu, the Father 
of them that are above the heavens, the Lord of them that are 
in the heavens, the law of them that are in the ether, the course 
of them that are in the air, the keeper of them that are on the 
earth, the fear of them that are under the earth, the grace of 
them that are thine own: receive also the soul of thy John, 
which it may be is accounted worthy by thee. 

113 O thou who hast kept me until this hour for thyself and 
untouched by union with a woman: who when in my youth 
I desired to marry didst appear unto me and say to me: John, 
I have need of thee: who didst prepare for me also a sickness of 
the body: who when for the third time I would marry didst 
forthwith prevent me, and then at the third hour of the day 
saidst unto me on the sea: John, if thou hadst not been mine, 
I would have suffered thee to marry: who for two years didst 
blind me (or afflict mine eyes), and grant me to mourn and 
entreat thee: who in the third year didst open the eyes of my 
mind and also grant me my visible eyes: who when I saw clearly 
didst ordain that it should be grievous to me to look upon a 
woman: who didst save me from the temporal fantasy and 
lead me unto that which endureth always: who didst rid me of 
the foul madness that is in the flesh: who didst take me from 
the bitter death and establish me on thee alone: who didst 
muzzle the secret disease of my soul and cut off the open deed: 
who didst afflict and banish him that raised tumult in me: who 
didst make my love of thee spotless: who didst make my joining 
unto thee perfect and unbroken: who didst give me undoubting 
faith in thee, who didst order and make clear my inclination 
toward thee: thou who givest unto every man the due reward 
of his works, who didst put into my soul that I should have 
no possession save thee only: for what is more precious than 
thee? Now therefore Lord, whereas I have accomplished the 
dispensation wherewith I was entrusted, account thou me 
worthy of thy rest, and grant me that end in thee which is 
salvation unspeakable and unutterable. 

114 And as I come unto thee, let the fire go backward, let the 
darkness be overcome, let the gulf be without strength, let the 
furnace die out, let Gehenna be quenched. Let angels follow, 
let devils fear, let rulers be broken, let powers fall; let the 
places of the right hand stand fast, let them of the left hand 
not remain. Let the devil be muzzled, let Satan be derided, let 
his wrath be burned out, let his madness be stilled, let his 


270 ACTS OF JOHN 


vengeance be ashamed, let his assault be in pain, let his children 
be smitten and all his roots plucked up. And grant me to 
accomplish the journey unto thee without suffering insolence or 
provocation, and to receive that which thou hast promised unto 
them that live purely and have loved thee only. 

115 And having sealed himself in every part, he stood and 
said: Thou art with me, O Lord Jesu Christ: and laid himself 
down in the trench where he had strown his garments: and 
having said unto us: Peace be with you, brethren, he gave up 
his spirit rejoicing. 

The less good Greek manuscripts and some versions are not content 
with this simple ending. The Latin says that after the prayer a great 
light appeared over the apostle for the space of an hour, so bright that 
no one could look at it. (Then he laid himself down and gave up the 
ghost.) We who were there rejoiced, some of us, and some mourned. 
. . . And forthwith manna issuing from the tomb was seen of all, 
which manna that place produceth even unto this day, &c. But 
perhaps the best conclusion is that of one Greek manuscript: 


We brought a linen cloth and spread it upon him, and went 
into the city. And on the day following we went forth and 
found not his body, for it was translated by the power of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory, &c. 

Another says: On the morrow we dug in the place, and him 
we found not, but only his sandals, and the earth moving (lit. 
springing up like a well), and after that we remembered that 
which was spoken by the Lord unto Peter, &c. 


Augustine (on John xxi) reports the belief that in his time the earth 
over the grave was seen to move as if stirred by John’s breathing. 


ACTS OF PAUL (See Appendix IT) 


This book, Tertullian tells us, was composed shortly before his time 
in honour of Paul by a presbyter of Asia, who was convicted of the 
imposture and degraded from his office. The date of it may therefore 
be about A.D. 160. The author was an orthodox Christian. 

Our authorities for it are: 

‘ The sadly mutilated Coptic MS. at Heidelberg, of the sixth century 
at latest. 

2. The Acts of Paul and Thecla, a single episode which has been 
preserved complete in Greek and many versions: parts of it exist in 
the Coptic. 

3. The correspondence with the Corinthians, partly preserved in the 
Coptic, and current separately in Armenian and Latin. 

4. The Martyrdom, the concluding episode of the Acts, preserved 
separately (as in the case of John and others) in Greek and other versions. 

5. Detached fragments or quotations. 

The length of the whole book is given as 3,600 lines (Stichometry 
of Nicephorus), or 3,560 (Stichometry of the Codex Claromontanus): 
the Canonical Acts are given by the same two authorities respectively 
as 2,800 and 2,600. We have, perhaps, 1,800 lines of the Acts of Paul. 


ACTS OF PAUL 271 


The text of the Coptic MS. is miserably defective, and the restora- 
tion of it, in the episodes which are preserved in it alone, is a most 
difficult process: Professor Carl Schmidt has done practically all that 
can be expected, with infinite labour and great acuteness. In treating 
the defective episodes I shall follow him closely, but shall not attempt 
to represent all the broken lines. 


I 


The first extant page of the Coptic MS. seems to be p. 9. 

p. 9. Paul went into (the house) at the place where the (dead) 
was. But Phila the wife of Panchares (Anchares, MS., see below) 
was very wroth and said to her husband in (great anger): Hus- 
band, thou hast gone . . . . the wild beasts, thou hast not 
begotten . . . . thyson .. . . where is mine? 


jn. 6 5 . (he hath not) desired food . . . . to bury 
him. But (Panchares) stood in the sight of all and made his 
prayer at the ninth hour, until the people of the city came to 
bear the boy out. When he had prayed, Paul (came) and saw 
ene OG aOled Cstisy Christie sac UDCEDOVAR lm s uionuns 
the prayer. 


p- ll (a small piece only). ... . multitude... . eight 
days .. . . they thought that he raised up the (boy). But 
when Paul had remained 


p. 12. They asked? him? . . . . the men listened to him 
seedy 8 they sent for Panchares . . . . and cried out, 
saying: We believe, Panchares, . . . but save the city 


from . . ._. many things, which they said. Panchares said 
unto them: Judge ye whether your good deeds (?) 

(OH dig oe - is not possible . . . . but to (testify) 
ee ee GOdawho hathteess. eels SON ACCOLGIRG TOM. =i) ses 
salvation, and I also believe that, my brethren, there is no other 
God, save Jesus Christ the son of the Blessed, unto whom is 
glory for ever, Amen. But when they saw that he would not 
turn to them, they pursued Paul, and caught him, and brought 
him back into the city, ill-using (?) him, and cast stones at him 
and thrust him out of their city and out of their country. But 
Panchares would not return evil for evil: he shut the door of 
his house and went in with his wife . . . . fasting. .. . 
But when it was evening Paul came to him and said: 

p. 14. Godhath . . . . Jesus Christ. 


These are the last words of the episode. The situation is a little 
cleared by a sentence in the Greek Acts of Titus ascribed to Zenas 
(not earlier than the fifth century?): ‘They arrived at Antioch and 
found Barnabas the son of Panchares, whom Paul raised up.’ Barnabas 
may be a mistake, but Panchares is, I doubt not, right: for the Coptic 
definite article is p prefixed to the word, and the Coptic translator 


272 ACTS OF PAUL 


finding Panchares in his text has confused the initial of it with his 
own definite article, and cut it out. 

We have, then, a husband Panchares and wife Phila at Antioch 
(in Pisidia perhaps: this is disputed), and their son (possibly named 
Barnabas) is dead. Phila reproaches Panchares with want of parental 
affection. I take it that he is a believer, and has not mourned over his 
son, perhaps knowing that Paul was at hand and hoping for his help. 
Panchares prays till his fellow-townsmen come to carry out the body 
for burial. Paul arrives: at some point he raises the dead: but the 
people are irritated and some catastrophe threatens them at Paul’s 
hands, 

Panchares makes a profession of faith, the result of which is Paul’s 
ill-treatment and banishment. But Paul returns secretly and reassures 
Panchares. 


II 


The next episode is that of Paul and Thecla, in which the Greek text 
exists, and will be followed. In the Coptic it has a title: 

After the flight from Antioch, when he would go to Iconium. 

It is possible that in this episode the author of the Acts may have 
used a local legend, current in his time, of a real Christian martyr 
Thecla. It is otherwise difficult to account for the very great popularity 
of the cult of St. Thecla, which spread over East and West, and made 
her the most famous of virgin martyrs. Moreover, one historical 
personage is introduced into the story, namely, Queen Tryphaena, 
who was the widow, it seems, of Cotys, King of Thrace, and the mother 
of Polemo II, King of Pontus. She was a great-niece of the Emperor 
Claudius. Professor W. M. Ramsay has contended that there was a 
written story of Thecla which was adapted by the author of the Acts: 
but his view is not generally accepted. 


1 When Paul went up unto Iconium after he fled from 
Antioch, there journeyed with him Demas and Hermogenes 
the coppersmith, which were full of hypocrisy, and flattered Paul 
as though they loved him. But Paul, looking only unto the 
goodness of Christ, did them no evil, but loved them well, so that 
he assayed to make sweet unto them all the oracles of the Lord, 
and of the teaching and the interpretation (of the Gospel) and 
of the birth and resurrection of the Beloved, and related unto 
them word by word all the great works of Christ, how they were 
revealed unto him (Copt. adds: how that Christ was born of 
Mary the virgin, and of the seed of David). 

2 And a certain man named Onesiphorus, when he heard 
that Paul was come to Iconium, went out with his children 
Simmias and Zeno and his wife Lectra to meet him, that he 
might receive him into his house: for Titus! had told him what 
manner of man Paul was in appearance; for he had not seen 
him in the flesh, but only in the spirit. 


1 The Acts of Titus tell us that Paul sent Titus before him to announce 
his coming in every city which he was to visit. 


ACTS OF PAUL 273 


38 And he went by the king’s highway that leadeth unto 
Lystra and stood expecting him, and looked upon them that 
came, according to the description of Titus. And he saw Paul 
coming, a man little of stature, thin-haired upon the head, 
crooked in the legs, of good state of body, with eyebrows joining, 
and nose somewhat hooked, full of grace: for sometimes he 
appeared like a man, and sometimes he had the face of an angel. 

4 And when Paul saw Onesiphorus he smiled, and Onesiphorus 
said: Hail, thou servant of the blessed God. And he said: 
Grace be with thee and with thine house. But Demas and 
Hermogenes were envious, and stirred up their hypocrisy yet 
more, so that Demas said: Are we not servants of the Blessed, 
that thou didst not salute us so? And Onesiphorus said: I see 
not in you any fruit of righteousness, but if ye be such, come ye 
also into my house and refresh yourselves. 

5 And when Paul entered into the house of Onesiphorus, 
there was great joy, and bowing of knees and breaking of bread, 
and the word of God concerning abstinence (or continence) and 
the resurrection; for Paul said: 

Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. 

Blessed are they that keep the flesh chaste, for they shall 
become the temple of God. 

Blessed are they that abstain (or the continent), for unto them 
shall God speak. 

Blessed are they that have renounced this world, for they shall 
be well-pleasing unto God. 

Blessed are they that possess their wives as though they had 
them not, for they shall inherit God. 

Blessed are they that have the fear of God, for they shall 
become angels of God. 

6 Blessed are they that tremble at the oracles of God, for 
they shall be comforted. 

Blessed are they that receive the wisdom of Jesus Christ, for 
they shall be called sons of the Most High. 

Blessed are they that have kept their baptism pure, for they 
shall rest with the Father and with the Son. 

Blessed are they that have compassed the understanding of 
Jesus Christ, for they shall be in light. 

Blessed are they that for love of God have departed from the 
fashion of this world, for they shall judge angels, and shall be 
blessed at the right hand of the Father. 

Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy and shall 
not see the bitter day of judgement. 

Blessed are the bodies of the virgins, for they shall be well- 
pleasing unto God and shall not lose the reward of their continence 
(chastity), for the word of the Father shall be unto them a work 
of salvation in the day of his Son, and they shall have rest world 
without end. 


3870 T, 


274 ACTS OF PAUL 


7 And as Paul was saying these things in the midst of the 
assembly (church) in the house of Onesiphorus, a certain virgin, 
Thecla, whose mother was Theocleia, which was betrothed to 
an husband, Thamyris, sat at the window hard by, and hearkened 
night and day unto the word concerning chastity which was 
spoken by Paul: and she stirred not from the window, but was 
led onward (or pressed onward) by faith, rejoicing exceedingly: 
and further, when she saw many women and virgins entering 
in to Paul, she also desired earnestly to be accounted worthy 
to stand before Paul’s face and to hear the word of Christ; for 
she had not yet seen the appearance of Paul, but only heard 
his speech. 

8 Now as she removed not from the window, her mother 
sent unto Thamyris, and he came with great joy as if he were 
already to take her to wife. Thamyris therefore said to Theo- 
cleia: Where is my Thecla? And Theocleia said: I have a 
new tale to tell thee, Thamyris: for for three days and three 
nights Thecla ariseth not from the window, neither to eat nor 
to drink, but looking earnestly as it were upon a joyful spectacle, 
she so attendeth to a stranger who teacheth deceitful and various 
words, that I marvel how the great modesty of the maiden is 
so hardly beset. 

9 O Thamyris, this man upsetteth the whole city of the 
Iconians, and thy Thecla also, for all the women and the young 
men go in to him and are taught by him. Ye must, saith he, 
fear one only God and live chastely. And my daughter, too, 
like a spider at the window, bound by his words, is held by a 
new desire and a fearful passion: for she hangeth upon the 
things that he speaketh, and the maiden is captured. But 
go thou to her and speak to her; for she is betrothed unto 
thee. 

10 And Thamyris went to her, alike loving her and fearing 
because of her disturbance (ecstasy), and said: Thecla, my 
betrothed, why sittest thou thus? and what passion is it that 
holdeth thee in amaze; turn unto thy Thamyris and be ashamed. 
And her mother also said the same: Thecla, why sittest thou 
thus, looking downward, and answering nothing, but as one 
stricken? And they wept sore, Thamyris because he failed of 
a wife, and Theocleia of a child, and the maidservants of a 
mistress; there was, therefore, great confusion of mourning in 
the house. And while all this was so, Thecla turned not away, 
but paid heed to the speech of Paul. 

11 But Thamyris leapt up and went forth into the street and 
watched them that went in to Paul and came out. And he saw 
two men striving bitterly with one another, and said to them: 
Ye men, tell me who ye are, and who is he that is within with 
you, that maketh the souls of young men and maidens to err, 
deceiving them that there may be no marriages but they should 


ACTS OF PAUL 275 


live as they are. I promise therefore to give you much money 
if ye will tell me of him: for I am a chief man of.the city. 

12 And Demas and Hermogenes said unto him: Who this 
man is, we know not; but he defraudeth the young men of 
wives and the maidens of husbands, saying: Ye have no resur- 
rection otherwise, except ye continue chaste, and defile not the 
flesh but keep it pure. 

13 And Thamyris said to them: Come, ye men, into mine 
house and refresh yourselves with me. And they went to a 
costly banquet and much wine and great wealth and a brilliant 
table. And Thamyris made them drink, for he loved Thecla and 
desired to take her to wife: and at the dinner Thamyris said: 
Tell me, ye men, what is his teaching, that I also may know it: 
for I am not a little afflicted concerning Thecla because she so: 
loveth the stranger, and I am defrauded of my marriage. 

14 And Demas and Hermogenes said: Bring him _ before 
Castelius the governor as one that persuadeth the multitudes 
with the new doctrine of the Christians; and so will he destroy 
him and thou shalt have thy wife Thecla. And we will teach 
thee of that resurrection which he asserteth, that it is already 
come to pass in the children which we have, and we rise again 
when we have come to the knowledge of the true God. 

15 But when Thamyris heard this of them, he was filled with 
envy and wrath, and rose up early and went to the house of 
Onesiphorus with the rulers and officers and a great crowd with 
staves, saying unto Paul: Thou hast destroyed the city of the 
Iconians and her that was espoused unto me, so that she will 
not have me: let us go unto Castelius the governor. And ali 
the multitude said: Away with the wizard, for he hath corrupted 
all our wives. And the multitude rose up together against him. 

16 And Thamyris, standing before the judgement seat, cried 
aloud and said: O proconsul, this is the man—we know not whence 
he is—who alloweth not maidens to marry: let him declare 
before thee wherefore he teacheth such things. And Demas 
and Hermogenes said to Thamyris: Say thou that he is a Chris- 
tian, and so wilt thou destroy him. But the governor kept 
his mind steadfast and called Paul, saying unto him: Who art 
thou, and what teachest thou? for it is no light accusation that 
these bring against thee. 

17 And Paul lifted up his voice and said: If J am this day 
examined what I teach, hearken, O proconsul. The living God, 
the God of vengeance, the jealous God, the God that hath need 
of nothing, but desireth the salvation of men, hath sent me, that 
I may sever them from corruption and uncleanness and all 
pleasure and death, that they may sin no more. Wherefore 
God hath sent his own Child, whom I preach and teach that men 
should have hope in him who alone hath had compassion upon 
the world that was in error; that men may no more be under 


276 ACTS OF PAUL 


judgement but have faith and the fear of God and the knowledge 
of sobriety and the love of truth. If then I teach the things 
that have been revealed unto me of God, what wrong do I, 
O proconsul? And the governor having heard that, commanded 
Paul to be bound and taken away to prison until he should have 
leisure to hear him more carefully. 

18 But Thecla at night took off her bracelets and gave them to 
the doorkeeper, and when the door was opened for her she went 
into the prison, and gave the jailer a mirror of silver and so 
went in to Paul and sat by his feet and heard the wonderful 
works of God. And Paul feared not at all, but walked in the 
confidence of God: and her faith also was increased as she kissed 
his chains. 

19 Now when Thecla was sought by her own people and by 
Thamyris, she was looked for through the streets as one lost; 
and one of the fellow-servants of the doorkeeper told that she 
went out by night. And they examined the doorkeeper and he 
told them that she was gone to the stranger unto the prison; 
and they went as he told them and found her as it were bound 
with him, in affection. And they went forth thence and gathered 
the multitude to them and showed it to the governor. 

20 And he commanded Paul to be brought to the judgement 
seat; but Thecla rolled herself upon the place where Paul taught 
when he sat in the prison. And the governor commanded her 
also to be brought to the judgement seat, and she went exulting 
with joy. And when Paul was brought the second time the 
people cried out more vehemently: He is a sorcerer, away with 
him! But the governor heard Paul gladly concerning the holy 
works of Christ: and he took counsel, and called Thecla and 
said: Why wilt thou not marry Thamyris, according to the law 
of the Iconians? but she stood looking earnestly upon Paul, 
and when she answered not, her mother Theocleia cried out, 
saying: Burn the lawless one, burn her that is no bride in the 
midst of the theatre, that all the women which have been taught 
by this man may be affrighted. 

21 And the governor was greatly moved: and he scourged 
Paul and sent him out of the city, but Thecla he condemned to 
be burned. And straightway the governor arose and went to 
the theatre: and all the multitude went forth unto the dreadful 
spectacle. But Thecla, as the lamb in the wilderness looketh 
about for the shepherd, so sought for Paul: and she looked upon 
the multitude and saw the Lord sitting, like unto Paul, and said: 
As if I were not able to endure, Paul is come to look upon me. And 
she earnestly paid heed to him: but he departed into the heavens. 

22 Now the boys and the maidens brought wood and hay to 
burn Thecla: and when she was brought in naked, the governor 
wept and marvelled at the power that was in her. And they 
laid the wood, and the executioner bade her mount upon the 


ACTS OF PAUL 277 


pyre: and she, making the sign of the cross, went up upon the 
wood. And they lighted it, and though a great fire blazed forth, 
the fire took no hold on her; for God had compassion on her, 
and caused a sound under the earth, and a cloud overshadowed 
her above, full of rain and hail, and all the vessel of it was poured 
out so that many were in peril of death, and the fire was quenched, 
and Thecla was preserved. 

23 Now Paul was fasting with Onesiphorus and his wife and 
their children in an open sepulchre on the way whereby they go 
from Iconium to Daphne. And when many days were past, as 
they fasted, the boys said unto Paul: We are anhungered. And 
they had not wherewith to buy bread, for Onesiphorus had left 
the goods of this world, and followed Paul with all his house. 
But Paul took off his upper garment and said: Go, child, buy 
several loaves and bring them. And as the boy was buying, he 
saw his neighbour Thecla, and was astonished, and said: Thecla, 
whither goest thou? And she said: I seek Paul, for I was 
preserved from the fire. And the boy said: Come, I will bring 
thee unto him, for he mourneth for thee and prayeth and fasteth 
now these six days. 

24 And when she came to the sepulchre unto Paul, who had 
bowed his knees and was praying and saying: O Father of Christ, 
let not the fire take hold on Thecla, but spare her, for she is thine: 
she standing behind him cried out: O Father that madest 
heaven and earth, the Father of thy beloved child Jesus Christ, 
I bless thee for that thou hast preserved me from the fire, that 
I might see Paul. And Paul arose and saw her and said: O God 
the knower of hearts, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, I bless 
thee that thou hast speedily accomplished that which I asked of 
thee, and hast hearkened unto me. 

25 And there was much love within the sepulchre, for Paul 
rejoiced, and Onesiphorus, and all of them. And they had five 
loaves, and herbs, and water (and salt), and they rejoiced for the 
holy works of Christ. And Thecla said unto Paul: I will cut my 
hair round about and follow thee whithersoever thou goest. But 
he said: The time is ill-favoured and thou art comely: beware 
lest another temptation take thee, worse than the first, and thou 
endure it not but play the coward. And Thecla said: Only give 
me the seal in Christ, and temptation shall not touch me. And 
Paul said: Have patience, Thecla, and thou shalt receive the water. 

26 And Paul sent away Onesiphorus with all his house unto 
Iconium, and so took Thecla and entered into Antioch: and as 
they entered in, a certain Syriarch, Alexander by name, saw 
Thecla and was enamoured of her, and would have bribed 
(flattered) Paul with money and gifts. But Paul said: I know 
not the woman of whom thou speakest, neither is she mine. But 
as he was of great power, he himself embraced her in the highway ; 
and she endured it not, but sought after Paul and cried out 


278 ACTS OF PAUL 


bitterly, saying: Force not the stranger, force not the handmaid 
of God. I am of the first of the Iconians, and because I would 
not marry Thamyris, I am cast out of the city. And she caught 
at Alexander and rent his cloak and took the wreath! from his 
head and made him a mocking-stock. 

27 But he alike loving her and being ashamed of what had 
befallen him, brought her before the governor; and when she 
confessed that she had done this, he condemned her to the beasts.? 
But the women were greatly amazed, and cried out at the 
judgement seat: An evil judgement, an impious judgement! 
And Thecla asked of the governor that she might remain a virgin 
until she should fight the beasts; and a certain rich queen, 
Tryphaena by name, whose daughter had died, took her into her 
keeping, and had her for a consolation. 

28 Now when the beasts were led in procession, they bound 
her to a fierce lioness, and the queen Tryphaena followed after her: 
but the lioness, when Thecla was set upon her, licked her feet, 
and all the people marvelled. Now the writing (title) of her 
accusation was: Guilty of sacrilege. And the women with their 
children cried out from above: O God, an impious judgement 
cometh to pass in this city. And after the procession Tryphaena 
took her again. For her daughter Falconilla, which was dead, 
had said to her in a dream: Mother, thou shalt take in my stead 
Thecla the stranger that is desolate, that she may pray for me 
and I be translated into the place of the righteous. 

29 When therefore Tryphaena received her after the procession, 
she alike bewailed her because she was to fight the beasts on the 
morrow, and also, loving her closely as her own daughter Fal- 
conilla; and said: Thecla, my second child, come, pray thou for 
my child that she may live for ever; for this have I seen in 
a dream. And she without delay lifted up her voice and said: 
O my God, Son of the Most High that art in heaven, grant unto 
her according to her desire, that her daughter Falconilla may live 
for ever. And after she had said this, Tryphaena bewailed her, 
considering that so great beauty was to be cast unto the beasts. 

30 And when it was dawn, Alexander came to take her—for 
it was he that was giving the games—saying: The governor is 
set and the people troubleth us: give me her that is to fight the 
beasts, that I may take her away. But Tryphaena cried aloud 
so that he fled away, saying: A second mourning for my Fal- 
conilla cometh about in mine house, and there is none to help, 
neither child, for she is dead, nor kinsman, for I am a widow. 
O God of Thecla my child, help thou Thecla. 

81 And the governor sent soldiers to fetch Thecla: and 
Tryphaena left her not, but herself took her hand and led her 
up, saying: I did bring my daughter Falconilla unto the sepulchre; 

1 With the figure of Caesar, Syr. 
* Syr. Lat. add: for it was Alexander that gave the spectacle. 


ACTS OF PAUL 279 


but thee, Thecla, do I bring to fight the beasts. And Thecla 
wept bitterly and groaned unto the Lord, saying: Lord God in 
whom I believe, with whom I have taken refuge, that savedst 
me from the fire, reward thou Tryphaena who hath had pity on 
thine handmaid, and hath kept me pure. 

32 There was therefore a tumult, and a voice of the beasts, and 
shouting of the people, and of the women which sat together, 
some saying: Bring in the sacrilegious one! and the women 
saying: Away with the city for this unlawful deed! away with 
all us, thou proconsul! it is a bitter sight, an evil judgement! 

33 But Thecla, being taken out of the hand of Tryphaena, was. 
stripped and a girdle put upon her, and was cast into the stadium: 
and lions and bears were set against her. And a fierce lioness 
running to her lay down at her feet, and the press of women 
cried aloud. And a bear ran upon her; but the lioness ran and 
met him, and tore the bear in sunder. And again a lion, trained 
against men, which was Alexander’s, ran upon her, and the 
lioness wrestled with him and was slain along with him. And 
the women bewailed yet more, seeing that the lioness also that: 
succoured her was dead. 

34 Then did they put in many beasts, while she stood and 
stretched out her hands and prayed. And when she had ended 
her prayer, she turned and saw a great tank full of water, and 
said: Now is it time that I should wash myself. And she cast 
herself in, saying: In the name of Jesus Christ do I baptize 
myself on the last day. And all the women seeing it and all the 
people wept, saying: Cast not thyself into the water: so that 
even the governor wept that so great beauty should be devoured 
by seals. So, then, she cast herself into the water in the name of 
Jesus Christ; and the seals, seeing the light of a flash of fire, 
floated dead on the top of the water. And there was about her 
a cloud of fire, so that neither did the beasts touch her, nor was 
she seen to be naked. 

85 Now the women, when other more fearful beasts were put 
in, shrieked aloud, and some cast leaves, and others nard, others 
cassia, and some balsam, so that there was a multitude of odours; 
and all the beasts that were struck thereby were held as it were 
in sleep and touched her not; so that Alexander said to the 
governor: I have some bulls exceeding fearful, let us bind the 
criminal to them. And the governor frowning, allowed it, saying: 
Do that thou wilt. And they bound her by the feet between the 
bulls, and put hot irons under their bellies that they might be the 
more enraged and kill her. They then leaped forward; but the 
flame that burned about her, burned through the ropes, and she 
was as one not bound. ; 

36 But Tryphaena, standing by the arena, fainted at the 
entry, so that her handmaids said: The queen Tryphaena is 
dead! And the governor stopped the games and all the city was 


280 ACTS OF PAUL 


frightened, and Alexander falling at the governor’s feet said: 
Have mercy on me and on the city, and let the condemned go, 
lest the city perish with her; for if Caesar hear this, perchance 
he will destroy us and the city, because his kinswoman the queen 
Tryphaena hath died at the entry. 

37 And the governor called Thecla from among the beasts, 
and said to her: Who art thou? and what hast thou about thee 
that not one of the beasts hath touched thee? But she said: 
I am the handmaid of the living God; and what I have about 
me—it is that I have believed on that his Son in whom God is 
well pleased; for whose sake not one of the beasts hath touched 
me. For he alone is the goal (or way) of salvation and the 
substance of life immortal; for unto them that are tossed about 
he is a refuge, unto the oppressed relief, unto the despairing 
shelter, and in a word, whosoever believeth not on him, shall not 
live, but die everlastingly. 

88 And when the governor heard this, he commanded garments 
to be brought and said: Put on these garments. And she said: 
He that clad me when I was naked among the beasts, the same 
in the day of judgement will clothe me with salvation. And she 
took the garments and put them on. And the governor forthwith 
issued out an act, saying: I release unto you Thecla the godly, 
the servant of God. And all the women cried out with a loud 
voice and as with one mouth gave praise to God, saying: One 
is the God who hath preserved Thecla: so that with their voice 
all the city shook. 

89 And Tryphaena, when she was told the good tidings, met 
her with much people and embraced Thecla and said: Now do 
I believe that the dead are raised up: now do I believe that my 
child liveth: come within, and I will make thee heir of all my 
substance. Thecla therefore went in with her and rested in her 
house eight days, teaching her the word of God, so that the more 
part of the maid-servants also believed, and there was great joy 
in the house. 

40 But Thecla yearned after Paul and sought him, sending 
about in all places; and it was told her that he was at Myra. 
And she took young men and maids, and girded herself, and 
sewed her mantle into a cloak after the fashion of a man, and 
departed into Myra, and found Paul speaking the word of God, 
and went to him. But he when he saw her and the people that 
were with her was amazed, thinking in himself: Hath some 
other temptation come upon her? But she perceived it, and 
said to him: I have received the washing, O Paul; for he that 
hath worked together with thee in the Gospel hath worked with 
me also unto my baptizing. 

41 And Paul took her by the hand and brought her into the 
house of Hermias, and heard all things from her; so that Paul 
marvelled much, and they that heard were confirmed, and prayed 


ACTS OF PAUL 281 


for Tryphaena. And Thecla arose and said to Paul: I go unto 
Iconium. And Paul said: Go, and teach the word of God. Now 
Tryphaena had sent her much apparel and gold, so that she left 
of it with Paul for the ministry of the poor. 

42 But she herself departed unto Iconium. And she entered 
into the house of Onesiphorus, and fell down upon the floor 
where Paul had sat and taught the oracles of God, and wept, 
saying: O God of me and of this house, where the light shone 
upon me, Jesu Christ the Son of God, my helper in prison, my 
helper before the governors, my helper in the fire, my helper 
among the beasts, thou art God, and unto thee be the glory for 
ever. Amen. 

43 And she found Thamyris dead, but her mother living. And 
she saw her mother and said unto her: Theocleia my mother, 
canst thou believe that the Lord liveth in the heavens? for 
whether thou desirest money, the Lord will give it thee through 
me: or thy child, lo, I am here before thee. And when she had 
so testified, she departed unto Seleucia, and after she had en- 
lightened many with the word of God, she slept a good sleep. 


A good many manuscripts add that Theocleia was not converted, 
but the Coptic does not support them: it ends the episode as above. 

A long appendix is given by other Greek copies, telling how in 
Thecla’s old age (she was ninety) she was living on Mount Calamon or 
Calameon, and some evil-disposed young men went up to ill-treat her: 
and she prayed, and the rock opened and she entered it, and it closed 
after her. Some add that she went underground to Rome: this, to 
account for the presence of her body there. 


Copt., p. 88 of the MS. III 
When he was departed from Antioch and taught in Myra (Myrrha). 


When Paul was teaching the word of God in Myra, there was 
there a man, Hermocrates by name, who had the dropsy, and he 
put himself forward in the sight of all, and said to Paul: Nothing 
is impossible with God, but especially with him whom thou 
preachest; for when he came he healed many, even that God 
whose servant thou art. Lo, I and my wife and my children, we 
cast ourselves at thy feet: have pity on me that I also may believe 
as thou hast believed on the living God. 

Paul said unto him: I will restore thee (thine health) not for 
reward, but through the name of Jesus Christ thou shalt become 
whole in the presence of all these. (And he touched his body) 
drawing his hand downwards: and his belly opened and much 
water ranfrom himand .. . ._ he fell down like a dead man, 
so that some said: It is better for him to die than to continue in 
pain. But when Paul had quieted the people, he took his hand 


282 ACTS OF PAUL 


and raised him up and asked him, saying: Hermocrates, ask for 
what thou desirest. And he said: I would eat. And he took 
a loaf and gave him to eat. And in that hour he was whole, and 
received the grace of the seal in the Lord, he and his wife. 

But Hermippus his son was angry with Paul, and sought for 
a set time wherein to rise up with them of his own age and 
destroy him. For he wished that his father should not be healed 
but should die, that he might soon be master of his goods. But 
Dion, his younger son, heard Paul gladly. 

Now all they that were with Hermippus took counsel to fight 
against Paul so that Hermippus . . . . and sought to kill 
him. . . . . Dion fell down and died: but Hermippus watered 
Dion with his tears. 

But Hermocrates mourned sore, for he loved Dion more than 
his other son. (Yet) he sat at Paul’s feet, and forgat that Dion 
was dead. But when Dion was dead, his mother Nympha rent 
her clothes and went unto Paul and set herself before the face of 
Hermocrates her husband and of Paul. And when Paul saw her, 
he was affrighted and said: Wherefore art thou thus, Nympha? 
But she said to him: Dion is dead; and the whole multitude 
wept when they beheld her. And Paul looked upon the people 
that mourned and sent young men, saying to them: Go and bring 
me him hither. And they went: but Hermippus caught hold of 
the body (of Dion) in the street and cried out 


A leaf lost 


- . . . the word in him (them?). But an angel of the Lord 
had said unto him in the night: Paul, thou hast to-day a great 
conflict against thy body, but God, the Father of his Son Jesus 
Christ, will protect thee. 

When Paul had arisen, he went unto his brethren, and 
remained (sorrowful?) saying: What meaneth this vision? And 
while Paul thought upon this, he saw Hermippus coming, having 
a sword drawn in his hand, and with him many other young men 
with staves. And Paul said unto them: I am not a robber, 
neither a murderer. The God of alJl things, the Father of Christ, 
will turn your hands backward, and your sword into its sheath, 
and your strength into weakness: for I am a servant of God, 
though I be alone and a stranger, and small and of no reputation (?) 
among the Gentiles. But do thou, O God, look down upon their 
counsel and suffer me not to be brought to nought by them. 

And when Hermippus ran upon Paul with his sword drawn, 
straightway he ceased to see, so that he cried out aloud, saying: 
My dear comrades, forget not your friend Hermippus. For 
I have sinned, O Paul, I have pursued after innocent blood. 
Learn, ye foolish and ye of understanding, that this world is 
nought, gold is nought, all money is nought: I that glutted 

1 In the lost text Dion is raised from the dead. 


ACTS OF PAUL 283 


myself with all manner of goods am now a beggar and entreat of 
you all: Hearken to me all ye my companions, and every one 
that dwelleth in Myra. JI have mocked at a man who hath saved 
my father: I have mocked at a man who hath raised up my 
brother Dion . . . . Ihave mocked ata manwho.. . 
without doing me any evil. But entreat ye of him: behold, he 
hath saved my father and raised up my brother; he is able there- 
fore to save me also. But Paul stood there weeping alike before 
God, for that he heard him quickly, and before man, for that the 
proud was brought low. And he turned himself and went up 
- . + . But the young men took the feet and bore Hermippus 
and brought him to the place where Paul was teaching and laid 
him down before the door and went unto their house. And when 
they were gone a great multitude came to the house of Hermocrates, 
and another great multitude entered in, to see whether Hermippus 
were shut up there. And Hermippus besought every one that 
went in, that they would entreat Paul, with him. But they that 
went in saw Hermocrates and Nympha, how they rejoiced greatly 
at the raising up of Dion, and distributed victuals and money 
unto the widows for his recovery. And they beheld Hermippus 
their son in the state of this second affliction, and how he took 
hold on the feet of every one, and on the feet of his parents also, 
and prayed them, as one of the strangers, that he might be healed. 
And his parents were troubled, and lamented to every one that 
came in, so that some said: Wherefore do these weep? for Dion 
is arisen. But Hermocrates possessed goods . . and 
brought the value of the goods and took it and distributed it. 
And ‘Hermocrates, troubled in mind and desiring that they might 
be satisfied, said: Brethren, let us leave the food . . . . and 
occupy ourselves . . Hermocrates. And He igel 
Nympha cried out in great ‘affliction unto Paul . . 
5 6 6 6 UE SRO ppoeae: Hermocrates calleth upon God 
that your son Hermippus 
may see and cease to grieve, for he hath resisted Christ and his 
minister. But they and Paul prayed to God. And when Her- 
mippus recovered his sight, he turned himself to his mother 
Nympha, and said to her: Paul came unto me and laid his hand 
upon me while I wept, and in that hour I saw all things clearly. 
And she took his hand and led him unto the widows “and Paul. 
But while Paul wept bitterly, Hermippus gave Leap saying 
unto them: Every one that believeth, shall . . 
A leaf gone. 
. . . concord and peace. . . Amen. 
And when Paul had confirmed the brethren that were in Myra, 
he departed unto Sidon. 
1 It seems clear to me that it was Christ in the form of Paul who 
healed Hermippus while Paul himself was within the house engaged in 
worship with the widows. 


284 ACTS OF PAUL 


IV 
When he was departed from Myra <and would go unto Sidon). 


Now when Paul was departed from Myra and would go unto 
Sidon there was great sadness of the brethren that were in 
Pisidia and Pamphylia, because they yearned after his word and 
his holy appearance in Christ ; so that some from Perga followed 
Paul, namely Thrasymachus and Cleon with their wives Aline (?) 
and Chrysa, Cleon’s wife. And on the way they nourished Paul: 
and they were eating their bread under a tree (?). And as he was 
about to say Amen, there came (five lines broken: the words ‘the 
brethren’ and ‘idol’ occur) . . . .tableof devils . .. . 
he dieth therefor, but every one that believeth on Jesus Christ 
who hath saved us from all defilement and all uncleanness and all 
evil thoughts, he shall be manifest. And they drew near unto the 
table (three lines broken. ‘Idol’ occurs) . . .. stood... . 
a mighty idol. Andanoldman .. . . stood up among them, 
saying unto them: Ye men, (wait a little and see) what befalleth 
the priests which would draw near unto our gods: for verily 
when our fellow-citizen Charinus hearkened and would . oe 
against the gods, there died he and his (father). And thereupon 
died Xanthus also, Chrysa (?), and (Hermocrates ?) died, sick of 
the dropsy, and his wife Nympha. 

Two leaves at least gone. 

(Paul is speaking) 

after the manner of strange men. Wherefore presume ye to do 
that which is not seemly (?)? Or have ye not heard of that which 
came to pass, which God brought upon Sodom and Gomorrha, 
because they robbed . . . . after the manner of strangers 
and of women? God did not . . . . them but cast them 
down into hell. Now therefore we are not men of this fashion 
that ye say, nor such as ye think, but we are preachers of the living 
God and his Beloved. But that ye may not marvel, understand 
het the miracles (?) which bear witness for us. But they 
hearkened not unto him, but took the men and put them into the 
temple of Apollo, to keep them until the morrow, whereon they 
assembled the whole city. And many and costly were the victuals 
which they gave them. 

But Paul, who was fasting now the third day, testified all the 
night long, being troubled, and smote his face and said: O God, 
look down upon their threatenings and suffer us not to slide, 
and let not our adversaries cast us down, but save us and bring 
down quickly thy righteousness upon us. And as Paul cast himself 
down, with the brethren, Thrasymachus and Cleon, then the 
temple fell . . . . so that they that belonged to the temple 
and the magistrates that were set over it . . . . others of 
them) in thes-5. 9 .-eetorn( chesone: part)itell) doy eee 
fell down . . . . round about, in the midst of the two parts. 


ACTS OF PAUL 285 


And they went in and beheld what had happened, and marvelled 
WOES 5 og 6 6 ile 6 5 6 6 RINGING Gg 5 oo rejoiced 
over the falling of the temple(?). And they cried out, saying: 
Verily these are the works of the men of a mighty God! And 
they departed and proclaimed in the city: Apollo the god of the 
Sidonians is fallen, and the half of his temple. And all the 
dwellers in the city ran to the temple and saw Paul and them that 
were with him, how they wept at this temptation, that they were 
made a spectacle for all men. But the multitude cried out: 
Bring them into the theatre. And the magistrates came to fetch 
them; and they groaned bitterly with one soul. 


About two leaves gone. 


(Paul speaking) throughtme ws Considert.. sen. (nine lines 
much broken, ‘the way of life (conversation) of Christ’, ‘not in the 


faith, Occur) cus. F.ckttypulaDs % 5. .os and they 5 
But the multitude . . . . and followed after Paul, crying: 
Praised be the God . . . . who hath sent Paul . 5 


that we should not . . . . of death. But Theudes 

and prayed at Paul’s feet and embraced his feet, that he should 
give him the seal in the Lord. But he commanded them to go 
to Tyre . . . . in health (or farewell), and they put Paul (in 
a ship ?) and went with him. 

The purpose of confining Paul and his companions in the temple 
appears to have been connected with the sins of the cities of the plain 
of which Paul speaks. 

The Acts of Titus, quoted before, have a sentence referring to this 
and the next episode: ‘And Paul healed Aphphia the wife of Chrysippus 
who was possessed with a devil: and fasting for seven days he over- 
threw the idol of Apollo.” The Acts place this immediately after 
the conversion and preaching at Damascus, and put the Panchares 
episode later. They are not to be trusted, therefore, as a guide to the 
order of our book. 


Vv 
When he was departed out of Sidon and would go unto Tyre. 


Now when Paul was entered unto Tyre there came a multitude 
of Jews .- +. . intohim. These .. . . and they heard 
the mighty works. . . . . They marvelled . . . . Amphion 

= Aphphia of the Acts of Titus) .. . . saying » .. « in 

ee CHR SIDDUSEi Nomen G@eVil With hilt | ect <i aTly, 

: When Paul came . . 5 INS EEMGIR USS 5 5 5 

God and will not be an evil spirit (2) Seeks tees) Amphion 

. through the evil spirit . . . . without any one’s 

having . . she said to him: Save me that I die not. 

And while the multitude ; . . .~ then arose the other(?) evil 

spirit . . . . And forthwith the devils fled away. And when 

the multitude saw this, by the power of God, they praised him 
who had (given such power) unto Paul. 


286 ACTS OF PAUL 


And there was there one by name... rimus, who had a son 
born to him which was dumb. 

On the next page is a proper name, Lix (or perhaps Kilix, a 
Cilician), and later the words, ‘I preach the good tidings of the 
Saviour . . . . Sonof God’. 

On the next page. Lix perhaps occurs again, and ‘Moses’. 

The neat begins: for that which we say cometh to pass forthwith. 
Behold we will bring him hither unto thee that he may ... . 
thee, to hear the truth of thy : 

Newt page. On God whose desire is come to pass in him, this 
is the wise man . 

5 6 6 o Ware Father and he hath sent Jesus Christ. 

Neat page, turned toward the East. Moses 

in Syria 
in Cyrene 


e e . . . . . . . ° 


Again I say unto you . 
I, that do the works A we 


that aman is not justified by the Law, but that he is 
justified by the works of righteousness, and he . 

Next page has the words ‘liberty ’, ‘and the yoke’, ‘all flesh’ 
and, ‘and every one confess that Jesus Christ is the glory of ue 
Father’. 

Neat page, lower part: is not water in him, but ... . 
being water, I am not hungry but I am thirsty; I am not 

° butnotto . . . . tosuffer them, to be (devoured) 
by wild beasts, not to be able . . . . from the earth, but not 
to suffer them to be burnt by the fire, are these Munge of the present 
age testified, he which was a persecutor . 

~ Newt page, lower part, ue: 


the lave of God whiche is elled - « . « Who walketh here before 
them, hath he not followed us throughout all the cities. . . 

And when . . . . he turned himself toward the East after this 
(after two lines) such words, neither preacheth he as thou 
preachest them, O Paul, that thou mayest not . . 

Neat page begins : Thou art in the presence (sight, face) of 
Jerusalem, but I trust in the Lord that thou wilt . .. . 

The name ‘Saul’ is almost certain some lines later. 

Next page begins: whom they crucified. 

And at the end: raised up our flesh. 

Next page, 7th line, For since the day when . . . . per- 
secuted the apostles which were (with me? sc. Peter) out of 
Jerusalem, I hid myself that I might have comfort, and we 
nourish them which stand, through the word according to the 
promise (?) of his grace. I have fallen into many troubles and have 


ACTS OF PAUL 287 


subjected myself to the law, as for your sakes. But I thought by 
night and by day in my trouble on Jesus Christ, waiting for him 
as a lamb . . . . when they crucified him he did not 
. - . . did not resist . . . . was not troubled. 


The above may be a speech of Peter. We have seen some indication 
that Paul is now at Jerusalem, and the conjecture is that a dialogue 
between him and Peter occurred in this place. 


The next page undoubtedly mentions Peter. 

Line 1 has ‘ Paul’, line 8, ‘twelve (?) shepherds’. 

Line 5, through Paul. But . . . . was troubled because 
of the questioning (examination) that (was come) upon Peter 
- . . . and he cried out, saying: Verily, God is one, and there 
is no God beside him: one also is Jesus Christ his Son, whom we 
- . . . this, whom thou preachest, did we crucify, whom 
- . . . expect in great glory, but ye say that he is God and 
Judge of the living and the dead, the King of the ages, for the 
- « . . in the form of man. 


. . . . . . e . . e 


VI 


Paul is condemned to the mines in an unknown place. Longinus 
and Firmilla have a daughter, Frontina, who is to be thrown down 
from a rock, and Paul with her. It is my distinct opinion that 
Frontina is already dead: her body is to be thus contumeliously 
treated because she has become a Christian. 

The upper part of the page has Longinus twice in lines 1, 2; 
Paul el meen): 

For since . . . . themine, there hath not . . . . nothing 
good hath befallen mine house. And he advised that the men 
which were to throw Frontina down, should throw down Paul 
also with her, alive. Now Paul knew these things, but he worked 
fasting, in great cheerfulness, for two days with the prisoners. 
They commanded that on the third day themen . . . . should 
bring forth Frontina: and the whole city followed after her. 
And Firmilla and Longinus lamented and the soldiers oes 
But the prisoners carried the bed (bier). And when Paul saw the 
great mourning with the daughter and eight uate 

Neat page, line 8. Paul alive with the daughter. But when 
Paul had taken the daughter in his arms, he groaned unto the 
Lord Jesus Christ because of the sorrow of Firmilla, and cast 
himself on his knees in the mire . . . . praying for Frontina 
with her in one (a) prayer. In that hour Frontina rose up. And 
the whole multitude was afraid, and fled. Paul took the hand of 
the daughter and led her through the city unto the house of 
Longinus, and the whole multitude said with one voice: God 
is one, who hath made heaven and earth, who hath granted 


288 ACTS OF PAUL 


the life of the daughter in the presence of Paul. . . . . a loaf. 
and he gave thanks to him. 

Some lines later. 
to Philippi (?). 


Vil 


When he was departed from . . . . and would go <to Philippi). 

Now when Paul was come to Philippi . . . . he entered into 
the house of . . . . and there was great joy (among the brethren) 
and to every one. 

On the following page begins the episode of the correspondence with 
the Corinthians, which was circulated separately in Syriac, Latin, and 
Armenian, and found a place in the Syriac collection of Pauline 
epistles (and is commented on with the rest by Ephraem the Syrian), 
and in the Armenian Bible. We have it in (a) many Armenian MSS., 
(b) in Ephraem’s commentary—only extant in Armenian, (c) in three 
Latin MSS., at Milan, Laon, and Paris: as well as in the Coptic MS., 
which is here less fragmentary than in the preceding pages. 

We begin with a short narrative, introducing the letter of the 
Corinthians to Paul; then follows another short piece of narrative, 
extant in Armenian only; then Paul’s reply, commonly called the 
‘Third Epistle to the Corinthians’. 

There are various phrases and whole sentences, especially in the 
Armenian and the Milan MS. of the Latin, which are absent from the 
Coptic and the Laon MS. and are regarded, rightly, as interpolations. 

These will be distinguished by small capitals. 

The page of the Coptic MS. on which the correspondence begins is 
fragmentary at the beginning. 

1. 1. the lawless one 

Io a theirewatd. mele y momen. usin 

[In BRE 5 6 o 0 CAGAy 

1. 4. one, and every one (?) 

1.6. Paul . . . . again (or together). 

1.'7. prayed that a messenger be sent to Philippi. For the 
Corinthians were in great trouble concerning Paul, that he 
would depart out of the world, before it was time. For 
there were certain men come to Corinth, Simon and Cleobius, 
saying: There is no resurrection of the flesh, but that of the 
spirit only: and that the body of man is not the creation of God; 
and also concerning the world, that God did not create it, and 
that God knoweth not the world, and that Jesus Christ was not 
crucified, but it was an appearance (i.e. but only in appearance), 
and that he was not born of Mary, nor of the seed of David. 
And in a word, there were many things which they had taught 
in Corinth, deceiving many other men, (and deceiving also) 
themselves. When therefore the Corinthians heard that Paul 
was at Philippi, they sent a letter unto Paul to Macedonia by 
Threptus and Eutychus the deacons. And the letter was after 
this manner. 


ACTS OF PAUL 289 


I. 1 Stephanus and the elders (presbyters) that are with him, 
even Daphnus and Eubulus and Theophilus and Zenon, unto Paul 
THEIR BROTHER ETERNAL greeting in the Lord. 

2 There have come unto Corinth two men, Simon and Cleobius, 
which are overthrowing the faith of many with evil (corrupt) 
words, 8 which do thou prove AND EXAMINE: 4 for we have 
never heard such words from thee nor from the other apostles: 
5 but all that we have received from thee or from them, that do 
we hold fast. 6 Since therefore the Lord hath had mercy on us, 
that while thou art still in the flesh we may hear these things 
again from thee, 7 if it be possible, either come unto us or 
write unto us. 8 For we believe, according as it hath been 
revealed unto Theonoé, that the Lord hath delivered thee out of 
the hand of the lawless one (enemy, Laon). 

9 Now the things which these men say and teach are these: 
10 They say that we must not use the prophets, 11 and that God 
is not Almighty, 12 and that there shall be no resurrection of the 
flesh, 13 and that man was not made by God, 14 and that Christ 
came not down (is not come, Copt.) in the flesh, neither was born 
of Mary, 15 and that the world is not of God, but of the angels. 

16 Wherefore, brother, WE PRAY THEE use all diligence to come 
unto us, that the church of the Corinthians may remain without 
offence, and the madness of these men may be made plain. 
Farewell aLways in the Lord. 

II. 1 The deacons Threptus and Eutyches brought the letter 
unto Philippi, 2 so that Paul received it, being in bonds because 
of Stratonice the wife of Apollophanes, AND HE FORGAT HIS BONDS, 
and was sore afflicted, 3 and cried out, saying: It were better 
for me to die and to be with the Lord, than to continue in the flesh 
and to hear such things AND THE CALAMITIES OF FALSE DOCTRINE, 
so that trouble cometh upon trouble. 4 And over and above 
this so great affliction I am in bonds and behold these evils 
whereby the devices of Satan are accomplished. (4 Harnack: 
may not the priests (intrigues) of Satan anticipate me while (or 
after) I suffer (have suffered) fetters for the sake (?) of men.) 
5 Paul therefore, in great affliction, wrote a letter, answering thus: 

III. 1 Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, unto the brethren which 
are in Corinth, greeting. 

2 Being in the midst of many tribulations, I marvel not if the 
teachings of the evil one run abroad apace. 3 For my Lord 
Jesus Christ will hasten his coming, and will set at nought (no 
longer endure the insolence of) them that falsify his words. _ 

4 For I delivered unto you in the beginning the things which 
I received of the HOLY apostles which were before me, who were 
at all times with Jesus Christ: 5 namely, that our Lord Jesus 
Christ was born of Mary wuicu 1s of the seed of David AccORDING 
TO THE FLESH, the Holy Ghost being sent forth from heaven 
from the Father unto her By THE ANGEL GABRIEL, 6 that he 


870 U 


290 ACTS OF PAUL 


(Jesus) might come down into this world and redeem all flesh 
by his flesh, and raise us up from the dead in the flesh, like as 
he hath shown to us in himself for an ensample. 7 And because 
man was formed by his Father, 8 therefore was he sought when 
he was lost, that he might be quickened by adoption. 9 For to 
this end did God Almighty who made heaven and earth first 
send the prophets unto the Jews, that they might be drawn 
away from their sins. 10 For he designed to save the house of 
Israel: therefore he conferred a portion of the spirit of Christ 
upon the prophets and sent them unto the Jews first (or unto 
the first Jews), and they proclaimed the true worship of God 
for a long space of time. 11 But the prince of iniquity, desiring 
to be God, laid hands on them and slew them (banished them 
from God, Laon MS.), and bound all flesh by evil lusts (AND THE 
END OF THE WORLD BY JUDGEMENT DREW NEAR). 

12 But God Almighty, who is righteous, would not cast away 
his own creation, BUT HAD COMPASSION ON THEM FROM HEAVEN, 
18 and sent his spirit into Mary In GALILEE, [14 Milan MS. and 
Arm.: WHO BELIEVED WITH ALL HER HEART AND RECEIVED THE 
Hoty GHOST IN HER WOMB, THAT JESUS MIGHT COME INTO THE 
WORLD, ] 15 that by that flesh whereby that wicked one had brought 
in death (had triumphed), by the same he should be shown to be 
overcome. 16 For by his own body Jesus Christ saved all flesh 
[AND RESTORED IT UNTO LIFE], 17 that he might show forth the 
temple of righteousness in his body. 18 In whom (or whereby) we 
are saved (Milan, Paris: in whom if we believe we are set free). 

19 They therefore (Paris MS.; Arm. has: Know therefore 
that. Laon has: They therefore who agree with them) are not 
children of righteousness but children of wrath who reject the 
wisdom (providence?) of God, saying that the heaven and the 
earth and all that are in them are not the work of God. 20 Tury 
THEREFORE ARE CHILDREN OF WRATH, for cursed are they, following 
the teaching of the serpent, 21 whom do ye drive out from you 
and flee from their doctrine. [Arm., Milan, Paris: 22 For vrE 
ARE NOT CHILDREN OF DISOBEDIENCE, BUT OF THE WELL-BELOVED 
CHURCH. 23 THEREFORE IS THE TIME OF THE RESURRECTION 
PROCLAIMED UNTO ALL.] 

24 And as for that which they say, that there is no resurrection 
of the flesh, they indeed shall have no resurrection UNTO LIFE, 
BUT UNTO JUDGEMENT, 25 because they believe not in him that 
is risen from the dead, NOT BELIEVING NOR UNDERSTANDING, 
26 for they know not, O Corinthians, the seeds of wheat or of 
other seeds (grain), how they are cast bare into the earth and are 
corrupted and rise again by the will of God with bodies, and 
clothed.t. 27 And not only that [body] which is cast in riseth 
again, but manifold more blessing itself [i. e. fertile and prosper- 

1 26 sqq. The influence not only of 1 Cor. xv but of the Apocalypse 
of Peter is visible here. 


ACTS OF PAUL 29) 


ing]. 28 And if we must not take an example from seeds ONLy, 
BUT FROM MORE NOBLE BODIES, 29 ye know how Jonas the som 
of Amathi, when he would not preach to them of Nineve, BuT 
FLED, was swallowed by the sea-monster; 80 and after three 
days and three nights God heard the prayer of Jonas out of the 
lowest hell, and no part of him was consumed, not even an hair 
nor an eyelash. 381 How much more, O YE OF LITTLE FAITH, 
shall he raise up you that have believed in Christ Jesus, like as he 
himself arose. 32 Likewise also a dead man was cast upon the 
bones of the prophet Helisaeus by the children of Israel, and he 
arose, both body and soul and bones and spirit (Laon: arose in his 
body); how much more shall ye which have been cast upon the body 
and bones and spirit of the Lord [Milan, Paris: how much more, 
O ye of little faith, shall ye which have been cast on him] arise 
again in that day having your flesh whole, EVEN AS HE AROSE? 
[83 Arm., Milan, Paris: LikEWISE ALSO CONCERNING THE PROPHET 
HELIAS: HE RAISED UP THE WIDOW’S SON FROM DEATH: HOW 
MUCH MORE SHALL THE LORD JESUS RAISE YOU UP FROM DEATH 
AT THE SOUND OF THE TRUMPET, IN THE TWINKLING OF AN EYE ? 
FOR HE HATH SHOWED US AN ENSAMPLE IN HIS OWN BODY. | 

84 If, then, ye receive any other doctrine, GoD SHALL BE WITNESS 
AGAINST YOU; AND let no man trouble me, 85 for I bear these 
bonds that I may win Christ, and I therefore bear his marks. 
in my body that I may attain unto the resurrection of the dead. 
86 And whoso receiveth (abideth in) the rule which he hath 
received by the blessed prophets and the holy gospel, shall 
receive a recompense from the Lord, AND WHEN HE RISETH FROM 
THE DEAD SHALL OBTAIN ETERNAL LIFE. 87 But whoso trans- 
gresseth these things, with him is the fire, and with them that 
walk in like manner (Milan, Paris: with them that go before 
in the same way, WHO ARE MEN wiTHoUT GoD), 88 which are 
a generation of vipers, 39 whom do ye reject in the power of 
the Lord, 40 and peace, GRACE, AND LOVE shall be with you. 

[Laon adds: This I found in an old book, entitled the third 
to the Corinthians, though it is not in the Canon.] 


Vill 
AT EPHESUS 

This episode is not traceable in the Coptic MS. but it undoubtedly 
formed part of the Acts, though its place is uncertain. It is preserved 
in an allusion by Hippolytus (early third century) and in an abstract 
by Nicephorus Callisti (fourteenth century) in his Ecclesiastical History 
(ii. 25). There is also a sentence in the Acts of Titus: 

‘They departed from Crete and came to Asia: and at Ephesus: 
twelve thousand believed at the teaching of the holy Paul: there also 
he fought with beasts, being thrown to a lion.’ 


Hirrotyrus in his Commentary on Daniel, iii. 29, says: 
For if we believe that when Paul was condemned to the beasts: 


292 ACTS OF PAUL 


the lion that was set upon him lay down at his feet and licked 
him, how shall we not believe that which happened in the case 
of Daniel? 

NICEPHORUS: 

Now they who drew up the travels of Paul have related that 
he did many other things, and among them this, which befell 
when he was at Ephesus. Hieronymus being governor, Paul 
used liberty of speech, and he (Hieronymus) said that he (Paul) 
was able to speak well, but that this was not the time for such 
words. But the people of the city, fiercely enraged, put Paul’s 
feet into irons, and shut him up in the prison, till he should 
be exposed as a prey to the lions. But Eubula and Artemilla, 
wives of eminent men among the Ephesians, being his attached 
disciples, and visiting him by night, desired the grace of the 
divine washing. And by God’s power, with angels to escort 
them and enlighten the gloom of night with the excess of the 
brightness that was in them, Paul, loosed from his iron fetters, 
went to the sea-shore and initiated them into holy baptism, 
and returning to his bonds without any of those in care of the 
prison perceiving it, was reserved as a prey for the lions. 

A lion, then, of huge size and unmatched strength was let 
loose upon him, and it ran to him in the stadium and lay down 
at his feet. And when many other savage beasts, too, were let 
loose, it was permitted to none of them to touch the holy body, 
standing like a statue in prayer. At this juncture a violent 
and vast hailstorm poured down all at once with a great rush, 
and shattered the heads of many men and beasts as well, and 
shore off the ear of Hieronymus himself. And thereafter, with 
his followers, he came to the God of Paul and received the baptism 
of salvation. But the lion escaped to the mountains. 

And thence Paul sailed to Macedonia and Greece, and there- 
after through Macedonia came to Troas and to Miletus, and 
from there set out for Jerusalem. 

Now it is not surprising that Luke has not narrated this 
fight with the beasts along with the other Acts: for it is not 
permitted to entertain doubt because (or seeing that) John 
alone of the evangelists has told of the raising of Lazarus: for 
we know that not every one writes, believes, or knows every- 
thing, but according as the Lord has imparted to each, as the 
spirit divides to each, so does he perceive and believe and write 
spiritually the things of the spirit. 


Hippolytus is a voucher for the early date of the story, and Nice- 
phorus for its source. It will be recognized, moreover, at once as 
being quite in the manner of our author. The anger of the Ephesians, 
it cannot be doubted, was roused by Paul’s preaching of continence, 
to which Eubula and Artemilla had become converts. The episode 
is really little more than a repetition of Thecla, with Paul for the 
principal figure. 


ACTS OF PAUL 293 


Ix 
FRAGMENTS: SCENES OF FAREWELL 


(Paul speaking) LC er eC Dank Solvain on (7) 

The grace of the Lord will walk with me until I have fulfilled 
all the dispensations which shall come upon me with patience. 
But they were sorrowful, and fasted. And Cleobius was in 
the Spirit and said unto them: Brethren, (the Lord) will suffer 
Paul to fulfil every dispensation and thereafter will suffer him 
to go up (to Jerusalem). But thereafter shall be . . . . 
in much instruction and knowledge and sowing of the word, 
so that men shall envy him, and so he shall depart out of this 
world. But when Paul and the brethren heard this, they lifted 
up their voices, saying: 

Next page, first extant line, ‘beheld’. Second, ‘shall say’. Third, 
But the Spirit came upon Myrte so that she said unto them: 
Hs rethren ie. eens LOOk pon thisssion that yell. l. ah). 
For Paul the servant of the Lord shall save many in Rome, 
so that of them shall be no number, and he will manifest himself 
more than all the faithful. Thereafter shall . . . . of the 
Lord Jesus Christ come . . . . a great grace is saa eede 
at Rome. And this is the manner wherein the Spirit spake unto 
Myrte. And every one took the bread, and they were in joy, 
according to the custom of the fast, through . . . . and 
the psalms of Davidand . . . . he rejoiced. 

On the next page the only significant words are ‘to Rome’; 
‘the brethren’; ‘grieved’; ‘took the bread’; ‘praised the 
Lord’; ‘were very sorrowful’. 

The next has ends of lines: ‘the Lord’; ‘risen’; ‘Jesus’; 
‘Paul said to him’. The last is ‘he (or they) greeted’. 

Two more pages have nothing of moment. The next is con- 
cerned with the Martyrdom. 


x 


THE MARTYRDOM 


This, preserved separately to be read on the day of Commemoration, 
exists in two Greek copies, an incomplete Latin version, and versions 
in Syriac, Coptic, Ethiopic, Slavonic, besides fragments in our Coptic MS. 


I. Now there were awaiting Paul at Rome Luke from Galatia 
(Gaul, Gk.) and Titus from Dalmatia: whom when Paul saw 
he was glad: and hired a grange outside Rome, wherein with 
the brethren he taught the word of truth, and he became noised 
abroad and many souls were added unto the Lord, so that there 
was a rumour throughout all Rome, and much people came 
unto him from the household of Caesar, believing, and there 
was great joy. 


294 ACTS OF PAUL 


And a certain Patroclus, a cup-bearer of Caesar, came at 
even unto the grange, and not being able because of the press 
to enter in to Paul, he sat in a high window and listened to him 
teaching the word of God. But whereas the evil devil envied 
‘tthe love of the brethren, Patroclus fell down from the window 
and died, and forthwith it was told unto Nero. 

But Paul perceiving it by the spirit said: Men and brethren, 
the evil one hath gained occasion to tempt you: go out of the 
house and ye shall find a lad fallen from the height and now 
ready to give up the ghost; take him up and bring him hither 
to me. And they went and brought him; and when the people 
saw it they were troubled. But Paul said: Now, brethren, 
let your faith appear; come all of you and let us weep unto 
our Lord Jesus Christ, that this lad may live and we continue 
in quietness. And when all had lamented, the lad received his 
spirit again, and they set him on a beast and sent him back 
alive, together with the rest that were of Caesar’s household. 

II. But Nero, when he heard of the death of Patroclus, was 
sore grieved, and when he came in from the bath he commanded 
another to be set over the wine. But his servants told him, 
saying: Caesar, Patroclus liveth and standeth at the table. And 
Caesar, hearing that Patroclus lived, was affrighted and would 
not go in. But when he went in, he saw Patroclus, and was 
beside himself, and said: Patroclus, livest thou? And he said: 
I live, Caesar. And he said: Who is he that made thee to live? 
And the lad, full of the mind of faith, said: Christ Jesus, the 
king of the ages. And Caesar was troubled and said: Shall 
he, then, be king of the ages and overthrow all kingdoms? 
Patroclus saith unto him: Yea, he overthroweth all kingdoms 
and he alone shall be for ever, and there shall be no kingdom 
that shall escape him. And he smote him on the face and said: 
Patroclus, art thou also a soldier of that king? And he said: 
Yea, Lord Caesar, for he raised me when I was dead. And 
Barsabas Justus of the broad feet, and Urion the Cappadocian, 
and Festus the Galatian, Caesar’s chief men, said: We also 
are soldiers of the king of the ages. And he shut them up in 
prison, having grievously tormented them, whom he loved much, 
and commanded the soldiers of the great king to be sought 
out, and set forth a decree to this effect, that all that were found 
to be Christians and soldiers of Christ should be slain. 

III. And among many others Paul also was brought, bound: 
unto whom all his fellow-prisoners gave heed; so that Caesar 
perceived that he was over the camp. And he said to him: 
Thou that art the great king’s man, but my prisoner, how 
thoughtest thou well to come by stealth into the government 
of the Romans and levy soldiers out of my province? But 
Paul, filled with the Holy Ghost, said before them all: O Caesar, 
not only out of thy province do we levy soldiers, but out of the 


ACTS OF PAUL 295 


whole world. For so hath it been ordained unto us, that no 
man should be refused who wisheth to serve my king. And 
if it like thee also to serve him (Lat. thou wilt not repent thereof: 
but think not that the wealth, &c., which seems better), it is 
not wealth nor the splendour that is now in this life that shall 
save thee; but if thou submit and entreat him, thou shalt be 
saved; for in one day (or one day) he shall fight against the 
world with fire. And when Caesar heard that, he commanded 
all the prisoners to be burned with fire, but Paul to be beheaded 
after the law of the Romans. 

But Paul kept not silence concerning the word, but com- 
municated with Longus the prefect and Cestus the centurion. 

Nero therefore went on (was) (perhaps add ‘raging’) in Rome, 
slaying many Christians without a hearing, by the working 
of the evil one; so that the Romans stood before the palace 
and cried: It sufficeth, Caesar! for the men are our own! thou 
destroyest the strength of the Romans! Then at that he was 
persuaded and ceased, and commanded that no man should 
touch any Christian, until he should learn throughly concerning 
them. 

IV. Then was Paul brought unto him after the decree; and 
he abode by his word that he should be beheaded. And Paul 
said: Caesar, it is not for a little space that I live unto my 
king; and if thou behead me, this will I do: I will arise and 
show myself unto thee that I am not dead but live unto my 
Lord Jesus Christ, who cometh to judge the world. 

But Longus and Cestus said unto Paul: Whence have ye 
this king, that ye believe in him and will not change your mind, 
even unto death? And Paul communicated unto them the word 
and said: Ye men that are in this ignorance and error, change 
your mind and be saved from the fire that cometh upon all 
the world: for we serve not, as ye suppose, a king that cometh 
from the earth, but from heaven, even the living God, who 
because of the iniquities that are done in this world, cometh 
as a judge; and blessed is that man who shall believe in him 
and shall live for ever when he cometh to burn the world and 
purge it throughly. Then they beseeching him said: We entreat 
thee, help us, and we will let thee go. But he answered and 
said: I am not a deserter of Christ, but a lawful soldier of the 
living God: if I had known that I should die, O Longus and 
Cestus, I would have done it, but seeing that I live unto God 
and love myself, I go unto the Lord, to come with him in the 
glory of his Father. They say unto him: How then shall we 
live when thou art beheaded? 

V. And while they yet spake thus, Nero sent one Parthenius 
and Pheres to see if Paul were already beheaded; and they 
found him yet alive. And he called them to him and said: 
Believe on the living God, which raiseth me and all them that 


296 ACTS OF PAUL 


believe on him from the dead. And they said: We go now 
unto Nero; but when thou diest and risest again, then will 
we believe on thy God. And as Longus and Cestus entreated 
him yet more concerning salvation, he saith to them: Come 
quickly unto my grave in the morning and ye shall find two men 
praying, Titus and Luke. They shall give you the seal in the 
Lord. 

Then Paul stood with his face to the east and lifted up his 
hands unto heaven and prayed a long time, and in his prayer 
he conversed in the Hebrew tongue with the fathers, and then 
stretched forth his neck without speaking. And when the 
executioner (speculator) struck off his head, millx spurted upon 
the cloak of the soldier. And the soldier and all that were there 
present when they saw it marvelled and glorified God which 
had given such glory unto Paul: and they went and told Caesar 
what was done. 

VI. And when he heard it, while he marvelled long and was 
in perplexity, Paul came about the ninth hour, when many 
philosophers and the centurion were standing with Caesar, 
and stood before them all and said: Caesar, behold, I, Paul, 
the soldier of God, am not dead, but live in my God. But unto 
thee shall many evils befall and great punishment, thou wretched 
man, because thou hast shed unjustly the blood of the righteous, 
not many days hence. And having so said Paul departed from 
him. But Nero hearing it and being greatly troubled com- 
manded the prisoners to be loosed, and Patroclus also and 
Barsabas and them that were with him. 

VII. And as Paul charged them, Longus and Cestus the 
centurion went early in the morning and approached with fear 
unto the grave of Paul. And when they were come thither 
they saw two men praying, and Paul betwixt them, so that 
they beholding the wondrous marvel were amazed, but Titus 
and Luke being stricken with the fear of man when they saw 
Longus and Cestus coming toward them, turned to flight. But 
they pursued after them, saying: We pursue you not for death 
but for life, that ye may give it unto us, as Paul promised us, 
whom we saw just now standing betwixt you and praying. And 
when they heard that, Titus and Luke rejoiced and gave them 
the seal in the Lord, glorifying the God and Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ (Copt. and glorified the Lord Jesus Christ and all 
the saints). 

Unto whom be glory world without end. Amen. 

The Coptic MS. has a colophon: The Acts of Paul according 
to the Apostle. 


ACTS OF PAUL 297 


XI 
UNPLACED AND UNCERTAIN FRAGMENTS 


Among the very few ancient quotations of the Acts of Paul 
are two short phrases cited by Origen. 

(a) On First Principles, i. 2, 8: wherefore also that word seems 
to me to be truly said, which is written in the Acts of Paul: 
‘He is the word, a living creature.’ But John in the beginning 
of his Gospel says more exaltedly and more excellently, &c. 

(b) On John, xx. 12. But if any one likes to accept that which 
is recorded in the Acts of Paul as spoken by the Saviour: ‘Again 
am I about to be crucified.’ 

Both phrases, but the second especially, have been thought by 
some to come from a context relating to the death of Peter. (a) is 
compared with Peter’s speech at the cross; (b) appears in slightly 
different forms in all the Passions of Peter as Christ’s answer to Peter 
when he is escaping from Rome. Whither goest thou Lord? (or, What 
doest thou here?) ‘I come to be crucified again.’ The inference is 
that an account of the martyrdom of Peter formed part of the Acts of 
Paul. But this I find very difficult to accept, though I acknowledge 
it to be possible, seeing that the author of these Acts evidently placed 
the martyrdom of Paul after that of Peter, and, to judge from the 
Acts of Peter, some little time (perhaps a whole year) after. 

A probable fragment is a quotation made by Clement of Alexandria 
(Strom. vi. 5: ed. Stahelin, ii. 452). 

He has been quoting the Preaching of Peter, and continues: 

But the proposition that, just as God willed the Jews to be 
saved by giving them the prophets, so he raised up the most 
approved of the Greeks to be prophets suited to their language, 
according as they were capable of receiving the benefit from 
God, and distinguished them from the ruck of men—this, in 
addition to the Preaching of Peter, the apostle Paul will show 
when he says: 

‘Take also the Greek books, take knowledge of the Sibyl, 
how she declares one God, and things to come, take and read 
Hystaspes, and ye will find the Son of God described far more 
openly and plainly, and how many kings will make war against 
the Christ, hating him and those that bear his name, and his 
faithful ones: and his patience and his coming again.’ And 
then in one word he asks of us: ‘And the whole world and all 
that is in it, whose arethey? are they not God’s?’ Therefore is 
it that Peter says (another quotation from the Preaching follows). 

It has been usual to assume that these sentences are from a Preaching 
of Paul: but of such a book the very existence is doubtful. The 
passages supposed to establish it shall be given. 

One is in Pseudo-Cyprian de rebaptismate (third century) : 

Now of this spurious, nay fatal, baptism an especial supporter 
is a book forged by these same heretics to favour this error, 


298 ACTS OF PAUL 


which is entitled ‘the Preaching of Paul’. In which book, 
contrary to every scripture, you will find Christ, who alone never 
sinned at all, both confessing his own sin and being compelled 
almost against his will by his mother Mary to receive the baptism 
of John; and further, that when he was baptized, fire appeared 
upon the water, which is recorded in no gospel. And that after 
so long a time Peter and Paul (after their conference (comparison) 
on the gospel at Jerusalem, after their common counsels, their 
dispute, their settling of a course of action (?)) at last met in Rome 
as if then first known to each other: and some other things 
of the kind absurdly and disgracefully concocted, all of which 
you will find heaped together in that book. 

The author, it may be noted, is wrong in his statement that the 
baptism story was not recorded in any Gospel: it was found, wholly 
or partly, in the Gospel according to the Hebrews and the Ebionite 
Gospel. 

The other is in Lactantius’ Institutes, iv. 21. 2: 


(Jesus) also revealed all things to come (to his disciples) which 
Peter and Paul preached at Rome, and that preaching continues 
in writing, for a memorial. Wherein, with many other wondrous 
things, they said that this too would come to pass, that after a 
little time God would send a king who would attack the Jews 
and lay their cities even with the ground and besiege them till 
they were exhausted with hunger and thirst: then would they 
feed on the bodies of their own kin, and devour one another: 
finally, that they would be taken and fall into the enemies’ 
hands and see their wives maltreated before their faces, their 
maidens outraged and prostituted, their boys carried off, their 
infants dashed to the earth, all, in a word, wasted by fire and 
sword, and themselves captive and banished for ever from their land, 
because they rejoiced against the beloved and approved Son of God. 

No other trace of a book called a Preaching of Paul remains, and, as 
I say, its existence is doubtful. 

Commodian, the strange Christian poet, who according to some 
critics, was an African of the third century, and according to others 
lived in Gaul in the fifth, has in his Carmen Apologeticum (624 sqq.) 
are to the Acts of Peter and of Paul. Speaking of God’s power, 
he says: 


And whatever he willeth he can do: making dumb things to 
speak; he made Balaam’s ass speak to him when he beat it; 
and a dog to say to Simon: ‘Thou art called for by Peter!’ 
For Paul when he preached, he caused dumb persons (or perhaps 
mules) to speak of him!: he made a lion speak to the people 
with God-given voice. Lastly, a thing which our nature does 
not permit—he made an infant five months old speak in public. 


? The manuscript has multi, which may be for muti or muli. Or, 
keeping multi (as Zahn), we should translate, ‘For Paul when he 


ACTS OF PAUL 299 


The incidents of the dog and of the child are from the Acts of Peter 
(only there the child is seven months old): but the lion and the dumb 
people (or mules) are not; and it seems that the lion is certainly from 
the Acts of Paul.! Perhaps it was the Ephesian lion. In the Ethiopic 
life of Paul we do find a talking lion. 

Lastly, in John of Salisbury’s Policraticus (finished in 1156) is this 
passage which, whatever its source, preserves a record of an apocryphal 
speech of Paul. 

iv. 9. He has told the stories of the self-sacrifice of Codrus and 
Lycurgus, which he gets from the historian Justin. Then he 
continues: 

I make use of these examples the more readily because I find 
that the apostle Paul when preaching to the Athenians made 
use of them also. That excellent preacher strove so to impress 
on their minds Jesus Christ and him crucified, that he might 
show by the example of heathens how the release of many came 
about through the shame of the cross. And this, he argued, 
could not happen save by the blood of the just, and of those 
who bore rule over the people. Further, no one could be found 
capable of freeing all, both Jews and Gentiles, save he unto 
whom the heathen are given for an inheritance, and the utmost 
parts of the earth assigned for his possession. And such a one 
he said could be no other than the Son of God Almighty, since 
no one but God has subjected to himself all nations and lands. 
As, then, he proclaimed the shame of the cross in such a way 
as gradually to purge away the foolishness of the heathen, little 
by little he raised the word of faith and the language of his 
preaching, up to the Word of God, the wisdom of God, and the 
very throne of the divine majesty: and, lest the power of the 
gospel should seem mean in the weakness of the flesh by dint 
of the slanders of Jews and the folly of heathens, he set forth 
the works of the crucified, which were confirmed by the witness 
of common report; since it was plain to all that none but God 
could do such things. But as report often falsifies, in both 
directions, report was assisted by the fact that Christ’s disciples 
did even greater works, seeing that by the shadow of a disciple 
(Peter) the sick were healed of every kind of disease. What 
more? The ingenuities of an Aristotle, the subtleties of a 
Chrysippus, the gins of all the philosophers were defeated by 
the rising of one who had been dead. (This last sentence is 
borrowed from Jerome (Ep. (to Pammachius) 57 or 34.) 
preached, in order that many might speak (or learn) of him, God made 
a lion’, &c. The miracle was done in order to attract the attention of 
‘many ’ hearers. 

1 Jerome, quoting Tertullian, but adding some details to what he 
says (the source of them is doubtful), speaks of ‘that whole fable 
about the baptized lion’. It reminds us of Commodian’s words: but 
Jerome is a bad witness about apocryphal books, which he despises 
and reviles, 


800 


ACTS OF PETER 


Written, probably by a resident in Asia Minor (he does not know 
much about Rome), not later than a. p. 200, in Greek. The author 
has read the Acts of John very carefully, and modelled his language 
upon them. However, he was not so unorthodox as Leucius, though 
his language about the Person of our Lord (ch. xx) has rather suspicious 
resemblances to that of the Acts of John. 

The length of the book as given by the Stichometry of Nicephorus 
was 2,750 lines—fifty lines less than the canonical Acts. The portions 
we have may be about the length of St. Mark’s Gospel; and about 
1,000 lines may be wanting. Such is Zahn’s estimate. 

We have: 

1. A short episode in Coptic. 

2. A large portion in Latin preserved in a single manuscript of the 
seventh century at Vercelli: often called the Vercelli Acts. It includes 
the martyrdom. 

3. The martyrdom, preserved separately, in two good Greek copies, 
in Latin, and in many versions—Coptic, Slavonic, Syriac, Armenian, 
Arabic, Ethiopic. 

Also: 

One or two important quotations from lost portions; asmall fragment 
of the original in a papyrus; certain passages—speeches of Peter— 
transferred by an unscrupulous writer to the Life of St. Abercius of 
Hierapolis.t 

A Latin paraphrase of the martyrdom, attributed to Linus, Peter’s 
successor in the bishopric of Rome, was made from the Greek, and is 
occasionally useful. 


I 
THE COPTIC FRAGMENT 


This is preserved separately, in an early papyrus manuscript (fourth- 
fifth century) now at Berlin; the other contents of it are Gnostic 
writings which have not yet been published. I follow C. Schmidt’s 
rendering of it. It has a title at the end: 


The Act of Peter 


On the first day of the week, that is, on the Lord’s day, a 
multitude gathered together, and they brought unto Peter many 
sick that he might heal them. And one of the multitude adven- 
tured to say unto Peter: Lo, Peter, in our presence thou hast 
made many blind to see and the deaf to hear and the lame 
to walk, and hast succoured the weak and given them strength: 
but wherefore hast thou not succoured thy daughter, the virgin, 
which grew up beautiful and hath believed in the name of God ? 
For behold, her one side is wholly palsied, and she lieth there 


chs. xxxviii, xxxix have also been extensively used in a prayer 
before the oblation in the Syrian (?) Testament of the Lord. 


ACTS OF PETER 301 


stretched out in the corner helpless. We see them that have 
been healed by thee: thine own daughter thou hast neglected. 

But Peter smiled and said unto him: My son, it is manifest 
unto God alone wherefore her body is not whole. Know then 
that God is not weak nor powerless to grant his gift unto my 
daughter: but that thy soul may be convinced, and they that 
are here present may the more believe—then he looked unto his 
daughter and said to her: Raise thyself up from thy place, 
without any helping thee save Jesus only, and walk whole before 
all these, and come unto me. And she arose and came to him; 
and the multitude rejoiced at that which was come to pass. Then 
said Peter unto them: Behold, your heart is convinced that God 
is not without strength concerning all things that we ask of him. 
Then they rejoiced yet more and praised God. And Peter said to 
his daughter: Go unto thy place, and lay thee down and be again 
in thine infirmity, for this is expedient for me and for thee. And 
the maiden went back and lay down in her place and was as 
beforetime: and the whole multitude wept, and entreated Peter 
to make her whole. 

But Peter said unto them: As the Lord liveth, this is expedient 
for her and for me. For on the day when she was born unto me 
I saw a vision, and the Lord said unto me: Peter, this day is 
a great temptation born unto thee, for this daughter will bring 
hurt unto many souls if her body continue whole. But I thought 
that the vision did mock me. 

Now when the maiden was ten years old, a stumbling-block 
was prepared for many by reason of her. And an exceeding rich 
man, by name Ptolemaeus, when he had seen the maiden with 
her mother bathing, sent unto her to take her to wife; but her 
mother consented not. And he sent oft-times to her, and could 
not wait. 

[Here a leaf is lost: the sense, however, is not hard to supply. 
Augustine speaks (quoting Apocryphal Acts) of a daughter of Peter 
struck with palsy at the prayer of her father. 

Ptolemaeus, unable to win the maiden by fair means, comes and 
carries her off. Peter hears of it and prays God to protect her. His 
prayer is heard. She is struck with palsy on one side of her body. 
Then the text resumes. ] 

The servants of Ptolemaeus brought the maiden and laid her 
down before the door of the house and departed. 

But when I perceived it, I and her mother, we went down and 
found the maiden, that one whole side of her body from her toes 
even to her head was palsied and withered: and we bore her 
away, praising the Lord which had preserved his handmaid from 
defilement and shame and (corruption?). This is the cause of 
the matter, why the maiden continueth so unto this day. 

Now, then, it is fitting for you to know the end of Ptolemaeus. 
He went home and sorrowed night and day over that which had 


802 ACTS OF PETER 


befallen him, and by reason of the many tears which he shed, he 
became blind. And when he had resolved to rise up and hang 
himself, lo, about the ninth hour of the day, he saw a great light 
which enlightened the whole house, and heard a voice saying 
unto him: Ptolemaeus, God hath not given thee the vessels for 
corruption and shame, and yet more doth it not become thee 
which hast believed in me to defile my virgin, whom thou shalt 
know as thy sister, even as if I were unto you both one spirit (sic). 
But rise up and go quickly unto the house of the apostle Peter, 
and thou shalt see my glory; he shall make known unto thee 
what thou must do. 

But Ptolemaeus was not negligent, and bade his servants 
show him the way and bring him unto me. And when they were 
come to me, he told me all that had befallen him by the power of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. Then did he see with the eyes of his flesh, 
and with the eyes of his soul, and much people believed (hoped) 
in Christ: and he did them good and gave them the gift of God. 

Thereafter Ptolemaeus died, departing out of this life, and 
went unto his Lord: and when he made his will he bequeathed 
a piece of land in the name of my daughter, because through her 
he had believed in God and was made whole. But I unto whom 
the disposition thereof fell, exercised it with great carefulness: 
I sold the land, and God alone knoweth neither I nor my 
daughter (received the price). I sold the land and kept nought 
back of the price, but gave all the money unto the poor. 

Know therefore, thou servant of Jesus Christ, that God 
directeth (?) them that are his, and prepareth good for every 
one of them, although we think that God hath forgotten us. 
Therefore now, brethren, let us be sorrowful and watch and pray, 
and so shall the goodness of God look upon us, whereon we wait. 

And yet further discourse did Peter hold before them all, and 
glorified the name of Christ the Lord and gave them all of the 
bread: and when he had distributed it, he rose up and went unto 
his house. 


The scene of this episode is probably Jerusalem. The subject of it 
was often used by later writers, most notably, perhaps, by the author 
of the late Acts of SS. Nereus and Achilleus (fifth or sixth century), 
who gives the daughter a name, Petronilla, which has passed into 
Kalendars, and as Perronelle, Pernel, or Parnell has become familiar. 

A few critics have questioned whether this piece really belongs to 
the Acts of Peter: but the weight of probability and of opinion is 
against them. Nothing can be plainer than that it is an extract from 
a larger book, and that it is ancient (the manuscript may be of the 
fourth century). Moreover, Augustine, in dealing with apocryphal 
Acts, alludes to the story contained in it. What other large book of 
ancient date dealing with Peter’s doings can we imagine save the Acts? 


ACTS OF PETER 803 


II 
THE GARDENER’S DAUGHTER 


Augustine (Against Adimantus, xvii. 5), says to his Manichaean 
opponent: the story of Peter killing Ananias and Sapphira by 
a word is very stupidly blamed by those who in the apocryphal 
Acts read and admire both the incident I mentioned about the 
apostle Thomas (the death of the cup-bearer at the feast in his 
Acts) ‘ and that the daughter of Peter himself was stricken with 
palsy at the prayer of her father, and that the daughter of a 
gardener died at the prayer of Peter. Their answer is that it was 
expedient for them, that the one should be disabled by palsy and 
the other should die: but they do not deny that it happened at 
the prayer of the apostle ’. 


This allusion to the gardener’s daughter remained a puzzle until 
lately. But a passage in the Epistle of Titus (already quoted) tells us 
the substance of the story. 


A certain gardener had a daughter, a virgin, her father’s only 
child: he begged Peter to pray for her. Upon his request, the 
apostle answered him that the Lord would give her that which 
was useful for her soul. Immediately the girl fell dead. 

O worthy gain and suitable to God, to escape the insolence of 
the flesh and mortify the boastfulness of the blood! But that 
old man, faithless, and not knowing the greatness of the heavenly 
favour, ignorant of the divine benefit, entreated Peter that his 
only daughter might be raised again. And when she was raised, 
not many days after, jas it might be to-dayt, the slave of a 
believer who lodged in the house ran upon her and ruined the 
girl, and both of them disappeared. 


This was evidently a contrast to the story of Peter’s daughter, 
and probably followed immediately upon it in the Acts. There is 
another sentence appropriate to the situation, which Dom de Bruyne 
found in a Cambrai MS. of the thirteenth century—a collection of 
apophthegms—and printed with the extracts from the Epistle of Titus, 


That the dead are not to be mourned overmuch, Peter, speaking 
to one who lamented without patience the loss of his daughter, 
said: So many assaults of the devil, so many warrings of the 
body, so many disasters of the world hath she escaped, and thou 
sheddest tears as if thou knewest not what thou sufferest in 
thyself (what good hath befallen thee). 


This might very well be part of Peter’s address to the bereaved 
gardener. 


804 ACTS OF PETER 


II 
THE VERCELLI ACTS 

I. At the time when Paul was sojourning in Rome and con- 
firming many in the faith, it came also to pass that one by name 
Candida, the wife of Quartus that was over the prisons, heard 
Paul and paid heed to his words and believed. And when she 
had instructed her husband also and he believed, Quartus 
suffered Paul to go whither he would away from the city: to 
whom Paul said: If it be the will of God, he will reveal it unto 
me. And after Paul had fasted three days and asked of the Lord 
that which should be profitable for him, he saw a vision, even 
the Lord saying unto him: Arise, Paul, and become a physician 
in thy body (i. e. by going thither in person) to them that are in 
Spain. 

He therefore, having related to the brethren what God had 
commanded, nothing doubting, prepared himself to set forth 
from the city. But when Paul was about to depart, there was 
great weeping throughout all the brotherhood, because they 
thought that they should see Paul no more, so that they even 
rent their clothes. For they had in mind also how that Paul 
had oftentimes contended with the doctors of the Jews and 
confuted them, saying: Christ, upon whom your fathers laid 
hands, abolished their sabbaths and fasts and holy-days and 
circumcision, and the doctrines of men and the rest of the 
traditions he did abolish. But the brethren lamented (and 
adjured) Paul by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he 
should not be absent above a year, saying: We know thy love 
for thy brethren; forget not us when thou art come thither, 
neither begin to forsake us, as little children without a mother. 
And when they besought him long with tears, there came a sound 
from heaven, and a great voice saying: Paul the servant of God 
is chosen to minister all the days of his life: by the hands of 
Nero the ungodly and wicked man shall he be perfected before 
your eyes. And a very great fear fell upon the brethren because 
of the voice which came from heaven: and they were confirmed 
yet more in the faith. 

II. Now they brought unto Paul bread and water for the 
sacrifice, that he might make prayer and distribute it to every 
one. Among whom it befell that a woman named Rufina desired, 
she also, to receive the Eucharist at the hands of Paul: to whom 
Paul, filled with the spirit of God, said as she drew near: Rufina, 
thou comest not worthily unto the altar of God, arising from 
beside one that is not thine husband but an adulterer, and 
assayest to receive the Eucharist of God. For behold Satan 
shall trouble thine heart and cast thee down in the sight of all 


1 This incident is quoted in the Epistle of Titus. 


ACTS OF PETER 805 


them that believe in the Lord, that they which see and believe may 
know that they have believed in the living God, the searcher of 
hearts. But if thou repent of thine act, he is faithful that is able 
to blot out thy sin and set thee free from this sin: but if thou 
repent not, while thou art yet in the body, devouring fire and 
outer darkness shall receive thee for ever. And immediately 
Rufina fell down, being stricken with palsy (?) from her head 
unto the nails of her feet, and she had no power to speak (given 
her) for her tongue was bound. And? when both they that 
believed (in the faith) and the neophytes saw it, they beat their 
breasts, remembering their old sins, and mourned and said: We 
know not if God will forgive the former sins which we have 
committed. Then Paul called for silence and said: Men and 
brethren which now have begun to believe on Christ, if ye continue 
not in your former works of the tradition of your fathers, and 
keep yourselves from all guile and wrath and fierceness and 
adultery and defilement, and from pride and envy and contempt 
and enmity, Jesus the living God will forgive you that ye did in 
ignorance. Wherefore, ye servants of God, arm yourselves every 
one in your inner man with peace, patience, gentleness, faith, 
charity, knowledge, wisdom, love of the brethren, hospitality, 
mercy, abstinence, chastity, kindness, justice: then shall ye have 
for your guide everlastingly the first-begotten of all creation, and 
shall have strength in peace with our Lord. And when they had 
heard these things of Paul, they besought him to pray for them. 
And Paul lifted up his voice and said: O eternal God, God of 
the heavens, God of unspeakable majesty (divinity), who hast 
stablished all things by thy word, who hast bound upon all the 
world the chain of thy grace, Father of thine holy Son Jesus 
Christ, we together pray thee through thy Son Jesus Christ, 
strengthen the souls which were before unbelieving but now are 
faithful. Once I was a blasphemer, now I am blasphemed ; 
once I was a persecutor, now do I suffer persecution of others ; 
once I was the enemy of Christ, now I pray that I may be his 
friend: for I trust in his promise and in his mercy; I account 
myself faithful and that I have received forgiveness of my 
former sins. Wherefore I exhort you also, brethren, to believe 
in the Lord the Father Almighty, and to put all your trust 
in our Lord Jesus Christ his Son, believing in him, and no man 
shall be able to uproot you from his promise. Bow your 
knees therefore together and commend me unto the Lord, who 
am about to set forth unto another nation, that his grace may 
go before me and dispose my journey aright, that he may receive 
his vessels holy and believing, that they, giving thanks for my 
preaching of the word of the Lord, may be well grounded in the 
faith. But the brethren wept long and prayed unto the Lord 
with Paul, saying: Be thou, Lord Jesus Christ, with Paul and 


1 This passage and Paul’s speech are used in the Life of St. Abercius. 
870 x 


306 ACTS OF PETER 


restore him unto us whole: for we know our weakness which is 
in us even to this day. 

III. And a great multitude of women were kneeling and 
praying and beseeching Paul; and they kissed his feet and 
accompanied him unto the harbour. But Dionysius and Balbus, 
of Asia, knights of Rome, and illustrious men, and a senator by 
name Demetrius abode by Paul on his right hand and said: 
Paul, I would desire to leave the city if I were not a magistrate, 
that I might not depart from thee. Also from Caesar’s house 
Cleobius and Iphitus and Lysimachus and Aristaeus and two 
matrons Berenice and Philostrate, with Narcissus the presbyter 
[after they had] accompanied him to the harbour: but whereas 
a storm of the sea came on, he (Narcissus ?) sent the brethren 
back to Rome, that if any would, he might come down and hear 
Paul until he set sail: and hearing that, the brethren went up 
unto the city. And when they told the brethren that had 
remained in the city, and the report was spread abroad, some on 
beasts, and some on foot, and others by way of the Tiber came 
down to the harbour, and were confirmed in the faith for three 
days, and on the fourth day until the fifth hour, praying together 
with Paul, and making the offering: and they put ail that was 
needful on the ship and delivered him two young men, believers, 
to sail with him, and bade him farewell in the Lord and returned 
to Rome. 


There has been great dispute about these three chapters, whether 
they are not an excerpt from the Acts of Paul, or whether they are an 
addition made by the writer of the Greek original of the Vercelli Acts. 

If they are from the Acts of Paul, it means that in those Acts Paul 
was represented as visiting Rome twice, and going to Spain between 
the visits. Evidently, if this was so, he did not return straight from 
Spain to Rome: at least the Coptic gives no indication that the 
prophecies of Cleobius and Myrte were uttered in Spain. 

The question is a difficult one. All allow that the writer of the 
Acts of Peter knew and used the Acts of Paul: but there is strong 
opposition to the idea that Paul related two visits to Rome. 

The writer of Paul obviously knew the canonical Acts very well 
and obviously took great liberties with them. Did he go so far, one 
wonders, as to suppress and ignore the whole story of the trial before 
Felix and the shipwreck? If he told of but one visit to Rome—the 
final one—it appears that he did: for the conditions described in the 
Martyrdom—Paul quite free and martyred very shortly after his 
arrival—are totally irreconcilable with Luke (Paul arriving in custody 
and living two years at least in the city). 

IV. Now after a few days there was a great commotion in 
the midst of the church, for some said that they had seen wonderful 
works done by a certain man whose name was Simon, and that 
he was at Aricia, and they added further that he said he was a 
great power of God and without God he did nothing. Is not 
this the Christ? but we believe in him whom Paul preached 


ACTS OF PETER B07 


unto us; for by him have we seen the dead raised, and men 
delivered from divers infirmities: +but this man seeketh conten- 
tion, we know itf (or, but what this contention is, we know not) 
for there is no small stir made among us. Perchance also he will 
now enter into Rome; for yesterday they besought him with 
great acclamations, saying unto him: Thou art God in Italy, 
thou art the saviour of the Romans: haste quickly unto Rome. 
But he spake to the people with a shrill voice, saying: To-morrow 
about the seventh hour ye shall see me fly over the gate of the 
city in the form (habit) wherein ye now see me speaking unto you. 
Therefore, brethren, if it seem good unto you, let us go and await 
carefully the issue of the matter. 

They all therefore ran together and came unto the gate. 
And when it was the seventh hour, behold suddenly a dust was 
seen in the sky afar off, like a smoke shining with rays stretching 
far from it. And when he drew near to the gate, suddenly he 
was not seen: and thereafter he appeared, standing in the midst 
of the people; whom they all worshipped, and took knowledge 
that he was the same that was seen of them the day before. 

And the brethren were not a little offended among themselves, 
seeing, moreover, that Paul was not at Rome, neither Timotheus 
nor Barnabas, for they had been sent into Macedonia by Paul, 
and that there was no man to comfort us, to speak nothing of 
them that had but just become catechumens. And as Simon 
exalted himself yet more by the works which he did, and many 
of them daily called Paul a sorcerer, and others a deceiver, of 
so great a multitude that had been stablished in the faith all 
fell away save Narcissus the presbyter and two women in the 
lodging of the Bithynians, and four that could no longer go out 
of their house, but were shut up (day and night): these gave 
themselves unto prayer (by day and night), beseeching the Lord 
that Paul might return quickly, or some other that should visit 
his servants, because the devil had made them fall by his 
wickedness. 

Vv. And as they prayed and fasted, God was already teaching 
Peter at Jerusalem of that which should come to pass. For 
whereas the twelve years which the Lord Christ had enjoined 
upon him were fulfilled, he showed him a vision after this manner, 
saying unto him: Peter, that Simon the sorcerer whom thou 
didst cast out of Judaea, convicting him, hath again come before 
thee (prevented thee) at Rome. And that shalt thou know 
shortly (or, and that thou mayest know in few words): for all 
that did believe in me hath Satan made to fall by his craft and 
working: whose Power Simon approveth himself to be. But 
delay thee not: set forth on the morrow, and there shalt thou 
find a ship ready, setting sail for Italy, and within few days I will 
show thee my grace which hath in it no grudging. Peter then, 
admonished by the vision, related it unto the brethren without 


308 ACTS OF PETER 


delay, saying: It is necessary for me to go up unto Rome to 
fight with the enemy and adversary of the Lord and of our 
brethren. 

And he went down to Caesarea and embarked quickly in the 
ship, whereof the Jadder was already drawn up, not taking any 
provision with him. But the governor of the ship whose name 
was Theon looked on Peter and said: Whatsoever we have, all 
is thine. For what thank have we, if we take in a man like 
unto ourselves who is in uncertain case (difficulty) and share not 
all that we have with thee? but only let us have a prosperous 
voyage. But Peter, giving him thanks for that which he 
offered, himself fasted while he was in the ship, sorrowful in 
mind and again consoling himself because God accounted him 
worthy to be a minister in his service. 

And after a few days the governor of the ship rose up at the 
hour of his dinner and asked Peter to eat with him, and said to 
him: O thou, whoever thou art, I know thee not, but as I reckon, 
I take thee for a servant of God. For as I was steering my ship 
at midnight I perceived the voice of a man from heaven saying 
to me: Theon, Theon! And twice it called me by my name and 
said to me: Among them that sail with thee let Peter be greatly 
honoured by thee, for by him shalt thou and the rest be preserved 
safe without any hurt after such a course as thou hopest not for. 
And Peter believed that God would vouchsafe to show his 
providence upon the sea unto them that were in the ship, and 
thenceforth began Peter to declare unto Theon the mighty works 
of God, and how the Lord had chosen him from among the 
apostles, and for what business he sailed unto Italy: and daily 
he communicated unto him the word of God. And considering 
him he perceived by his walk that he was of one mind in the 
faith and a worthy minister (deacon). 

Now when there was a calm upon the ship in Hadria (the 
Adriatic), Theon showed it to Peter, saying unto him: If thou 
wilt account me worthy, whom thou mayest baptize with the seal 
of the Lord, thou hast an opportunity. For all that were in the 
ship had fallen asleep, being drunken. And Peter went down by 
a rope and baptized Theon in the name of the Father and the 
Son and the Holy Ghost: and he came up out of the water 
rejoicing with great joy, and Peter also was glad because God 
had accounted Theon worthy of his name. And it came to pass 
when Theon was baptized, there appeared in the same place 
a youth shining and beautiful, saying unto them: Peace be unto 
you. And immediately Peter and Theon went up and entered 
into the cabin; and Peter took bread and gave thanks unto the 
Lord which had accounted him worthy of his holy ministry, and 
for that the youth had appeared unto them, saying: Peace be 
unto you. And he said: Thou best and alone holy one, it is 
thou that hast appeared unto us, O God Jesu Christ, and in thy 


ACTS OF PETER 809 


name hath this man now been washed and sealed with thy holy 
seal. Therefore in thy name do I impart unto him thine eucharist, 
that he may be thy perfect servant without blame for ever. 

And as they feasted and rejoiced in the Lord, suddenly there 
came a wind, not vehement but moderate, at the ship’s prow, 
and ceased not for six days and as many nights, until they came 
unto Puteoli. 

VI. And when they had touched at Puteoli, Theon leapt out 
of the ship and went unto the inn where he was wont to lodge, 
to prepare to receive Peter. Now he with whom he lodged was 
one by name Ariston, which alway feared the Lord, and because 
of the Name Theon entrusted himself with him (had dealings 
with him). And when he was come to the inn and saw Ariston, 
Theon said unto him: God who hath accounted thee worthy to 
serve him hath communicated his grace unto me also by his 
holy servant Peter, who hath now sailed with me from Judaea, 
being commanded by our Lord to come unto Italy. And when he 
heard that, Ariston fell upon Theon’s neck and embraced him 
and besought him to bring him to the ship and show him Peter. 
For Ariston said that since Paul set forth unto Spain there was 
no man of the brethren with whom he could refresh himself, 
and, moreover, a certain Jew had broken into the city, named 
Simon, and with his charms of sorcery and his wickedness hath 
he made all the brotherhood fall away this way and that, so that 
I also fled from Rome, expecting the coming of Peter: for Paul 
had told us of him, and I also have seen many things in a vision. 
Now, therefore, I believe in my Lord that he will build up again 
his ministry, for all this deceit shall be rooted out from among 
his servants. For our Lord Jesus Christ is faithful, who is able 
to restore our minds. And when Theon heard these things from 
Ariston, who wept, his spirit was raised (increased) yet more 
and he was the more strengthened, because he perceived that he 
had believed on the living God. 

But when they came together unto the ship, Peter looked upon 
them and smiled, being filled with the Spirit; so that Ariston 
falling on his face at Peter’s feet, said thus: Brother and lord, 
that hast part in the holy mysteries and showest the right way 
which is in the Lord Jesus Christ our God, who by thee hath 
shown unto us his coming: we have lost all them whom Paul 
had delivered unto us, by the working of Satan; but now I trust 
in the Lord who hath commanded thee to come unto us, sending 
thee as his messenger, that he hath accounted us worthy to see 
his great and wonderful works by thy means. I pray thee 
therefore, make haste unto the city: for I left the brethren which 
have stumbled, whom I saw fall into the temptation of the devil, 
and fled hither, saying unto them: Brethren, stand fast in the 
faith, for it is of necessity that within these two months the 
mercy of our Lord bring his servant unto you. For I had seen 


310 ACTS OF PETER 


a vision, even Paul, saying unto me: Ariston, flee thou out of 
the city. And when I heard it, I believed without delay and 
went forth in the Lord, although I had an infirmity in my flesh, 
and came hither; and day by day I stood upon the sea-shore 
asking the sailors: Hath Peter sailed with you? But now 
through the abundance of the grace of God I entreat thee, let 
us go up unto Rome without delay, lest the teaching of this 
wicked man prevail yet further. And as Ariston said this with 
tears, Peter gave him his hand and raised him up from the 
earth, and Peter also groaning, said with tears: He hath pre- 
vented us which tempteth all the world by his angels; but he 
that hath power to save his servants from all temptations shall 
quench his deceits and put him beneath the feet of them that 
have believed in Christ whom we preach. 

And, as they entered in at the gate, Theon entreated Peter, 
saying: Thou didst not refresh thyself on any day in so great 
a voyage (sea): and now after (before) so hard a journey wilt 
thou set out forthwith from the ship? tarry and refresh thyself, 
and so shalt thou set forth: for from hence to Rome upon a pave- 
ment of flint I fear lest thou be hurt by the shaking. But Peter 
answered and said to them: What if it come to pass that a 
millstone were hung upon me, and likewise upon the enemy of 
our Lord, even as my Lord said unto us of any that offended one 
of the brethren, and I were drowned in the sea? but it might be 
not only a millstone, but that which is far worse, jeven that 
I which am the enemy of this persecutor of his servants should 
die afar off from them that have believed on the Lord Jesus 
Christ} (so Ficker: the sentence is corrupt; the sense is that 
Peter must at all costs be with his fellow-Christians, or he will 
incur even worse punishment than that threatened by our Lord’s 
words). And by no exhortation could Theon prevail to persuade 
him to tarry there even one day. 

But Theon himself delivered all that was in the ship to be sold for 
the price which he thought good, and followed Peter unto Rome; 
whom Ariston brought unto the abode of Narcissus the presbyter. 

VII. Now the report was noised through the city unto the 
brethren that were dispersed, <saying that Peter was come to 
Rome?) because of Simon, that he might show him to bea deceiver 
and a persecutor of good men. All the multitude therefore 
ran together to see the apostle of the Lord stay (himself, or the 
brethren) on Christ. And on the first day of the week when the 
multitude was assembled to see Peter, Peter began to say with 
a loud voice: Ye men here present that trust in Christ, ye that 
for a little space have suffered temptation, learn for what cause 
God sent his Son into the world, and wherefore he made him to be 
born of the Virgin Mary; for would he so have done if not to 


* Professor Turner would read ‘ that Peter the disciple of the Lord 
was come’. 


ACTS OF PETER 811 


procure us some grace or dispensation? even because he would 
take away all offence and all ignorance and all the contrivance 
of the devil, his attempts (beginnings) and his strength wherewith 
he prevailed aforetime, before our God shined forth in the world. 
And whereas men through ignorance fell into death by many 
and divers infirmities, Almighty God, moved with compassion, sent 
his Son into the world. With whom I was; and he (or I) walked 
upon the water, whereof I myself remain a witness, and do testifythat 
he then worked inthe world by signsand wonders, all of which he did. 

I do confess, dearly-beloved brethren, that I was with him: 
yet I denied him, even our Lord Jesus Christ, and that not once 
only, but thrice ; for there were evil dogs that were come about 
me as they did unto the Lord’s prophets. And the Lord imputed 
it not unto me, but turned unto me and had compassion on 
the infirmity of my flesh, when (or so that) afterward I bitterly 
bewailed myself, and lamented the weakness of my faith, because 
I was befooled by the devil and kept not in mind the word of 
my Lord. And now I say unto you, O men and brethren, which 
are gathered together in the name of Jesus Christ: against you 
also hath the deceiver Satan aimed his arrows, that ye might 
depart out of the way. But faint not, brethren, neither let 
your spirit fall, but be strong and persevere and doubt not: 
for if Satan caused me to stumble, whom the Lord had in great 
honour, so that I denied the light of mine hope, and if he over- 
threw me and persuaded me to flee as if I had put my trust in 
a man, what think ye will he do unto you which are but young 
in the faith? Did ye suppose that he would not turn you away 
to make you enemies of the kingdom of God, and cast you down 
into perdition by a new (or the last) deceit? For whomsoever 
he casteth out from the hope of our Lord Jesus Christ, he is a 
son of perdition for ever. Turn yourselves, therefore, brethren, 
chosen of the Lord, and be strong in God Almighty, the Father 
of our: Lord Jesus Christ, whom no man hath seen at any time, 
neither can see, save he who hath believed in him. And be ye 
aware whence this temptation hath come upon you. For it is 
not only by words that I would convince you that this is Christ 
whom I preach, but also by deeds and exceeding great works 
of power do I exhort you by the faith that is in Christ Jesus, 
that none of you look for any other save him that was despised 
and mocked of the Jews. even this Nazarene which was crucified 
and died and the third day rose again. 

VIII. And the brethren repented and entreated Peter to fight 
against Simon: (who said that he was the power of God, and 
lodged in the house of Marcellus a senator, whom he had con- 
vinced by his charms) saying: Believe us, brother Peter: there 
was no man among men so wise as this Marcellus. All the widows 
that trusted in Christ had recourse unto him; all the fatherless 
were fed by him; and what more, brother? all the poor called 
Marcellus their patron, and his house was called the house of 


312 ACTS OF PETER 


the strangers and of the poor, and the emperor said unto him: 
I will keep thee out of every office, lest thou despoil the provinces 
to give gifts unto the Christians. And Marcellus answered: 
All my goods are also thine. And Caesar said to him: Mine 
they would be if thou keptest them for me; but now they are 
not mine, for thou givest them to whom thou wilt, and I know 
not to what vile persons. Having this, then, before our eyes, 
brother Peter, we report it to thee, how the great mercy of this 
man is turned unto blasphemy; for if he had not turned, neither 
should we have departed from the holy faith of God our Lord. 
And now doth this Marcellus in anger repent him of his good 
deeds, saying: All this substance have I spent in all this time, 
vainly believing that I gave it for the knowledge of God! So that 
if any stranger cometh to the door of his house, he smiteth him 
with a staff and biddeth him be beaten, saying: Would God 
I had not spent so much money upon these impostors: and yet 
more doth he say, blaspheming. But if there abide in thee any 
mercy of our Lord and aught of the goodness of his command- 
ments, do thou succour the error of this man who hath done so 
many alms-deeds unto the servants of God. 

And Peter, when he perceived this, was smitten with sharp 
affliction and said: O the divers arts and temptations of the 
devil! O the contrivances and devices of the wicked! he that 
nourisheth up for himself a mighty fire in the day of wrath, the 
destruction of simple men, the ravening wolf, the devourer and 
scatterer of eternal life! Thou didst enmesh the first man in 
concupiscence and bind him with thine old iniquity and with 
the chain of the flesh: thou art wholly the exceeding bitter fruit of 
the tree of bitterness, who sendest divers lusts upon men. Thou 
didst compel Judas my fellow-disciple and fellow-apostle to do 
wickedly and deliver up our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall punish 
thee therefor. Thou didst harden the heart of Herod and didst 
inflame Pharaoh and compel him to fight against Moses the 
holy servant of God; thou didst give boldness unto Caiaphas, 
that he should deliver our Lord Jesus Christ unto the unrighteous 
multitude; and even until now thou shootest at innocent souls 
with thy poisonous arrows. Thou wicked one, enemy of all men, 
be thou accursed from the Church of him the Son of the holy 
God omnipotent, and as a brand cast out of the fire shalt thou 
be quenched by the servants of our Lord Jesus Christ. Upon 
thee let thy blackness be turned and upon thy children, an evil 
seed ; upon thee be turned thy wickedness and thy threatenings ; 
upon thee and thine angels be thy temptations, thou beginning 
of malice and bottomless pit of darkness! Let thy darkness 
that thou hast be with thee and with thy vessels which thou 
ownest! Depart from them that shall believe in God, depart 
from the servants of Christ and from them that desire to be his 
soldiers. Keep thou to thyself thy garments of darkness! Without 


ACTS OF PETER 813 


cause knockest thou at other men’s doors, which are not thine 
but of Christ Jesus that keepeth them. For thou, ravening wolf, 
wouldest carry off the sheep that are not thine but of Christ 
Jesus, who keepeth them with all care and diligence. 

IX. As Peter spake thus with great sorrow of mind, many 
were added unto them that believed on the Lord. But the 
brethren besought Peter to join battle with Simon and not suffer 
him any longer to vex the people. And without delay Peter 
went quickly out of the synagogue (assembly) and went unto the 
house of Marcellus, where Simon lodged: and much people 
followed him. And when he came to the door, he called the 
porter and said to him: Go, say unto Simon: Peter because of 
whom thou fleddest out of Judaea waiteth for thee at the door. 
The porter answered and said to Peter: Sir, whether thou be 
Peter, I know not: but I have a command; for he had know- 
ledge that yesterday thou didst enter into the city, and said 
unto me: Whether it be by day or by night, at whatsoever 
hour he cometh, say that I am not within. And Peter said to 
the young man: Thou hast well said in reporting that which he 
compelled thee to say. And Peter turned unto the people that 
followed him and said: Ye shall now see a great and marvellous 
wonder. And Peter seeing a great dog bound with a strong 
chain, went to him and loosed him, and when he was loosed the 
dog received a man’s voice and said unto Peter: What dost thou 
bid me to do, thou servant of the unspeakable and living God? 
Peter said unto him: Go in and say unto Simon in the midst of 
his company: Peter saith unto thee, Come forth abroad, for for 
thy sake am I come to Rome, thou wicked one and deceiver of 
simple souls. And immediately the dog ran and entered in, and 
rushed into the midst of them that were with Simon, and lifted 
up his forefeet and in a loud voice said: Thou Simon, Peter the 
servant of Christ who standeth at the door saith unto thee: 
Come forth abroad, for for thy sake am I come to Rome, thou 
most wicked one and deceiver of simple souls. And when Simon 
heard it, and beheld the incredible sight, he lost the words where- 
with he was deceiving them that stood by, and all of them 
were amazed. 

X. But when Marcellus saw it he went out to the door and 
cast himself at Peter’s feet and said: Peter, I embrace thy feet, 
thou holy servant of the holy God; I have sinned greatly: but 
exact thou not my sins, if there be in thee the true faith of 
Christ, whom thou preachest, if thou remember his command- 
ments, to hate no man, to be unkind to no man, as I learned 
from thy fellow apostle Paul; keep not in mind my faults, but 
pray for me unto the Lord, the holy Son of God whom I have 
provoked to wrath—for I have persecuted his servants—that 
I be not delivered with the sins of Simon unto eternal fire; who so 
persuaded me, that I set up a statue to him with this inscription: 


814 ACTS OF PETER 


‘To Simon the new (young) God.’ If I knew, O Peter, that 
thou couldest be won with money, I would give thee all my 
substance, yea I would give it and despise it, that I might gain 
my soul. If I had sons, I would account them as nothing, if 
only I might believe in the living God. But I confess that he 
would not have deceived me save that he said that he was the 
power of God; yet will I tell thee, O most gentle (sweet) Peter: 
I was not worthy to hear thee, thou servant of God, neither was 
I stablished in the faith of God which is in Christ; therefore was 
I made to stumble. I beseech thee, therefore, take not ill that 
which I am about to say, that Christ our Lord whom thou 
preachest in truth said unto thy fellow-apostles in thy presence: 
If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto 
this mountain: Remove thyself: and straightway it shall remove 
itself. But this Simon said that thou, Peter, wast without 
faith when thou didst doubt, in the waters. And I have heard 
that Christ said this also: They that are with me have not under- 
stood me. If, then, ye upon whom he laid his hands, whom also 
he chose, did doubt, I, therefore, having this witness, repent 
me, and take refuge in thy prayers. Receive my soul, who have 
fallen away from our Lord and from his promise. But I believe 
that he will have mercy upon me that repent. For the Almighty 
is faithful to forgive me my sins. 

But Peter said with a loud voice: Unto thee, our Lord, be 
glory and splendour, O God Almighty, Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Unto thee be praise and glory and honour, world without 
end. Amen. Because thou hast now fully strengthened and 
stablished us in thee in the sight of all, holy Lord, confirm thou 
Marcellus, and send thy peace upon him and upon his house 
this day: and whatsoever is lost or out of the way, thou alone 
canst turn them all again; we beseech thee, Lord, shepherd of 
the sheep that once were scattered, but now shall be gathered 
in one by thee. So also receive thou Marcellus as one of thy 
lambs and suffer him no longer to go astray (revel) in error or 
ignorance. Yea, Lord, receive him that with anguish and tears 
entreateth thee. 

XI. And as Peter spake thus and embraced Marcellus, Peter 
turned himself unto the multitude that stood by him and saw 
there one that laughed (smiled), in whom was a very evil spirit. 
And Peter said unto him: Whosoever thou art that didst laugh, 
show thyself openly unto all that are present. And hearing 
this the young man ran into the court of the house and cried out 
with a loud voice and dashed himself against the wall and said: 
Peter, there is a great contention between Simon and the dog 
whom thou sentest; for Simon saith to the dog: Say that I am 
not here. Unto whom the dog saith more than thou didst charge 
him; and when he hath accomplished the mystery which thou 
didst command him, he shall die at thy feet. But Peter said: 


ACTS OF PETER 315 


And thou also, devil, whosoever thou art, in the name of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, go out of that young man and hurt him not 
at all: show thyself unto all that stand here. When the young 
man heard it, he ran forth and caught hold on a great statue of 
marble which was set in the court of the house, and brake it in 
pieces with his feet. Now it was a statue of Caesar. Which 
Marcellus beholding smote his forehead and said unto Peter: 
A great crime hath been committed; for if this be made known 
unto Caesar by some busybody, he will afflict us with sore 
punishments. And Peter said to him: I see thee not the same 
that thou wast a little while ago, for thou saidst that thou wast 
ready to spend all thy substance to save thy soul. But if thou 
indeed repentest, believing in Christ with thy whole heart, take 
in thine hands of the water that runneth down, and pray to the 
Lord, and in his name sprinkle it upon the broken pieces of the 
statue and it shall be whole as it was before. And Marcellus, 
nothing doubting, but believing with his whole heart, before he 
took the water lifted up his hands and said: I believe in thee, 
O Lord Jesu Christ: for I am now proved by thine apostle Peter, 
whether I believe aright in thine holy name. Therefore I take 
water in mine hands, and in thy name do I sprinkle these stones 
that the statue may become whole as it was before. If, therefore, 
Lord, it be thy will that I continue in the body and suffer nothing 
at Caesar’s hand, let this stone be whole as it was before. And 
he sprinkled the water upon the stones, and the statue became 
whole, whereat Peter exulted that Marcellus had not doubted 
in asking of the Lord, and Marcellus was exalted in spirit for that 
such a sign was first wrought by his hands; and he therefore 
believed with his whole heart in the name of Jesus Christ the Son 
of God, by whom all things impossible are made possible. 

XII. But Simon within the house said thus to the dog: Tell 
Peter that I am not within. Whom the dog answered in the 
presence of Marcellus: Thou exceeding wicked and shameless 
one, enemy of all that live and believe on Christ Jesus, here is 
a dumb animal sent unto thee which hath received a human 
voice to confound thee and show thee to be a deceiver and a 
liar. Hast thou taken thought so long, to say at last: ‘ Tell 
him that I am not within’? Art thou not ashamed to utter thy 
feeble and useless words against Peter the minister and apostle 
of Christ, as if thou couldst hide thee from him that hath com- 
manded me to speak against thee to thy face: and that not for 
thy sake but for theirs whom thou wast deceiving and sending 
unto destruction? Cursed therefore shalt thou be, thou enemy 
and corrupter of the way of the truth of Christ, who shall prove 
by fire that dieth not and in outer darkness, thine iniquities 
that thou hast committed. And having thus said, the dog went 
forth and the people followed him, leaving Simon alone. And 
the dog came unto Peter as he sat with the multitude that was 


816 ACTS OF PETER 


come to see Peter’s face, and the dog related what he had done 
unto Simon. And thus spake the dog unto the angel and apostle 
of the true God: Peter, thou wilt have a great contest with the 
enemy of Christ and his servants, and many that have been 
deceived by him shalt thou turn unto the faith; wherefore thou 
shalt receive from God the reward of thy work. And when the 
dog had said this he fell down at the apostle Peter’s feet and 
gave up the ghost. And when the great multitude saw with 
amazement the dog speaking, they began then, some to throw 
themselves down at Peter’s feet, and some said: Show us another 
sign, that we may believe in thee as the minister of the living 
God, for Simon also did many signs in our presence and therefore 
did we follow him. 

XIII. And Peter turned and saw a herring (sardine) hung in 
a window, and took it and said to the people: If ye now see this 
swimming in the water like a fish, will ye be able to believe in 
him whom I preach? And they said with one voice: Verily 
we will believe thee. Then he said—now there was a bath for 
swimming at hand: In thy name, O Jesu Christ, forasmuch 
as hitherto it is not believed in, in the sight of all these live and 
swim like a fish. And he cast the herring into the bath, and it 
lived and began to swim. And all the people saw the fish 
swimming, and it did not so at that hour only, lest it should be 
said that it was a delusion (phantasm), but he made it to swim 
for a long time, so that they brought much people from all 
quarters and showed them the herring that was made a living 
fish, so that certain of the people even cast bread to it; and 
they saw that it was whole. And seeing this, many followed 
Peter and believed in the Lord. 

And they assembled themselves day and night unto the house 
of Narcissus the presbyter. And Peter discoursed unto them of 
the scriptures of the prophets and of those things which our 
Lord Jesus Christ had wrought both in word and in deeds. 

XIV. But Marcellus was confirmed daily by the signs which he 
saw wrought by Peter through the grace of Jesus Christ which 
he granted unto him. And Marcellus ran upon Simon as he 
sat in his house in the dining chamber, and cursed him and 
said unto him: Thou most adverse and pestilent of men, cor- 
rupter of my soul and my house, who wouldest have made me 
fall away from my Lord and Saviour Christ! and laying hands 
on him he commanded him to be thrust out of his house. And 
the servants having received such licence, covered him with 
reproaches; some buffeted his face, others beat him with sticks, 
others cast stones, others emptied out vessels full of filth upon 
his head, even those who on his account had fled from their 
master and been a long time fettered; and other their fellow- 
servants of whom he had spoken evil to their master reproached 
him, saying to him: Now by the will of God who hath had mercy 


ACTS OF PETER 317 


on us and on our master, do we recompense thee with a fit 
reward. And Simon, shrewdly beaten and cast out of the house, 
ran unto the house where Peter lodged, even the house of 
Narcissus, and standing at the gate cried out: Lo, here am I, 
Simon: come thou down, Peter, and I will convict thee that 
thou hast believed on a man which is a Jew and a carpenter’s son. 

XV. And when it was told Peter that Simon had said this, 
Peter sent unto him a woman which had a sucking child, saying 
to her: Go down quickly, and thou wilt find one that seeketh 
me. For thee there is no need that thou answer him at all, but 
keep silence and hear what the child whom thou holdest shall 
say unto him. The woman therefore went down. Now the 
child whom she suckled was seven months old; and it received 
a man’s voice and said unto Simon: O thou abhorred of God 
and men, and destruction of truth, and evil seed of all corruption, 
O fruit by nature unprofitable! but only for a short and little 
season shalt thou be seen, and thereafter eternal punishment is 
laid up for thee. Thou son of a shameless father, that never 
puttest forth thy roots for good but for poison, faithless genera- 
tion void of all hope! thou wast not confounded when a dog 
reproved thee; I a child am compelled of God to speak, and not 
even now art thou ashamed. But even against thy will, on the 
sabbath day that cometh, another shall bring thee into the 
forum of Julius that it may be shown what manner of man thou 
art. Depart therefore from the gate wherein walk the feet of 
the holy; for thou shalt no more corrupt the innocent souls 
whom thou didst turn out of the way and make sad ; in Christ, 
therefore, shall be shown thine evil nature, and thy devices shall 
be cut in pieces. And now speak I this last word unto thee: 
Jesus Christ saith to thee: Be thou stricken dumb in my name, 
and depart out of Rome until the sabbath that cometh. And 
forthwith he became dumb and his speech was bound; and he 
went out of Rome until the sabbath and abode in a stable. 
But the woman returned with the child unto Peter and told 
him and the rest of the brethren what the child had said unto 
Simon: and they magnified the Lord which had shown these 
things unto men. 

XVI. Now when the night fell, Peter, while yet waking, beheld 
Jesus clad in a vesture of brightness, smiling and saying unto 
him: Already is much people of the brotherhood returned 
through me and through the signs which thou hast wrought in 
my name. But thou shalt have a contest of the faith upon the 
sabbath that cometh, and many more of the Gentiles and of 
the Jews shall be converted in my name unto me who was 
reproached and mocked and spat upon. For I will be present 
with thee when thou askest for signs and wonders, and thou 
shalt convert many: but thou shalt have Simon opposing thee 
by the works of his father; yet all his works shall be shown to 


818 ACTS OF PETER 


be charms and contrivances of sorcery. But now slack thou not, 
and whomsoever I shall send unto thee thou shalt establish in 
my name. And when it was light, he told the brethren how the 
Lord had appeared unto him and what he had commanded him 

XVII. [This episode, inserted most abruptly, is believed by Vouaux 
to have been inserted here by the compiler of the Greek original of 
the Vercelli Acts: but it was not composed by him, but transferred 
with very slight additions from the earlier part of the Acts—now lost— 
of which the scene was laid in Judaea. I incline to favour this view.] 

But believe ye me, men and brethren, I drove this Simon out 
of Judaea where he did many evils with his magical charms, 
lodging in Judaea with a certain woman Eubula, who was of 
honourable estate in this world, having store of gold and pearls 
of no small price. Here did Simon enter in by stealth with two 
others like unto himself, and none of the household saw them 
two, but Simon only, and by means of a spell they took away 
all the woman’s gold, and disappeared. But Eubula, when she 
found what was done, began to torture her household, saying: 
Ye have taken occasion by this man of God and spoiled me, when 
ye saw him entering in to me to honour a mere woman; but his 
name is! as the name of the Lord. 

As I fasted for three days and prayed that this matter should 
be made plain, I saw in a vision Italicus and Antulus (Antyllus ?) 
whom I had instructed in the name of the Lord, and a boy naked 
and chained giving me a wheaten loaf and saying unto me: 
Peter, endure yet two days and thou shalt see the mighty works 
of God. As for all that is lost out of the house of Eubula, Simon 
hath used art magic and hath caused a delusion, and with two 
others hath stolen it away: whom thou shalt see on the third 
day at the ninth hour, at the gate which leadeth unto Neapolis, 
selling unto a goldsmith by name Agrippinus a young satyr of 
gold of two pound weight, having in it a precious stone. But 
for thee there is no need that thou touch it, lest thou be defiled; 
but let there be with thee some of the matron’s servants, and 
thou shalt show them the shop of the goldsmith and depart from 
them. For by reason of this matter shall many believe on the 
name of the Lord, and all that which these men by their devices 
and wickedness have oft-times stolen shall be openly showed. 
When I heard that, I went unto Eubula and found her sitting 
with her clothes rent and her hair disordered, mourning; unto 
whom I said: Eubula, rise up from thy mourning and compose 
thy face and order thy hair and put on raiment befitting thee, 
and pray unto the Lord Jesus Christ that judgeth every soul: 
for he is the invisible Son of God, by whom thou must be saved, 
if only thou repent with thine whole heart of thy former sins: 

1 Here a leaf ends: there is no gap in the manuscript, but the 


sentence is abrupt, and Peter is very suddenly introduced into the 
story. 


ACTS OF PETER 319 


and receive thou power from him; for behold, by me the Lord 
saith to thee: Thou shalt find all whatsoever thou hast lost. 
And after thou hast received them, take thou care that he find 
thee, that thou mayest renounce this present world and seek 
for everlasting refreshment. Hearken therefore unto this: Let 
certain of thy people keep watch at the gate that leadeth to 
Neapolis on the day after to-morrow at about the ninth hour, 
and they shall see two young men having a young satyr of gold, 
of two pound weight, set with gems, as a vision hath shown me: 
which thing they will offer for sale to one Agrippinus of the 
household of godliness and of the faith which is in the Lord 
Jesus Christ: by whom it shall be showed thee that thou shouldest 
believe in the living God and not on Simon the magician, the 
unstable devil, who hath desired that thou shouldest remain in 
sorrow, and thine innocent household be tormented; who by 
fair words and speech only hath deceived thee, and with his 
mouth only spake of godliness, whereas he is wholly possessed 
of ungodliness. For when thou didst think to keep holy-day, and 
settedst up thine idol and didst veil it and set out all thine 
ornaments upon a table (round three-legged table), he brought in 
two young men whom no man of yours saw, by a magic charm, 
and they stole away thine ornaments and were no more seen. 
But his device hath had no success (place); for my God hath 
manifested it unto me, to the end thou shouldest not be deceived, 
neither perish in hell, for those sins which thou hast committed 
ungodly and contrary to God, who is full of all truth, and the 
righteous judge of quick and dead; and there is none other hope 
of life unto men save through him, by whom those things which 
thou hast lost are recovered unto thee: and now do thou gain 
thine own soul. 

But she cast herself down before my feet, saying: O man, who 
thou art I know not; but him I received as a servant of God, 
and whatsoever he asked of me to give it unto the poor, I gave 
much by his hands, and beside that I did give much unto him. 
What hurt did I do him, that he should contrive all this against 
mine house? Unto whom Peter said:1 There is no faith to be 
put in words, but in acts and deeds: but we must go on with 
that we have begun. So I left her and went with two stewards 
of Eubula and came to Agrippinus and said to him: See that 
thou take note of these men; for to-morrow two young men 
will come to thee, desiring to sell thee a young satyr of gold set 
with jewels, which belongeth to the mistress of these: and thou 
shalt take it as it were to look upon it, and praise the work of 
the craftsman, and then when these come in, God will bring the 
rest to the proof. And on the next day the stewards of the 
matron came about the ninth hour, and also those young men, 

1 Note the third person. It may be a mere slip, but, if not, it con- 
firms the idea that the story has been transplanted from another place. 


320 ACTS OF PETER 


willing to sell unto Agrippinus the young satyr of gold. And 
they being forthwith taken, it was reported unto the matron, and 
she in distress of mind came to the deputy, and with a loud voice 
declared all that had befallen her. And when Pompeius the 
deputy beheld her in distress of mind, who never had come forth 
abroad, he forthwith rose up from the judgement seat and went 
unto the praetorium, and bade those men to be brought and 
tortured; and while they were being tormented they confessed 
that they did it in the service of Simon, which, said they, per- 
suaded us thereto with money. And being tortured a long time, 
they confessed that all that Eubula had lost was laid up under 
the earth in a cave on the other side of the gate, and many other 
things besides. And when Pompeius heard this, he rose up to 
go unto the gate, with those two men, each of them bound with 
two chains. And lo, Simon came in at the gate, seeking them 
because they tarried long. And he seeth a great multitude 
coming, and those two bound with chains; and he understood 
and betook him to flight, and appeared no more in Judaea unto 
this day. But Eubula, when she had recovered all her goods, 
gave them for the service of the poor, and believed on the Lord 
Jesus Christ and was comforted; and despised and renounced 
this world, and gave unto the widows and fatherless, and clothed 
the poor. And after a long time she received her rest (sleep). 
Now these things, dearly beloved brethren, were done in Judaea, 
whereby he that is called the angel of Satan! was driven out 
thence. 

XVIII. Brethren, dearest and most beloved, let us fast together 
and pray unto the Lord. For he that drove him out thence is 
able also to root him out of this place: and let him grant unto 
us power to withstand him and his magical charms, and to prove 
that he is the angel of Satan. For on the sabbath our Lord shall 
bring him, though he would not, unto the forum of Julius. Let 
us therefore bow our knees unto Christ, which heareth us, though 
we cry not; it is he that seeth us, though he be not seen with 
these eyes, yet is he in us: if we will, he will not forsake us. 
Let us therefore purify our souls of every evil temptation, and 
God will not depart from us. Yea, if we but wink with our eyes, 
he is present with us. 

XIX. Now after these things were spoken by Peter, Marcellus 
also came in, and said: Peter, I have for thee cleansed mine whole 
house from the footsteps (traces) of Simon, and wholly done away 
even his wicked dust. For I took water and called upon the holy 
name of Jesus Christ, together with mine other servants which 
belong unto him, and sprinkled all my house and all the dining 
chambers and all the porticoes, even unto the outer gate, and 
said: I know that thou, Lord Jesu Christ, art pure and untouched 
of any uncleanness: so let mine enemy and adversary be driven 


1 Or, ‘the angel of Satan which is called Simon’. 


ACTS OF PETER 821 


out from before thy face. And now, thou blessed one, have 
I bidden the widows and old women to assemble unto thee in my 
house which is purified (14S. common), that they may pray with 
us. And they shall receive every one a piece of gold in the name 
of the ministry (service), that they may be called indeed servants 
of Christ. And all else is now prepared for the service. I entreat 
thee, therefore, O blessed Peter, consent unto their request, so 
that thou also pay honour unto (ornament) their prayers in my 
stead; let us then go and take Narcissus also, and whosoever of 
the brethren are here. So then Peter consented unto his simplicity, 
to fulfil his desire, and went forth with him and the rest of the 
brethren. 

XX. But Peter entered in, and beheld one of the aged women, 
a widow, that was blind, and her daughter giving her her hand 
and leading her into Marcellus’ house; and Peter said unto her: 
Come hither, mother: from this day forward Jesus giveth thee 
his right hand, by whom we have light unapproachable which no 
darkness hideth; who saith unto thee by me: Open thine eyes 
and see, and walk by thyself. And forthwith the widow saw 
Peter laying his hand upon her. 

And Peter entered into the dining-hall and saw that the 
Gospel was being read, and he rolled up the book and said: Ye 
men?‘ that believe and hope in Christ, learn in what manner the 
holy Scripture of our Lord ought to be declared: whereof we by 
his grace wrote that which we could receive, though yet it appear 
unto you feeble, yet according to our power, even that which can 
be endured to be borne by (or instilled into) human flesh. We 
ought therefore first to know the will and the goodness of God, 
how that when error was everywhere spread abroad, and many 
thousands of men were being cast down into perdition, God was 
moved by his mercy to show himself in another form and in the 
likeness of man, concerning which neither the Jews nor we were 
able worthily to be enlightened. For every one of us according 
as he could contain the sight, saw, as he was able. Now will 
I expound unto you that which was newly read unto you. Our 
Lord, willing that I should behold his majesty in the holy mount— 
I, when I with the sons of Zebedee saw the brightness of his 
light, fell as one dead and shut mine eyes, and heard such a voice 
from him as I am not able to describe, and thought myself to be 
blinded by his brightness. And when I recovered (breathed 
again) a little I said within myself: Peradventure my Lord hath 
brought me hither that he might blind me. And I said: If this 
also be thy will, Lord, I resist not. And he gave me his hand 
and raised me up; and when I arose I saw him again in such 
a form as I was able to take in. As, therefore, the merciful God, 
dearly beloved brethren, carried our infirmities and bare our sins 
(as the prophet saith: He beareth our sins and suffereth for us; 

1 Parts of the speech are in Greek in the Life of St. Abercius. 


870 Y 


822 ACTS OF PETER 


but we did esteem him to be in affliction and smitten with plagues), 
for he is in the Father and the Father in him—he also is himself 
the fulness of all majesty, who hath shown unto us all his good 
things: he did eat and drink for our sakes, himself being neither 
an-hungered nor athirst; he carried and bare reproaches for our 
sakes, he died and rose again because of us; who both defended 
me when I sinned and comforted me by his greatness, and will 
comfort youalso that ye may love him: this God who is great and 
small, fair and foul, young and old, seen in time and unto eternity 
invisible ; whom the hand of man hath not held, yet is he held 
by his servants; whom no flesh hath seen, yet now seeth ; 
who is the word proclaimed by the prophets and now appearing 
(so Gk. : Lat. not heard of but now known) ; not subject to suffering, 
but having now made trial of suffering for our sake (or like unto 
us) ; never chastised, yet now chastised ; who was before the world 
and hath been comprehended in time; the great beginning of all 
principality, yet delivered over unto princes ; beautiful, but among 
us lowly; seen of all yet foreseeing all (MS. foul of view, yet 
foreseeing). This Jesus ye have, brethren, the door, the light, 
the way, the bread, the water, the life, the resurrection, the refresh- 
ment, the pearl, the treasure, the seed, the abundance (harvest), 
the mustard seed, the vine, the plough, the grace, the faith, the 
word: he is all things and there is none other greater than he. 
Unto him be praise, world without end. Amen. 

XXI. And when the ninth hour was fully come, they rose up 
to make prayer. And behold certain widows, of the aged, un- 
known to Peter, which sat there, being blind and not believing}, 
cried out, saying unto Peter: We sit together here, O Peter, 
hoping and believing in Christ Jesus: as therefore thou hast 
made one of us to see, we entreat thee, lord Peter, grant unto us 
also his mercy and pity. But Peter said to them: If there be in 
you the faith that is in Christ, if it be firm in you, then perceive 
in your mind that which ye see not with your eyes, and though 
your ears are closed, yet let them be open in your mind within you. 
These eyes shall again be shut, seeing nought but men and oxen 
and dumb beasts and stones and sticks ; but not every eye seeth 
Jesus Christ. Yet now, Lord, let thy sweet and holy name succour 
these persons; do thou touch their eyes; for thou art able—that 
these may see with their eyes. 

And when all had prayed, the hall wherein they were shone 
as when it lighteneth, even with such a light as cometh in the 
clouds, yet not such a light as that of the daytime, but unspeak- 
able, invisible, such as no man can describe, even such that we 
were beside ourselves with bewilderment, calling on the Lord 
and saying: Have mercy, Lord, upon us thy servants: what we 
are able to bear, that, Lord, give thou us; for this we can neither 
see nor endure. And as we lay there, only those widows stood up 

1 sic: qu. not rising ? 


ACTS OF PETER 823 


which were blind; and the bright light which appeared unto us 
entered into their eyes and made them to see. Unto whom Peter 
said: Tell us what ye saw. And they said: We saw an old man 
of such comeliness as we are not able to declare to thee; but 
others said: We saw a young man; and others: We saw a boy 
touching our eyes delicately, and so were our eyes opened. Peter 
therefore magnified the Lord, saying: Thou only art the Lord 
God, and of what lips have we need to give thee due praise? and 
how can we give thee thanks according to thy mercy? Therefore, 
brethren, as I told you but a little while since, God that is constant 
is greater than our thoughts, even as we have learned of these 
aged widows, how that they beheld the Lord in divers forms. 

XXII. And having exhorted them all to think upon (under- 
stand) the Lord with their whole heart, he began together with 
Marcellus and the rest of the brethren to minister unto the 
virgins of the Lord, and to rest until the morning. 

Unto whom Marcellus said: Ye holy and inviolate virgins of 
the Lord, hearken: Ye have a place to abide in, for these things 
that are called mine, whose are they save yours? depart not 
hence, but refresh yourselves: for upon the sabbath which 
cometh, even to-morrow, Simon hath a controversy with Peter 
the holy one of God: for as the Lord hath ever been with him, 
so will Christ the Lord now stand for him as his apostle. For 
Peter hath continued tasting nothing, but fasting yet a day, that 
he may overcome the wicked adversary and persecutor of the 
Lord’s truth. For lo, my young men are come announcing that 
they have seen scaffolds being set up in the forum, and much 
people saying: To-morrow at daybreak two Jews are to contend 
here concerning the teaching (?) of God. Now therefore let us 
watch until the morning, praying and beseeching our Lord Jesus 
Christ to hear our prayers on behalf of Peter. 

And Marcellus turned to sleep for a short space, and awoke 
and said unto Peter: O Peter, thou apostle of Christ, let us go 
boldly unto that which lieth before us. For just now when 
I turned myself to sleep for a little, I beheld thee sitting in a high 
place and before thee a great multitude, and a woman exceeding 
foul, in sight like an Ethiopian, not an Egyptian, but altogether 
black and filthy, clothed in rags, and with an iron collar about 
her neck and chains upon her hands and feet, dancing. And when 
thou sawest me thou saidst to me with a loud voice: Marcellus, 
the whole power of Simon and of his God is this woman that 
danceth; do thou behead her. And I said to thee: Brother 
Peter, I am a senator of a high race, and I have never defiled 
my hands, neither killed so much as a sparrow at any time. And 
thou hearing it didst begin to cry out yet more: Come thou, our 
true sword, Jesu Christ, and cut not off only the head of this 
devil, but hew all her limbs in pieces in the sight of all these 
whom I have approved in thy service. And immediately one 


324 ACTS OF PETER 


like unto thee, O Peter, having a sword, hewed her in pieces: 
so that I looked earnestly upon you both, both on thee and on 
him that cut in pieces that devil, and marvelled greatly to see 
how alike ye were. And I awaked, and have told unto thee these 
signs of Christ. And when Peter heard it he was the more filled 
with courage, for that Marcellus had seen these things, knowing 
that the Lord alway careth for his own. And being joyful and 
refreshed by these words, he rose up to go unto the forum. 

XXIII. Now the brethren were gathered together, and all 
that were in Rome, and took places every one for a piece of gold: 
there came together also the senators and the prefects and those in 
authority. And Peter came and stood in the midst, and all cried 
out: Show us, O Peter, who is thy God and what is his greatness 
which hath given thee confidence. Begrudge not the Romans; 
they are lovers of the gods. We have had proof of Simon, let us 
have it of thee; convince us, both of you, whom we ought truly to 
believe. And as they said these things, Simon also came in, and 
standing in trouble of mind at Peter’s side, at first he locked at him. 

And after long silence Peter said: Ye men of Rome, be ye 
true judges unto us, for I say that I have believed on the living 
and true God; and I promise to give you proofs of nim, which 
are known unto me, as many among you also can bear witness. 
For ye see that this man is now rebuked and silent, knowing that 
I drove him out of Judaea because of the deceits which he 
practised upon Eubula, an honourable and simple woman, by his 
art magic; and being driven out from thence, he is come hither, 
thinking to escape notice among you; and Jo, he standeth face 
to face with me. Say now, Simon, didst thou not at Jerusalem 
fall at my feet and Paul’s, when thou sawest the healings that 
were wrought by our hands, and say: I pray you take of me 
a payment as much as ye will, that I may be able to lay hands 
on men and do such mighty works? And we when we heard it 
cursed thee, saying: Dost thou think to tempt us as if we desired 
to possess money? And now, fearest thou not at all? My name 
is Peter, because the Lord Christ vouchsafed to call me ‘prepared 
for all things’: for I trust in the living God by whom I shall put 
down thy sorceries. Now let him do in your presence the wonders 
which he did aforetime: and what I have now said of him, will 
ye not believe it ? 

But Simon said: Thou presumest to speak of Jesus of Nazareth, 
the son of a carpenter, and a carpenter himself, whose birth is 
recorded (or whose race dwelleth) in Judaea. Hear thou, Peter : 
the Romans have understanding: they are no fools. And he 
turned to the people and said: Ye men of Rome, is God born ? is 
he crucified ? he that hath a master is no God. And when he so 
spake, many said: Thou sayest well, Simon. 

XXIV. But Peter said: Anathema upon thy words against 
(or in) Christ! Presumest thou to speak thus, whereas the 


ACTS OF PETER 825 


prophet saith of him: Who shall declare his generation? And 
another prophet saith: And we saw him and he had no beauty 
nor comeliness. And: In the last times shall a child be born of 
the Holy Ghost: his mother knoweth not a man, neither doth 
any man say that he is his father. And again he saith: She 
hath brought forth and not brought forth. And again: Is it 
a small thing for you to weary men (lit. Is it a small thing that 
ye make a contest for men)? Behold, a virgin shall conceive in 
the womb. And another prophet saith, honouring the Father: 
Neither did we hear her voice, neither did a midwife come in.” 
Another prophet saith: Born not of the womb of a woman, but 
from a heavenly place came he down. And: A stone was cut out 
without hands, and smote all the kingdoms. And: The stone 
which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the 
corner; and he calleth him a stone elect, precious. And again 
a prophet saith concerning him: And behold, I saw one like the 
Son of man coming upon a cloud. And what more? O ye men 
of Rome, if ye knew the Scriptures of the prophets, I would 
expound all unto you: by which Scriptures it was necessary that 
this should be spoken in a mystery, and that the kingdom of God 
should be perfected. But these things shall be opened unto you 
hereafter. Now turn I unto thee, Simon: do thou some one thing 
of those wherewith thou didst before deceive them, and I will 
bring it to nought through my Lord Jesus Christ. And Simon 
plucked up his boldness and said: If the prefect allow it (prepare 
yourselves and delay not for my sake) °. 

XXV. But the prefect desired to show patience unto both, 
that he might not appear to do aught unjustly. And the prefect 
put forward one of his servants and said thus unto Simon: 
Take this man and deliver him to death. And to Peter he said: 
And do thou revive him. And unto the people the prefect said: 
It is now for you to judge whether of these two is acceptable unto 
God, he that killeth or he that maketh alive. And straightway 
Simon spake in the ear of the lad and made him speechless, and 
he died. 

And as there began to be a murmuring among the people, one 
of the widows who were nourished (refreshed) in Marcellus’ 
house, standing behind the multitude, cried out: O Peter, servant 
of God, my son is dead, the only one that I had. And the people 
made place for her and led her unto Peter: and she cast herself 
down at his feet, saying: I had one only son, which with his 
hands (shoulders) furnished me with nourishment: he raised me 


1 From the apocryphal Ezekiel (lost). 

# From the Ascension of Isaiah, xi. 14. 

8 This appears to be the sense of the first line of the fragment in the 
Oxyrhynchus Papyrus, no. 849 (of early fourth century), in which 
parts of chs. xxv and xxvi are contained. The line is intrusive where 
it occurs: I think it may have stood originally in this place. 


326 ACTS OF PETER 


up, he carried me: now that he is dead, who shall reach me 
a hand? Unto whom Peter said: Go, with these for witness, and 
bring hither thy son, that they may see and be able to believe 
that by the power of God he is raised, tand that this man (Simon) 
may behold it and fall} (or, and she when she saw him, fell down). 
And Peter said to the young men: We have need of some young 
men, and, moreover, of such as will believe. And forthwith thirty 
young men arose, which were prepared to carry her or to bring 
thither her son that was dead. And whereas the widow was 
hardly returned to herself, the young men took her up; and she 
was crying out and saying: Lo, my son, the servant of Christ 
hath sent unto thee: tearing her hair and her face. Now the 
young men which were come examined?! (Gk. apparently, held) 
the lad’s nostrils to see whether he were indeed dead; and seeing 
that he was dead of a truth, they had compassion on the old 
woman and said: If thou so will, mother, and hast confidence in 
the God of Peter, we will take him up and carry him thither that 
he may raise him up and restore him unto thee. 

XXXVI. And as they said these things, the prefect (in the 
forum, Lat.), looking earnestly upon Peter (said: What sayest 
thou Peter?) Behold my lad is dead, who also is dear unto the 
emperor, and I spared him not, though I had with me other 
young men; but I desired rather to make trial (tempt) of thee 
and of the God whom thou (preachest), whether ye be true, and 
therefore I would have this lad die. And Peter said: God is not 
tempted nor proved, O Agrippa, but if he be loved and entreated 
he heareth them that are worthy. But since now? my God and 
Lord Jesus Christ is tempted among you, who hath done so great 
signs and wonders by my hands to turn you from your sins—now 
also in the sight of all do thou, Lord, at my word, by thy power 
raise up him whom Simon hath slain by touching him. And 
Peter said unto the master of the lad: Go, take hold on his right 
hand, and thou shalt have him alive and walking with thee. 
And Agrippa the prefect ran and went to the lad and took his 
hand and raised him up. And all the multitude seeing it cried: 
One is the God, one is the God of Peter. 

XXVII. In the meanwhile the widow’s son also was brought 
upon a bed by the young men, and the people made way for them 
and brought them unto Peter. And Peter lifted up his eyes unto 
heaven and stretched forth his hands and said: O holy Father 
of thy Son Jesus Christ, who hast granted us thy power, that 
we may through thee ask and obtain, and despise all that is in 
the world, and follow thee only, who art seen of few and wouldest 
be known of many: shine thou about us, Lord, enlighten us, 


‘ Here begins the Greek fragment—a single vellum leaf—Ozy- 
rhynchus Papyri, no. 849 (pl. VI): it is paged 167, 168. Each side 
has 14 lines of 19-20 letters. I follow it here. 

* End of the Greek fragment. 


ACTS OF PETER 827 


appear thou, raise up the son of this aged widow, which cannot 
help herself without her son. And I, repeating the word of Christ 
my Lord, say unto thee: Young man, arise and walk with thy 
mother so long as thou canst do her good; and thereafter shalt 
thou serve me after a higher sort, ministering in the lot of a deacon 
of the bishop (or, and of a bishop). And immediately the dead 
man rose up, and the multitudes saw it and marvelled, and the 
people cried out: Thou art God the Saviour, thou, the God of 
Peter, the invisible God, the Saviour. And they spake among 
themselves, marvelling indeed at the power of a man that called 
upon his Lord with a word; and they received it unto sanctification. 

XXVIII. The fame of it therefore being spread throughout 
the city, there came the mother of a certain senator, and cast 
herself into the midst of the people, and fell at Peter’s feet, 
saying: I have learned from my people that thou art a servant 
of the merciful God, and dost impart his grace unto all them that 
desire this light. Impart therefore the light unto my son, for 
I know that thou begrudgest none; turn not away from a matron 
that entreateth thee. Unto whom Peter said: Wilt thou believe 
on my God, by whom thy son shall be raised? And the mother 
said with a loud voice, weeping: I believe, O Peter, I believe! 
and all the people cried out: Grant the mother her son. But 
Peter said: Let him be brought hither before all these. And 
Peter turned himself to the people and said: Ye men of Rome, 
LTalso am one of yourselves, and bear a man’s body and ama sinner, 
but have obtained mercy: look not therefore upon me as though 
I did by mine own power that which I do, but by the power of 
my Lord Jesus Christ, who is the judge of quick and dead. In 
him do I believe and by him am I sent, and have confidence when 
I call upon him to raise the dead. Go thou therefore also, 
O woman, and cause thy son to be brought hither and to rise 
again. And the woman passed through the midst of the people 
and went into the street, running, with great joy, and believing 
in her mind she came unto her house, and by means of her young 
men she took him up and came unto the forum. Now she bade 
the young men put caps! on their heads, and to walk before the 
bier, and all that she had determined to burn upon the body of 
her son to be borne before his bier; and when Peter saw it he had 
compassion upon the dead body and upon her. And she came 
unto the multitude, while all bewailed her; and a great crowd 
of senators and matrons followed after, to behold the wonderful 
works of God: for this Nicostratus which was dead was exceeding 
noble and beloved of the senate. And they brought him and set 
him down before Peter. And Peter called for silence, and with 
a loud voice said: Ye men of Rome, let there now be a just 
judgement betwixt me and Simon; and judge ye whether of us 
two believeth in the living God, he or I. Let him raise up the 

1 pilei, a sign that they were now freed. 


328 ACTS OF PETER 


body that lieth here, and believe in him as the angel of God. 
But if he be not able, and I call upon my God and restore the son 
alive unto his mother, then believe ye that this man is a sorcerer 
and a deceiver, which is entertained among you. And when all 
they heard these things, they thought that it was right which 
Peter had spoken, and they encouraged Simon, saying: Now, 
if there be aught in thee, show it openly! either overcome, or 
thou shall be overcome! (or, convince us, or thou shalt be con- 
victed). Why standest thou still? Come, begin! But Simon, 
when he saw them all instant with him, stood silent; and there- 
after, when he saw the people silent and looking upon him, Simon 
cried out, saying: Ye men of Rome, if ye behold the dead man 
arise, will ye cast Peter out of the city? And all the people said: 
We will not only cast him out, but on the very instant will we 
burn him with fire. 

Then Simon went to the head of the dead man and stooped 
down and thrice raised himself up (or, and said thrice: Raise 
thyself), and showed the people that he (the dead) lifted his 
head and moved it, and opened his eyes and bowed himself 
a little unto Simon. And straightway they began to ask for 
wood and torches, wherewith to burn Peter. But Peter receiving 
strength of Christ, lifted up his voice and said unto them that 
cried out against him: Now see I, ye people of Rome, that ye 
are—I must not say fools and vain, so long as your eyes and 
your ears and your hearts are blinded. How long shall your 
understanding be darkened? see ye not that ye are bewitched, 
supposing that a dead man is raised, who hath not lifted himself 
up? It would have sufficed me, ye men of Rome, to hold my 
peace and die without speaking, and to leave you among the 
deceits of this world; but I have the chastisement of fire un- 
quenchable before mine eyes. If therefore it seem good unto 
you, let the dead man speak, let him arise if he liveth, let him 
loose his jaw that is bound, with his hands, let him call upon his 
mother, let him say unto you that cry out: Wherefore cry ye? 
let him beckon unto us with his hand. If now ye would see that 
he is dead, and yourselves bewitched, let this man depart from 
the bier, who hath persuaded you to depart from Christ, and ye 
shall see that the dead man is such as ye saw him brought hither. 

But Agrippa the prefect had no longer patience, but thrust 
away Simon with his own hands, and again the dead man lay as 
he was before. And the people were enraged, and turned away 
from the sorcery of Simon and began to cry out: Hearken, 
O Caesar! if now the dead riseth not, let Simon burn instead of 
Peter, for verily he hath blinded us. But Peter stretched forth 
his hand and said: O men of Rome, have patience! I say not 
unto you that if the lad be raised Simon shall burn; for if I say 
it, ye will do it. The people cried out: Against thy will, Peter, 
we will do it. Unto whom Peter said: If ye continue in this mind. 


ACTS OF PETER 829 


the lad shall not arise: for we know not to render evil for evil, 
but we have learned to love our enemies and pray for our perse- 
cutors. For if even this man can repent, it were better; for God 
will not remember evil. Let him come, therefore, into the light 
of Christ ; but if he cannot, let him possess the part of his father 
the devil, but let not your hands be defiled. And when he had 
thus spoken unto the people, he went unto the lad, and before he 
raised him, he said to his mother: These young men whom thou 
hast set free in the honour of thy son, can yet serve their God 
when he liveth, being free; for I know that the soul of some is 
hurt if they shall see thy son arise and know that these shall yet 
be in bondage: but let them all continue free and receive their 
sustenance as they did before, for thy son is about to rise again; 
and let them be with him. And Peter looked long upon her, to 
see her thoughts. And the mother of the lad said: What other 
can I do? therefore before the prefect I say: whatsoever I was 
minded to burn upon the body of my son, let them possess it. 
And Peter said: Let the residue be distributed unto the widows. 
Then Peter rejoiced in soul and said in the spirit: O Lord that 
art merciful, Jesu Christ, show thyself unto thy Peter that 
calleth upon thee like as thou hast always shown him mercy and 
loving-kindness: and in the presence of all these which have 
obtained freedom, that these may become thy servants, let 
Nicostratus now arise. And Peter touched the lad’s side and said: 
Arise. And the lad arose and put off his grave clothes and sat 
up and loosed his jaw, and asked for other raiment; and he came 
down from the bier and said unto Peter: I pray thee, O man of 
God, let us go unto our Lord Christ whom I saw speaking with 
me; who also showed me unto thee and said to thee: Bring him 
hither unto me, for he is mine. And when Peter heard this of the 
lad, he was strengthened yet more in soul by the help of the 
Lord; and Peter said unto the people: Ye men of Rome, it is 
thus that the dead are raised up, thus do they converse, thus do 
they arise and walk, and live so long time as God willeth. Now 
therefore, ye that have come together unto the sight, if ye turn 
not from these your evil ways, and from all your gods that are 
made with hands, and from all uncleanness and concupiscence, 
<ye shall perish for ever: Turn ye therefore and) receive fellow- 
ship with Christ, believing, that ye may obtain everlasting life. 

X XIX. And in the same hour they worshipped him as a God, 
falling down at his feet, and <brought> the sick whom they had 
at home, that he might heal them. 

But the prefect seeing that so great a multitude waited upon 
Peter, signified to Peter that he should withdraw himself: and 
Peter told the people to come unto Marcellus’ house. But the 
mother of the lad besought Peter to set foot in her house. But 
Peter had appointed to be with Marcellus on the Lord’s day, 
to see the widows even as Marcellus had promised, to minister 


330 ACTS OF PETER 


unto them with his own hands. The lad therefore that was 
risen again said: I depart not from Peter. And his mother, 
glad and rejoicing, went unto her own house. And on the next 
day after the sabbath she came to Marcellus’ house bringing 
unto Peter two thousand pieces of gold, and saying unto Peter: 
Divide these among the virgins of Christ which serve him. But 
the lad that was risen from the dead, when he saw that he had 
given nothing to any man, went home and opened the press 
and himself offered four thousand pieces of gold, saying unto 
Peter: Lo, I also which was raised, offer a double offering, 
and myself also from this day forward as a speaking sacrifice 
unto God. 


Here begins the original Greek text as preserved in one of our two 
manuscripts (that at Mt. Athos). The second (Patmos) manuscript 
begins, as do the versions, at ch. xxxiii. The Greek and not the Latin 
is followed in the translation. 


XXX. Now on the Lord’s day as Peter discoursed unto the 
brethren and exhorted them unto the faith of Christ, there 
being present many of the senate and many knights and rich 
women and matrons, and being confirmed in the faith, one 
woman that was there, exceeding rich, which was surnamed 
Chryse because every vessel of hers was of gold—for from her 
birth she never used a vessel of silver or glass, but golden ones 
only—said unto Peter: Peter, thou servant of God, he whom 
thou callest God appeared unto me in a dream and said: Chryse, 
carry thou unto Peter my minister ten thousand pieces of gold; 
for thou owest them to him. I have therefore brought them, 
fearing lest some harm should be done me by him that appeared 
unto me, which also departed unto heaven. And so saying, she 
laid down the money and departed. And Peter seeing it glorified 
the Lord, for that they that were in need should be refreshed. 
Certain, therefore, of them that were there said unto him: 
Peter, hast thou not done ill to receive the money of her? for 
she is ill spoken of throughout all Rome for fornication, and 
because she keepeth not to one husband, yea, she even hath 
to do with the young men of her house. Be not therefore a 
partner with the table of Chryse, but let that which came from 
her be returned unto her. But Peter hearing it laughed and said 
to the brethren: What this woman is in the rest of her way 
of life, I know not, but in that I have received this money, 
I did it not foolishly; for she did pay it as a debtor unto Christ, 
and giveth it unto the servants of Christ: for he himself hath 
provided for them. 

XXX]. And they brought unto him also the sick on the 
sabbath, beseeching that they might recover of their diseases. 
And many were healed that were sick of the palsy, and the gout, 
and fevers tertian and quartan, and of every disease of the body 


ACTS OF PETER 331 


were they healed, believing in the name of Jesus Christ, and very 
many were added every day unto the grace of the Lord. 

But Simon the magician, after a few days were past, promised 
the multitude to convict Peter that he believed not in the true 
God but was deceived. And when he did many lying wonders, 
they that were firm in the faith derided him. For in dining- 
chambers he made certain spirits enter in, which were only an 
appearance, and not existing in truth. And what should I more 
say ? though he had oft-times been convicted of sorcery, he made 
lame men seem whole for a little space, and blind likewise, and 
once he appeared to make many dead to live and move, as 
he did with Nicostratus (Gk. Stratonicus). But Peter followed 
him throughout and convicted him always unto the beholders: 
and when he now made a sorry figure and was derided by the 
people of Rome and disbelieved for that he never succeeded 
in the things which he promised to perform, being in such a 
plight at last he said to them: Men of Rome, ye think now 
that Peter hath prevailed over me, as more powerful, and ye 
pay more heed to him: ye are deceived. For to-morrow I shall 
forsake you, godless and impious that ye are, and fly up unto 
God whose Power I am, though I am become weak. Whereas, 
then, ye have fallen, I am He that standeth, and I shall go up 
to my Father and say unto him: Me also, even thy son that 
standeth, have they desired to pull down; but I consented 
not unto them, and am returned back unto myself. 

XXXII. And already on the morrow a great multitude as- 
sembled at the Sacred Way to see him flying. And Peter came 
unto the place, having seen a vision (07, to see the sight), that he 
might convict him in this also; for when Simon entered into 
Rome, he amazed the multitudes by flying: but Peter that 
convicted him was then not yet living at Rome: which city he thus 
deceived by illusion, so that some were carried away by him 
(amazed at him). 

So then this man standing on an high place beheld Peter and 
began to say: Peter, at this time when I am going up before 
all this people that behold me, I say unto thee: If thy God 
is able, whom the Jews put to death, and stoned you that were 
chosen of him, let him show that faith in him is faith in God, 
and let it appear at this time, if it be worthy of God. For I, 
ascending up, will show myself unto all this multitude, who 
Iam. And behold when he was lifted up on high, and all beheld 
him raised up above all Rome and the temples thereof and the 
mountains, the faithful looked toward Peter. And Peter seeing 
the strangeness of the sight cried unto the Lord Jesus Christ: 
If thou suffer this man to accomplish that which he hath set 
about, now will all they that have believed on thee be offended, 
and the signs and wonders which thou hast given them through 
me will not be believed: hasten thy grace, O Lord, and let him 


332 ACTS OF PETER 


fall from the height and be disabled; and let him not die but 
be brought to nought, and break his leg in three places. And 
he fell from the height and brake his leg in three places. Then 
every man cast stones at him and went away home, and thence- 
forth believed Peter. 

But one of the friends of Simon came quickly out of the way 
(or arrived from a journey), Gemellus by name, of whom Simon 
had received much money, having a Greek woman to wife, and 
saw him that he had broken his leg, and said: O Simon, if the 
Power of God is broken to pieces, shall not that God whose Power 
thou art, himself be blinded ? Gemellus therefore also ran and 
followed Peter, saying unto him: I also would be of them that 
believe on Christ. And Peter said: Is there any that grudgeth it, 
my brother ? come thou and sit with us. 

But Simon in his affliction found some to carry him by night 
on a bed from Rome unto Aricia; and he abode there a space, 
and was brought thence unto Terracina to one Castor that was 
banished from Rome upon an accusation of sorcery. And there 
he was sorely cut (Lat. by two physicians), and so Simon the 
angel of Satan came to his end. 


[Here the Martyrdom proper begins in the Patmos MS. and the 
versions. | 


XXXII. Now Peter was in Rome rejoicing in the Lord with 
the brethren, and giving thanks night and day for the multitude 
which was brought daily unto the holy name by the grace of 
the Lord. And there were gathered also unto Peter the con- 
cubines of Agrippa the prefect, being four, Agrippina and Nicaria 
and Euphemia and Doris; and they, hearing the word concerning 
chastity and all the oracles of the Lord, were smitten in their 
souls, and agreeing together to remain pure from the bed of 
Agrippa they were vexed by him. 

Now as Agrippa was perplexed and grieved concerning them— 
and he loved them greatly—he observed and sent men privily 
to see whither they went, and found that they went unto Peter. 
He said therefore unto them when they returned: That Christian 
hath taught you to have no dealings with me: know ye that 
I will both destroy you, and burn him alive. They, then, endured 
to suffer all manner of evil at Agrippa’s hand, if only they might 
not suffer the passion of love, being strengthened by the might 
of Jesus. 

XXXIV. And a certain woman which was exceeding beautiful, 
the wife of Albinus, Caesar’s friend, by name Xanthippe, came, 
she also, unto Peter, with the rest of the matrons, and withdrew 
herself, she also, from Albinus. He therefore being mad, and 
loving Xanthippe, and marvelling that she would not sleep 
even upon the same bed with him, raged like a wild beast and 
would have dispatched Peter; for he knew that he was the cause 


ACTS OF PETER 333 


of her separating from his bed. Many other women also, loving 
the word of chastity, separated themselves from their husbands, 
because they desired them to worship God in sobriety and 
cleanness. And whereas there was great trouble in Rome, 
Albinus made known his state unto Agrippa, saying to him: 
Hither do thou avenge me of Peter that hath withdrawn my 
wife, or I will avenge myself. And Agrippa said: I have suffered 
the same at his hand, for he hath withdrawn my concubines. 
And Albinus said unto him: Why then tarriest thou, Agrippa? 
let us find him and put him to death for a dealer in curious arts, 
that we may have our wives again, and avenge them also which 
are not able to put him to death, whose wives also he hath parted 
from them. 

XX XV. And as they considered these things, Xanthippe took 
knowledge of the counsel of her husband with Agrippa, and 
sent and showed Peter, that he might depart from Rome. And 
the rest of the brethren, together with Marcellus, besought him 
to depart. But Peter said unto them: Shall we be runaways, 
brethren? and they said to him: Nay, but that thou mayest yet 
be able to serve the Lord. And he obeyed the brethren’s voice 
and went forth alone, saying: Let none of you come forth with 
me, but I will go forth alone, having changed the fashion of 
mine apparel. And as he went forth of the city, he saw the Lord 
entering into Rome. And when he saw him, he said: Lord, 
whither goest thou thus (or here)? And the Lord said unto 
him: I go into Rome to be crucified. And Peter said unto 
him: Lord, art thou (being) crucified again? He said unto him: 
Yea, Peter, I am (being) crucified again. And Peter came to 
himself: and having beheld the Lord ascending up into heaven, 
he returned to Rome, rejoicing, and glorifying the Lord, for 
that he said: I am being crucified: the which was about to 
befall Peter. 

XXXVI. He went up therefore again unto the brethren, and 
told them that which had been seen by him: and they lamented 
in soul, weeping and saying: We beseech thee, Peter, take 
thought for us that are young. And Peter said unto them: 
If it be the Lord’s will, it cometh to pass, even if we will it not; 
but for you, the Lord is able to stablish you in his faith, and 
will found you therein and make you spread abroad, whom he 
himself hath planted, that ye also may plant others through 
him. But I, so long as the Lord will that I be in the flesh, resist 
not; and again if he take me to him I rejoice and am glad. 

And while Peter thus spake, and all the brethren wept, behold 
four soldiers took him and led him unto Agrippa. And he in 
his madness (disease) commanded him to be crucified on an 
accusation of godlessness. 

The whole multitude of the brethren therefore ran together, 
both of rich and poor, orphans and widows, weak and strong, 


334 ACTS OF PETER 


desiring to see and to rescue Peter, while the people shouted 
with one voice, and would not be silenced: What wrong hath 
Peter done, O Agrippa? Wherein hath he hurt thee? tell the 
Romans! And others said: We fear lest if this man die, 
his Lord destroy us all. 

And Peter when he came unto the place stilled the people 
and said: Ye men that are soldiers of Christ! ye men that 
hope in Christ! remember the signs and wonders which ye have 
seen wrought through me, remember the compassion of God, 
how many cures he hath wrought for you. Wait for him that 
cometh and shall reward every man according to his doings. 
And now be ye not bitter against Agrippa; for he is the minister 
of his father’s working. And this cometh to pass at all events, 
for the Lord hath manifested unto me that which befalleth. 
But why delay I and draw not near unto the cross? 

XXXVII. And having approached and standing by the cross 
he began to say: O name of the cross, thou hidden mystery! 
O grace ineffable that is pronounced in the name of the cross! 
O nature of man, that cannot be separated from God! O love 
(friendship) unspeakable and inseparable, that cannot be shown 
forth by unclean lips! I seize thee now, I that am at the end 
of my delivery hence (or, of my coming hither). I will declare 
thee, what thou art: I will not keep silence of the mystery 
of the cross which of old was shut and hidden from my soul. 
Let not the cross be unto you which hope in Christ, this which 
appeareth: for it is another thing, different from that which 
appeareth, even this passion which is according to that of Christ. 
And now above all, because ye that can hear are able to hear 
it of me, that am at the last and final hour of my life, hearken: 
Separate your souls from every thing that is of the senses, from 
every thing that appeareth, and does not exist in truth. Blind 
these eyes of yours, close these ears of yours, put away your doings 
that are seen; and ye shall perceive that which concerneth 
Christ, and the whole mystery of your salvation: and let thus 
much be said unto you that hear, as if it had not been spoken. 
But now it is time for thee, Peter, to deliver up thy body unto 
them that take it. Receive it then, ye unto whom it belongeth. 
I beseech you the executioners, crucify me thus, with the head 
downward and not otherwise: and the reason wherefore, I will 
tell unto them that hear. 

XXXVITI. And when they had hanged him up after the manner 
he desired, he began again to say: Ye men unto whom it belong- 
eth to hear, hearken to that which I shall declare unto you 
at this especial time as I hang here. Learn ye the mystery of 
all nature, and the beginning of all things, what it was. For 
the first man, whose race I bear in mine appearance (or, of the 
race of whom I bear the likeness), fell (was borne) head down- 
wards, and showed forth a manner of birth such as was not 


ACTS OF PETER 835 


heretofore: for it was dead, having no motion. He, then, being 
pulled down—who also cast his first state down upon the earth— 
established this whole disposition of all things, being hanged 
up an image of the creation (Gk. vocation) wherein he made 
the things of the right hand into left hand and the left hand 
into right hand, and changed about all the marks of their nature, 
so that he thought those things that were not fair to be fair, 
and those that were in truth evil, to be good. Concerning which 
the Lord saith in a mystery: Unless ye make the things of 
the right hand as those of the left, and those of the left as those 
of the right, and those that are above as those below, and those 
that are behind as those that are before, ye shall not have know- 
ledge of the kingdom. 

This thought, therefore, have I declared unto you; and the 
figure wherein ye now see me hanging is the representation of 
that man that first came unto birth. Ye therefore, my beloved, 
and ye that hear me and that shall hear, ought to cease from 
your former error and return back again. For it is right to 
mount upon the cross of Christ, who is the word stretched out, 
the one and only, of whom the spirit saith: For what else is 
Christ, but the word, the sound of God? So that the word is 
the upright beam whereon I am crucified. And the sound is that 
which crosseth it, the nature of man. And the nail which holdeth 
the cross-tree unto the upright in the midst thereof is the con- 
version and repentance of man. 

XX XIX. Now whereas thou hast made known and revealed 
these things unto me, O word of life, called now by me wood 
(or, word called now by me the tree of life), I give thee thanks, 
not with these lips that are nailed unto the cross, nor with this 
tongue by which truth and falsehood issue forth, nor with this 
word which cometh forth by means of art whose nature is material, 
but with that voice do I give thee thanks, O King, which is 
perceived (understood) in silence, which is not heard openly, 
which proceedeth not forth by organs of the body, which goeth 
not into ears of flesh, which is not heard of corruptible substance 
which existeth not in the world, neither is sent forth upon earth, 
nor written in books, which is owned by one and not by another: 
but with this, O Jesu Christ, do I give thee thanks, with the 
silence of a voice, wherewith the spirit that is in me loveth thee, 
speaketh unto thee, seeth thee, and beseecheth thee. Thou 
art perceived of the spirit only, thou art unto me father, thou 
my mother, thou my brother, thou my friend, thou my bondsman, 
thou my steward: thou art the Alli and the All is in thee: and 
thou Art, and there is nought else that IS save thee only. 

Unto him therefore do ye also, brethren, flee, and if ye learn 
that in him alone ye exist, ye shall obtain those things whereof 
he saith unto you: ‘which neither eye hath seen nor ear 
heard, neither have they entered into the heart of man.’ We 


336 ACTS OF PETER 


ask, therefore, for that which thou hast promised to give unto 
us, O thou undefiled Jesu. We praise thee, we give thee thanks, 
and confess to thee, glorifying thee, even we men that are yet 
without strength, for thou art God alone, and none other: to 
whom be glory now and unto all ages. Amen. 

XL. And when the multitude that stood by pronounced the 
Amen with a great sound, together with the Amen Peter gave 
up his spirit unto the Lord. 

And Marcellus not asking leave of any, for it was not possible, 
when he saw that Peter had given up the ghost, took him down 
from the cross with his own hands and washed him in milk 
and wine: and cut fine seven minae of mastic,! and of myrrh 
and aloes and Indian leaf other fifty, and perfumed (embalmed) 
his body and filled a coffin of marble of great price with Attic 
honey and laid it in his own tomb. 

But Peter by night appeared unto Marcellus and said: Mar- 
cellus, hast thou heard that the Lord saith: Let the dead be 
buried of their own dead? And when Marcellus said: Yea, 
Peter said to him: That, then, which thou hast spent on the 
dead, thou hast lost: for thou being alive hast like a dead man 
cared for the dead. And Marcellus awoke and told the brethren 
of the appearing of Peter: and he was with them that had 
been stablished in the faith of Christ by Peter, himself also being 
stablished yet more until the coming of Paul unto Rome.? 

XLI. [This last chapter, and the last sentence of XL, are thought by 
Vouaux to be an addition by the author of i-iii, in other words by the 
compiler of the Greek original of the Vercelli Acts.] 


But Nero, learning thereafter that Peter was departed 
out of this life, blamed the prefect Agrippa, because he had 
been put to death without his knowledge; for he desired to 
punish him more sorely and with greater torment, because 
Peter had made disciples of certain of them that served him, 
and had caused them to depart from him: so that he was very 
wrathful and for a long season spake not unto Agrippa: for he 
sought to destroy all them that had been made disciples by 
Peter. And he beheld by night one that scourged him and said 
unto him: Nero, thou canst not now persecute nor destroy 
the servants of Christ: refrain therefore thine hands from them. 
And so Nero, being greatly affrighted by such a vision, abstained 
from harming the disciples at that time when Peter also departed 
this life. 

And thenceforth the brethren were rejoicing with one mind 
and exulting in the Lord, glorifying the God and Saviour (Father ?) 
of our Lord Jesus Christ with the Holy Ghost, unto whom be 
glory, world without end. Amen. 


1 Gk. Chian. The adjective was used by itself to signify mastic. 
* The Latin omits this last sentence, but the other versions have it. 


837 


ACTS OF ANDREW 


We have no ancient record of the length of this book, as we had in 
the cases of John, Paul, and Peter (but I suspect it was the most prolix 
of all the five), and we have fewer relics of the original text than for 
those. We have, however, a kind of abstract of the whole, written 
in Latin by Gregory of Tours: and there are Greek Encomia of the 
apostle which also help to the reconstruction of the story. The 
Martyrdom (as in other cases) exists separately, in many texts. Max 
Bonnet has established the relations of these to each other: and 
J. Flamion has made a most careful study of all the fragments. 

The best specimen of the original text which we have is a fragment 
preserved in a Vatican MS., tenth-eleventh centuries, containing dis- 
courses of Andrew shortly before his passion. There are also a few 
ancient quotations. 

These Acts may be the latest of the five leading apostolic romances. 
They belong to the third century: c. a. D. 260? 

It was formerly thought that the Acts of Andrew and Matthias. 
(Matthew) were an episode of the original romance: but this view has 
ceased to be held. That legend is akin to the later Egyptian romances 
about the apostles of which an immense number were produced in the 
fifth and later centuries. An abstract of them will be given in due course. 

The epitome by Gregory of Tours is considered by Flamion to give 
on the whole the best idea of the contents of the original Acts. The 
latest edition of it is that by M. Bonnet in the Monumenta Germaniae 
Historica (Greg. Turon. II. 821-47). The greater part appears as 
Lib. III of the Historia Apostolica of (Pseudo-)Abdias, in a text much 
altered, it seems, in the sixteenth century by Wolfgang Lazius: reprinted 
in Fabricius’ Cod. Apocr. N. T. 


Gregory’s prologue is as follows: 

The famous triumphs of the apostles are, I believe, not un- 
known to any of the faithful, for some of them are taught us 
in the pages of the gospel, others are related in the Acts of the 
Apostles, and about some of them books exist in which the 
actions of each apostle are recorded; yet of the more part we 
have nothing but their Passions in writing. 

Now I have come upon a book on the miracles (virtues, great 
deeds) of St. Andrew the apostle, which, because of its excessive 
verbosity, was caJled by some apocryphal. And of this I thought 
good to extract and set out the ‘virtues’ only, omitting all 
that bred weariness, and so include the wonderful miracles. 
within the compass of one small volume, which might both 
please the reader and ward off the spite of the adverse critic: 
for it is not the multitude of words, but the soundness of reason 
and the purity of mind that produce unblemished faith. 

11 After the Ascension the apostles dispersed to preach in various 
countries. Andrew began in the province of Achaia, but Matthew 
went to the city of Mermidona. (The rest of 1 and the whole of 2 


1 What follows is a full abstract, not a version, of Gregory’s text. 
870 vA 


338 ACTS OF ANDREW 


give a short abstract of the Acts of Andrew and Matthew which 
Gregory either found prefixed to his copy of the Acts of Andrew, 
or thought himself obliged to notice, because of the popularity 
of the story.) 

2 Andrew left Mermidona and came back to his own allotted 
district. Walking with his disciples he met a blind man who 
said: ‘Andrew, apostle of Christ, I know you can restore my 
sight, but I do not wish for that: only bid those with you to 
give me enough money to clothe and feed myself decently.’ 
Andrew said: ‘This is the devil’s voice, who will not allow the 
man to recover his sight.’ He touched his eyes and healed him. 
Then, as he had but a vile rough garment, Andrew said: ‘Take 
the filthy garment off him and clothe him afresh.’ All were 
ready to strip themselves, and Andrew said: ‘Let him have 
what will suffice him.’ He returned home thankful. 

8 Demetrius of Amasea had an Egyptian boy of whom he 
was very fond, who died of a fever. Demetrius hearing of 
Andrew’s miracles, came, fell at his feet, and besought help. 
Andrew pitied him, came to the house, held a very long discourse, 
turned to the bier, raised the boy, and restored him to his master. 
All believed and were baptized. 

4 A Christian lad named Sostratus came to Andrew privately 
and told him: ‘My mother cherishes a guilty passion for me: 
I have repulsed her, and she has gone to the proconsul to throw 
the guilt on me. I would rather die than expose her.’ The 
officers came to fetch the boy, and Andrew prayed and went 
with him. The mother accused him. The proconsul bade him 
defend himself. He was silent, and so continued, until the 
proconsul retired to take counsel. The mother began to weep. 
Andrew said: ‘Unhappy woman, that dost not fear to cast 
thine own guilt on thy son.’ She said to the proconsul: ‘Ever 
since my son entertained his wicked wish he has been in constant 
company with this man.’ The proconsul was enraged, ordered 
the lad to be sewn into the leather bag of parricides and drowned 
in the river, and Andrew to be imprisoned till his punishment 
should be devised. Andrew prayed, there was an earthquake, 
the proconsul fell from his seat, every one was prostrated, and 
the mother withered up and died. The proconsul fell at Andrew’s 
feet praying for mercy. The earthquake and thunder ceased, 
and he healed those who had been hurt. The proconsul and his 
house were baptized. 

5 The son of Cratinus (Gratinus) of Sinope bathed in the 
women’s bath and was seized by a demon. Cratinus wrote 
to Andrew for help: he himself had a fever and his wife dropsy. 
Andrew went there in a vehicle. The boy tormented by the evil 
spirit fell at his feet. He bade it depart and so it did, with 
outcries. He then went to Cratinus’ bed and told him he well 
‘deserved to suffer because of his loose life, and bade him rise 


ACTS OF ANDREW 3839 


and sin no more. He was healed. The wife was rebuked for 
her infidelity. ‘If she is to return to her former sin, let her not 
now be healed: if she can keep from it, let her be healed.’ The 
water broke out of her body and she was cured. The apostle 
brake bread and gave it her. She thanked God, believed with 
all her house, and relapsed no more into sin. Cratinus afterwards 
sent Andrew great gifts by his servants, and then, with his 
wife, asked him in person to accept them, but he refused saying: 
‘It is rather for you to give them to the needy.’ 

6 After this he went to Nicaea where were seven devils living 
among the tombs by the wayside, who at noon stoned passers- 
by and had killed many. And all the city came out to meet 
Andrew with olive branches, crying: ‘Our salvation is in thee, 
O man of God.’ When they had told him all, he said: ‘If you 
believe in Christ you shall be freed.’ They cried: ‘We will.’ 
He thanked God and commanded the demons to appear; they 
came in the form of dogs. Said he: ‘These are your enemies: 
if you profess your belief that I can drive them out in Jesus’ 
name, I will do so.’ They cried out: ‘We believe that Jesus 
Christ whom thou preachest is the Son of God.’ Then he bade 
the demons go into dry and barren places and hurt no man till 
the last day. They roared and vanished. The apostle baptized 
the people and made Callistus bishop. 

7 At the gate of Nicomedia he met a dead man borne on 
a bier, and his old father supported by slaves, hardly able to walk, 
and his old mother with hair torn, bewailing. ‘How has it 
happened?’ he asked. ‘He was alone in his chamber and seven 
dogs rushed on him and killed him.’ Andrew sighed and said: 
‘This is an ambush of the demons I banished from Nicaea. 
What will you do, father, if I restore your son?’ ‘I have nothing 
more precious than him, I will give him.’ He prayed: ‘Let 
the spirit of this lad return.’ The faithful responded, ‘Amen’. 
Andrew bade the lad rise, and he rose, and all cried: ‘Great is 
the God of Andrew.’ The parents offered great gifts which he 
refused, but took the lad to Macedonia, instructing him. 

8 Embarking in a ship he sailed into the Hellespont, on the 
way to Byzantium. There was a great storm. Andrew prayed 
and there was calm. They reached Byzantium. 

9 Thence proceeding through Thrace they met a troop of 
armed men who made as if to fall on them. Andrew made the 
sign of the cross against them, and prayed that they might be 
made powerless. A bright angel touched their swords and they 
all fell down, and Andrew and his company passed by while 
they worshipped him. And the angel departed in a great light. 

10 At Perinthus he found a ship going to Macedonia, and 
an angel told him to go on board. As he preached the captain 
and the rest heard and were converted, and Andrew glorified 
God for making himself known on the sea. 


840 ACTS OF ANDREW 


11 At Philippi were two brothers, one of whom had two sons, 
the other two daughters. They were rich and noble, and said: 
‘There is no family as good as ours in the place: let us marry 
our sons to our daughters.’ It was agreed and the earnest paid 
by the father of the sons. On the wedding-day a word from 
God came to them: ‘Wait till my servant Andrew comes: he 
will tell you what you should do.’ All preparations had been 
made, and guests bidden, but they waited. On the third day 
Andrew came: they went out to meet him with wreaths and 
told him how they had been charged to wait for him, and how 
things stood. His face was shining so that they marvelled at 
him. He said: ‘Do not, my children, be deceived: rather repent, 
for you have sinned in thinking to join together those who are 
near of kin. We do not forbid or shun marriage [this cannot 
be the author’s original sentiment: it is contradicted by all 
that we know of the Acts]. It is a divine institution: but we 
condemn incestuous unions.’ The parents were troubled and 
prayed for pardon. The young people saw Andrew’s face like 
that of an angel, and said: ‘We are sure that your teaching 
is true.’ The apostle blessed them and departed. 

12 At Thessalonica was a rich noble youth, Exo6és, who came 
without his parents’ knowledge and asked to be shown the way 
of truth. He was taught, and believed, and followed Andrew, 
taking no care of his worldly estate. The parents heard that 
he was at Philippi and tried to bribe him with gifts to leave 
Andrew. He said: ‘Would that you had not these riches, then 
would you know the true God, and escape his wrath.’ Andrew, 
too, came down from the third storey and preached to them, 
but in vain: he retired and shut the doors of the house. They 
gathered a band and came to burn the house, saying: ‘Death 
to the son who has forsaken his parents’: and brought torches, 
reeds, and faggots, and set the house on fire. It blazedup. Exodés 
took a bottle of water and prayed: ‘Lord Jesu Christ, in whose 
hand is the nature of all the elements, who moistenest the dry 
and driest the moist, coolest the hot and kindlest the quenched, 
put out this fire that thy servants may not grow evil, but be 
more enkindled unto faith.’ He sprinkled the flames and they 
died. ‘He is become a sorcerer,’ said the parents, and got 
Jadders, to climb up and kill them, but God blinded them. They 
remained obstinate, but one Lysimachus, a citizen, said: ‘Why 
persevere? God is fighting for these. Desist, lest heavenly 
fire consume you.’ They were touched, and said: ‘This is 
the true God.’ It was now night, but a light shone out, and 
they received sight. They went up and fell before Andrew and 
asked pardon, and their repentance made Lysimachus say: 
‘Truly Christ whom Andrew preaches is the Son of God.’ All 
were converted except the youth’s parents, who cursed him and 
went home again, leaving all their money to public uses. Fifty 


ACTS OF ANDREW 341 


days after they suddenly died, and the citizens, who loved the 
youth, returned the property to him. He did not leave Andrew, 
but spent his income on the poor. 

138 The youth asked Andrew to go with him to Thessalonica. 
All assembled in the theatre, glad to see their favourite. The 
youth preached to them, Andrew remaining silent, and all 
wondered at his wisdom. The people cried out: ‘Save the son 
of Carpianus who is ill, and we will believe.’ Carpianus went 
to his house and said to the boy: ‘You shall be cured to-day, 
Adimantus.’ He said: ‘Then my dream is come true: I saw 
this man in a vision healing me.’ He rose up, dressed, and ran 
to the theatre, outstripping his father, and fell at Andrew’s feet. 
The people seeing him walk after twenty-three years, cried: 
‘There is none like the God of Andrew.’ 

14 A citizen had a son possessed by an unclean spirit and 
asked for his cure. The demon, foreseeing that he would be 
cast out, took the son aside into a chamber and made him hang 
himself. The father said: ‘Bring him to the theatre: I believe 
this stranger is able to raise him.’ He said the same to Andrew. 
Andrew said to the people: ‘What will it profit you if you see 
this accomplished and do not believe?’ They said: ‘Fear not, 
we will believe.’ The lad was raised and they said: ‘It is 
enough, we do believe.’ And they escorted Andrew to the 
house with torches and lamps, for it was night, and he taught 
them for three days. 

15 Medias of Philippi came and prayed for his sick son. 
Andrew wiped his cheeks and stroked his head, saying: ‘Be 
comforted, only believe,’ and went with him to Philippi. As 
they entered the city an old man met them and entreated 
for his sons, whom for an unspeakable crime Medias had im- 
prisoned, and they were putrefied with sores. Andrew said: 
‘How can you ask help for your son when you keep these men 
bound? Loose their chains first, for your unkindness obstructs 
my prayers.’ Medias, penitent, said: ‘I will loose these two and 
seven others of whom you have not been told.’ They were 
brought, tended for three days, cured, and freed. ‘Then the 
apostle healed the son, Philomedes, who had been ill twenty-two 
years. The people cried: ‘Heal our sick as well.’ Andrew told 
Philomedes to visit them in their houses and bid them rise in 
the name of Jesus Christ, by which he had himself been healed. 
This was done, and all believed and offered gifts, which Andrew 
did not accept. : 

16 A citizen, Nicolaus, offered a gilt chariot and four white 
mules and four white horses as his most precious possession for 
the cure of his daughter. Andrew smiled. ‘I accept your gifts, 
but not these visible ones: if you offer this for your daughter, 
what will you for your soul? That is what I desire of you, that 
the inner man may recognize the true God, reject earthly things 


842 ACTS OF ANDREW 


and desire eternal...’ He persuaded all to forsake their idols, 
and healed the girl. His fame went through all Macedonia. 

17 Next day as he taught, a youth cried out: ‘What hast thou 
to do with us. Art thou come to turn us out of our own place ?’ 
Andrew summoned him: ‘What is your work?’ ‘I have dwelt 
in this boy from his youth and thought never to leave him: 
but three days since I heard his father say, “I shall go to 
Andrew”: and now I fear the torments thou bringest us and 
I shall depart.’ The spirit left the boy. And many came and 
asked: ‘In whose name dost thou cure our sick ?’ 

Philosophers also came and disputed with him, and no one 
could resist his teaching. 

18 At this time, one who opposed him went to the proconsul 
Virinus and said: ‘A man is arisen in Thessalonica who says 
the temples should be destroyed and ceremonies done away, 
and all the ancient law abolished, and one God worshipped, 
whose servant he says he is.’ The proconsul sent soldiers and 
knights to fetch Andrew. They found his dwelling: when they 
entered, his face so shone that they fell down in fear. Andrew 
told those present the proconsul’s purpose. The people armed 
themselves against the soldiers, but Andrew stopped them. The 
proconsul arrived; not finding Andrew in the appointed place, 
he raged like a lion and sent twenty more men. They, on arrival, 
were confounded and said nothing. The proconsul sent a large 
troop to bring him by force. Andrew said: ‘Have you come 
for me?’ ‘Yes, if you are the sorcerer who says the gods ought 
not to be worshipped.’ ‘I am no sorcerer, but the apostle of 
Jesus Christ whom I preach.’ At this, one of the soldiers drew 
his sword and cried: ‘What have I to do with thee, Virinus, that 
thou sendest me to one who can not only cast me out of this 
vessel, but burn me by his power? Would that you would come 
yourself! you would do him no harm.’ And the devil went out 
of the soldier and he fell dead. On this came the proconsul 
and stood before Andrew but could not see him. ‘I am he whom 
thou seekest.’ His eyes were opened, and he said in anger: 
‘What is this madness, that thou despisest us and our officers? 
Thou art certainly a sorcerer. Now will I throw thee to the 
beasts for contempt of our gods and us, and we shall see if the 
crucified whom thou preachest will help thee.’ Andrew: ‘Thou 
must believe, proconsul, in the true God and his Son whom he 
hath sent, specially now that one of thy men is dead.’ And 
after long prayer he touched the soldier: ‘Rise up: my God 
Jesus Christ raiseth thee.’ He arose and stood whole. The 
people cried: ‘Glory be to our God.’ The proconsul: ‘Believe 
not, O people, believe not the sorcerer.’ They said: ‘This is no 
sorcery but sound and true teaching.’ The proconsul: ‘I shall 
throw this man to the beasts and write about you to Caesar, 
that ye may perish for contemning his laws.’ They would have 


ACTS OF ANDREW 343 


stoned him, and said: ‘Write to Caesar that the Macedonians 
have received the word of God, and forsaking their idols, worship 
the true God.’ a 

Then the proconsul in wrath retired to the praetorium, and 
in the morning brought beasts to the stadium and had the 
apostle dragged thither by the hair and beaten with clubs. First 
they sent in a fierce boar who went about him thrice and touched 
him not. The people praised God. A bull led by thirty soldiers 
and incited by two hunters, did not touch Andrew but tore 
the hunters to pieces, roared, and fell dead. ‘Christ is the true 
God,’ said the people. An angel was seen to descend and 
strengthen the apostle. The proconsul in rage sent in a fierce 
leopard, which left every one alone but seized and strangled the 
proconsul’s son; but Virinus was so angry that he said nothing 
of it nor cared. Andrew said to the people: ‘Recognize now that 
this is the true God, whose power subdues the beasts, though 
Virinus knows him not. But that ye may believe the more, 
I will raise the dead son, and confound the foolish father.’ After 
long prayer, he raised him. The people would have slain Virinus, 
but Andrew restrained them, and Virinus went to the praetorium, 
confounded. 

19 After this a youth who followed the apostle sent for his. 
mother to meet Andrew. She came, and after being instructed, 
begged him to come to their house, which was devastated by 
a great serpent. As Andrew approached, it hissed loudly and 
with raised head came to meet him; it was fifty cubits long: 
every one fell down in fear. Andrew said: ‘Hide thy head, 
foul one, which thou didst raise in the beginning for the hurt of 
mankind, and obey the servants of God, and die.’ The serpent 
roared, and coiled about a great oak near by:and vomited poison 
and blood and died. 

Andrew went to the woman’s farm, where a child killed by 
the serpent lay dead. He said to the parents: ‘Our God who 
would have you saved hath sent me here that you may believe 
on him. Go and see the slayer slain.” They said: ‘We care 
not so much for the child’s death, if we be avenged.’ They went, 
and Andrew said to the proconsul’s wife (her conversion has 
been omitted by Gregory): ‘Go and raise the boy.’ She went, 
nothing doubting, and said: ‘Inthe name of my God Jesus Christ, 
rise up whole.’ The parents returned and found their child alive, 
and fell at Andrew’s feet. 

20 On the next night he saw a vision which he related. 
‘Hearken, beloved, to my vision. I beheld, and lo, a great moun- 
tain raised up on high, which had on it nothing earthly, but only 
shone with such light, that it seemed to enlighten all the world. 
And lo, there stood by me my beloved brethren the apostles 
Peter and John; and John reached his hand to Peter and raised 
him to the top of the mount, and turned to me and asked me to 


344, ACTS OF ANDREW 


go up after Peter, saying: ‘‘Andrew, thou art to drink Peter’s 
cup.” And he stretched out his hands and said: “Draw near to 
me and stretch out thy hands so as to join them unto mine, 
and put thy head by my head.”’ When I did so I found myself 
shorter than John. After that he said to me: “Wouldst thou 
know the image of that which thou seest, and who it is that 
speaketh to thee ?”? and I said: ‘‘I desire to know it.’’ And he said 
to me: “I am the word of the cross whereon thou shalt hang 
shortly, for his name’s sake whom thou preachest.’”” And many 
other things said he unto me, of which I must now say nothing, 
but they shall be declared when I come unto the sacrifice. But 
now let all assemble that have received the word of God, and let 
me commend them unto the Lord Jesus Christ, that he may 
vouchsafe to keep them unblemished in his teaching. For I am 
now being loosed from the body, and go unto that promise 
which he hath vouchsafed to promise me, who is the Lord of 
heaven and earth, the Son of God Almighty, very God with the 
Holy Ghost, continuing for everlasting ages.’ 


(I feel sure that John in the latter part of this vision has been 
substituted by Gregory for Jesus. The echoes of the Acts of John and 
of Peter are very evident here.) 


All the brethren wept and smote their faces. When all were 
gathered, Andrew said: ‘Know, beloved, that I am about to 
leave you, but I trust in Jesus whose word I preach, that he will 
keep you from evil, that this harvest which I have sown among 
you may not be plucked up by the enemy, that is, the knowledge 
and teaching of my Lord Jesus Christ. But do ye pray always 
and stand firm in the faith, that the Lord may root out all tares 
of offence and vouchsafe to gather you into his heavenly garner 
as pure wheat.’ So for five days he taught and confirmed them: 
then he spread his hands and prayed: ‘Keep, I beseech thee, 
O Lord, this flock which hath now known thy salvation, that the 
wicked one may not prevail against it, but that what by thy 
command and my means it hath received, it may be able to 
preserve inviolate for ever.’ And all responded ‘Amen’. He 
took bread, brake it with thanksgiving, gave it to all, saying: 
‘Receive the grace which Christ our Lord God giveth you by 
me his servant.’ He kissed every one and commended them to 
the Lord, and departed to Thessalonica, and after teaching 
there two days, he left them. 

21 Many faithful from Macedonia accompanied him in two 
ships. And all were desirous of being on Andrew’s ship, to hear 
him. He said: ‘I know your wish, but this ship is too small. 
Let the servants and baggage go in the larger ship, and you with 
me in this.’ He gave them Anthimus to comfort them, and bade 
them go into another ship which he ordered to keep always near 
. .. that they might see him and hear the word of God. (This 


ACTS OF ANDREW 845 


is a little confused.) And as he slept a little, one fell overboard. 
Anthimus roused him, saying: ‘Help us, good master; one of 
thy servants perisheth.’ He rebuked the wind, there was a calm, 
and the man was borne by the waves to the ship. Anthimus 
helped him on board and all marvelled. On the twelfth day 
they reached Patrae in Achaia, disembarked, and went to an inn. 

22 Many asked him to lodge with them, but he said he could 
only go where God bade him. That night he had no revelation, 
and the next night, being distressed at this, he heard a voice saying: 
rns I am alway with thee and forsake thee not,’ and was 
glad. 

Lesbius the proconsul was told in a vision to take him in, 
and sent a messenger for him. He came, and entering the pro- 
consul’s chamber found him lying as dead with closed eyes; 
he struck him on the side and said: ‘Rise and tell us what hath 
befallen thee.” Lesbius said: ‘I abominated the way which 
you teach, and sent soldiers in ships to the proconsul of Macedonia 
to send you bound to me, but they were wrecked and could not 
reach their destination. As I continued in my purpose of destroy- 
ing your Way, two black men (Ethiopes) appeared and scourged 
me, saying: ‘ We can no longer prevail here, for the man is coming 
whom you mean to persecute. So to-night, while we still have 
the power, we will avenge ourselves on you.”” And they beat me 
sorely and left me. But now do you pray that I may be pardoned 
and healed.’ Andrew preached the word and all believed, and 
the proconsul was healed and confirmed in the faith. 

23 Now Trophima, once the proconsul’s mistress, and now 
married to another, left her husband and clave to Andrew. Her 
husband came to her lady (Lesbius’ wife) and said she was 
renewing her liaison with the proconsul. The wife, enraged, 
said: ‘This is why my husband has left me these six months.’ 
She called her steward (procurator) and had Trophima sentenced 
as a prostitute and sent to the brothel. Lesbius knew nothing, 
and was deceived by his wife, when he asked about her. ‘Tro- 
phima in the brothel prayed continually, and had the Gospel 
on her bosom, and no one could approach her. One day one 
offered her violence, and the Gospel fell to the ground. She 
cried to God for help and an angel came, and the youth feil dead. 
After that, she raised him, and all the city ran to the sight. 

Lesbius’ wife went to the bath with the steward, and as they 
bathed an ugly demon came and killed them both. Andrew 
heard and said: ‘It is the judgement of God for their usage of 
Trophima.’ The lady’s nurse, decrepit from age, was carried to 
the spot, and supplicated for her. Andrew said to Lesbius: 
‘Will you have her raised?’ ‘No, after all the ill she has done.’ 
‘We ought not to be unmerciful.’? Lesbius went to the prae- 
torium; Andrew raised his wife, who remained shamefaced: he 
bade her go home and pray. ‘First’, she said, ‘reconcile me to 


846 ACTS OF ANDREW 


Trophima whom I have injured.’ ‘She bears you no malice.’ 
He called her and they were reconciled. Callisto was the wife. 

Lesbius, growing in faith, came one day to Andrew and confessed 
all his sins. Andrew said: ‘I thank God, my son, that thou 
fearest the judgement to come. Be strong in the Lord in whom 
thou believest.? And he took his hand and walked with him on 
the shore. 

24 They sat down, with others, on the sand, and he taught. 
A corpse was thrown up by the sea near them. ‘We must learn’, 
said Andrew, ‘what the enemy has done to him.’ So he raised 
him, gave him a garment, and bade him tell his story. He said: 
‘I am the son of Sostratus, of Macedonia, lately come from Italy. 
On returning home I heard of a new teaching, and set forth to 
find out about it. On the way here we were wrecked and all 
drowned.’ And after some thought, he realized that Andrew 
was the man he sought, and fell at his feet and said: ‘I know 
that thou art the servant of the true God. I beseech thee for 
my companions, that they also may be raised and know him.’ 
Then Andrew instructed him, and thereafter prayed God to show 
the bodies of the other drowned men: thirty-nine were washed 
ashore, and all there prayed for them to be raised. Philopator, 
the youth, said: ‘My father sent me here with a great sum. 
Now he is blaspheming God and his teaching. Let it not be so.’ 
Andrew ordered the bodies to be collected, and said: ‘Whom 
will you have raised first?’ He said: ‘Warus my foster-brother.’ 
So he was first raised and then the other thirty-eight. Andrew 
prayed over each, and then told the brethren each to take the 
hand of one and say: ‘Jesus Christ the son of the living God 
raiseth thee.’ 

Lesbius gave much money to Philopator to replace what he 
had lost, and he abode with Andrew. 

25 A woman, Calliopa, married to a murderer, had an illegitimate 
child and suffered in travail. She told her sister to call on Diana 
for help ; when she did so the devil appeared to her at night and 
said: ‘Why do you trouble me with vain prayers? Go to Andrew 
in Achaia.’ She came, and he accompanied her to Corinth, 
Lesbius with him. Andrew said to Calliopa: ‘You deserve to 
suffer for your evil life: but believe in Christ, and you will be 
relieved, but the child will be born dead.’ And so it was. 

26 Andrew did many signs in Corinth. Sostratus the father 
of Philopator, warned in a vision to visit Andrew, came first to 
Achaia and then to Corinth. He met Andrew walking with 
Lesbius, recognized him by his vision, and fell at his feet. Philo- 
pator said: ‘This is my father, who seeks to know what he must 
do.” Andrew: ‘I know that he is come to learn the truth; we 
thank God who reveals himself to believers.’ Leontius the 
servant of Sostratus, said to him: ‘Seest thou, sir, how this 
man’s face shineth?’ ‘I see, my beloved,’ said Sostratus; ‘let 


ACTS OF ANDREW 347 


us never leave him, but live with him and hear the words of 
eternal life.” Next day they offered Andrew many gifts, but he 
said: ‘It is not for me to take aught of you but your own selves. 
Had I desired money, Lesbius is richer.’ 

27 After some days he bade them prepare him a bath; and 
going there saw an old man with a devil, trembling exceedingly. 
As he wondered at him, another, a youth, came out of the bath 
and fell at his feet, saying: ‘What have we to do with thee, 
Andrew? Hast thou come here to turn us out of our abodes?’ 
Andrew said to the people: ‘Fear not,’ and drove out both the 
devils. Then, as he bathed, he told them: ‘The enemy of man- 
kind lies in wait everywhere, in baths and in rivers; therefore 
we ought always to invoke the Lord’s name, that he may have 
no power over us.’ 

They brought their sick to him to be healed, and so they did 
from other cities. 

28 An old man, Nicolaus, came with clothes rent and said: 
‘I am seventy-four years old and have always been a libertine. 
Three days ago I heard of your miracles and teaching. I thought 
I would turn over a new leaf, and then again that I would not. 
In this doubt, I took a Gospel and prayed God to make me 
forget my old devices. A few days after, I forgot the Gospel 
I had about me, and went to the brothel. The woman said: 
‘*Depart, old man, depart: thou art an angel of God, touch me 
not nor approach me, for I see in thee a great mystery.”’ Then 
I remembered the Gospel, and am come to you for help and 
pardon.’ Andrew discoursed long against incontinence, and 
prayed from the sixth to the ninth hour. He rose and washed 
his face and said: ‘I will not eat till I know if God will have 
mercy on this man.’ A second day he fasted, but had no revela- 
tion until the fifth day, when he wept vehemently and said: 
‘Lord, we obtain mercy for the dead, and now this man that 
desireth to know thy greatness, wherefore should he not return 
and thou heal him?’ A voice from heaven said: ‘Thou hast 
prevailed for the old man; but like as thou art worn with fasting, 
let him also fast. that he may be saved.’ And he called him and 
preached abstinence. On the sixth day he asked the brethren 
all to pray for Nicolaus, and they did. Andrew then took food 
and permitted the rest to eat. Nicolaus went home, gave away 
all his goods, and lived for six months on dry bread and water. 
Then he died. Andrew was not there, but in the place where 
he was he heard a voice: ‘Andrew, Nicolaus for whom thou didst 
intercede, is become mine.’ And he told the brethren that 
Nicolaus was dead, and prayed that he might rest in peace. 

29 And while he abode in that place (probably Lacedaemon) 
Antiphanes of Megara came and said: ‘If there be in thee any 
kindness, according to the command of the Saviour whom thou 
preachest, show it now.’ Asked what his story was, he told it. 


348 ACTS OF ANDREW 


‘Returning from a journey, I heard the porter of my house crying 
out. They told me that he and his wife and son were tormented 
of a devil. I went upstairs and found other servants gnashing 
their teeth, running at me, and laughing madly. I went further 
up and found they had beaten my wife: she lay with her hair 
over her face unable to recognize me. Cure her, and I care 
nothing for the others.’ Andrew said: ‘There is no respect of 
persons with God. Let us go there.’ They went from Lace- 
daemon to Megara, and when they entered the house, all the 
devils cried out: ‘What dost thou here, Andrew? Go where 
thou art permitted: this house is ours.’ He healed the wife and 
all the possessed persons, and Antiphanes and his wife became firm 
adherents. 

30 He returned to Patrae where Egeas was now proconsul, 
and one Iphidamia, who had been converted by a disciple, Sosias, 
came and embraced his feet and said: ‘My lady Maximilla who 
is in a fever has sent for you. The proconsul is standing by her 
bed with his sword drawn, meaning to kill himself when she 
expires.’ He went to her, and said to Egeas: ‘Do thyself no harm, 
but put up thy sword into his place. There will be a time when 
thou wilt draw it on me.’ Egeas did not understand, but made 
way. Andrew took Maximilla’s hand, she broke into a sweat, 
and was well: he bade them give her food. The proconsul sent 
him 100 pieces of silver, but he would not look at them. 

311 Going thence he saw a sick man lying in the dirt begging, 
and healed him. 

82? Elsewhere he saw a blind man with wife and son, and said: 
‘This is indeed the devil’s work: he has blinded them in soul and 
body.’ He opened their eyes and they believed. 

33° One who saw this said: ‘I beg thee come to the harbour; 
there is a man, the son of a sailor, sick fifty years, cast out of 
the house, lying on the shore, incurable, full of ulcers and worms.’ 
They went to him. The sick man said: ‘Perhaps you are the 
disciple of that God who alone can save.’ Andrew said: ‘Iam he 
who in the name of my God can restore thee to health,’ and added: 
‘In the name of Jesus Christ, rise and follow me.’ He left his 
filthy rags and followed, the pus and worms flowing from him. 
They went into the sea, and the apostle washed him in the name 
of the Trinity and he was whole, and ran naked through the city 
proclaiming the true God. 

3844 At this time the proconsul’s brother Stratocles arrived 
from Italy. One of his slaves, Aleman, whom he loved, was 
taken by a devil and lay foaming in the court. Stratocles hearing 
of it said: ‘Would the sea had swallowed me before I saw this.’ 


1 81 This occurs in the Greek Laudatio 39. 
* 32 In Laudatio 40. 

* 33 In Laudatio 41, at considerable length. 
‘ 34 In Laudatio 43, at considerable length. 


ACTS OF ANDREW 849 


Maximilla and Iphidamia said: ‘Be comforted: there is here 
a man of God, let us send for him.’ When he came he took the 
boy’s hand and raised him whole. Stratocles believed and clave 
to Andrew. 

35 Maximilla went daily to the praetorium and sent for 
Andrew to teach there. Egeas was away in Macedonia, angry 
because Maximilla had left him since her conversion. As they 
were all assembled one day, he returned, to their great terror. 
Andrew prayed that he might not be suffered to enter the place 
till all had dispersed. And Egeas was at once seized with indis- 
position, and in the interval the apostle signed them all and 
sent them away, himself last. But Maximilla on the first oppor- 
tunity came to Andrew and received the word of God and went 
home. [At about this point we must place the episodes quoted 
by Evodius of Uzala: see below.] 

86 After this Andrew was taken and imprisoned by Egeas, and 
all came to the prison to be taught. After a few days he was 
scourged and crucified; he hung for three days, preaching, and 
expired, as is fully set forth in his Passion. Maximilla embalmed 
and buried his body. 

87 From the tomb comes manna like flour, and oil: the amount 
shows the barrenness or fertility of the coming season—as I have 
told in my first book of Miracles. I have not set out his Passion 
at length, because I find it well done by some one else. 

88 This much have I presumed to write, unworthy, unlettered, 
&c. The author’s prayer for himself ends the book. May 
Andrew, on whose death-day he was born, intercede to save him. 


(The Passion to which Gregory alludes is that which begins 
‘Conversante et docente’.) 


Of the detached fragments and quotations which precede the Passion 
there are three: 


(a) One is in the Epistle of Titus (see p. 265). 


When, finally, Andrew also [John has been cited shortly 
before] had come to a wedding, he too, to manifest the glory of 
God, disjoined certain who were intended to marry each other, 
men and women, and instructed them to continue holy in the 
single state. 

No doubt this refers to the story in Gregory, ch. 11. Gregory, it 
may be noted, has altered the story (or has used an altered text), 
for the marriage of cousins was not forbidden till Theodosius’ time 
(so Flamion). He or his source has imagined the relationship between 
the couples; in the original Acts none need have existed: the mere 
fact of the marriage was enough. 


(b) The next are in a tract by Evodius, bishop of Uzala, against 
the Manichees: 

Observe, in the Acts of Leucius which he wrote under the 
name of the apostles, what manner of things you accept about 


350 ACTS OF ANDREW 


Maximilla the wife of Egetes: who, refusing to pay her due to 
her husband (though the apostle has said: Let the husband pay 
the due to the wife and likewise the wife to the husband: 1 Cor. 
vii. 3), imposed her maid Euclia upon her husband, decking her 
out, as is there written, with wicked (lit. hostile) enticements and 
paintings, and substituted her as deputy for herself at night, 
so that he in ignorance used her as his wife. 

There also is it written, that when this same Maximilla and 
Iphidamia were gone together to hear the apostle Andrew, a 
beautiful child, who, Leucius would have us understand, was 
either God or at least an angel, escorted them to the apostle 
Andrew and went to the praetorium of Egetes, and entering their 
chamber feigned a woman’s voice, as of Maximilla, complaining 
of the sufferings of womankind, and of Iphidamia replying. When 
Egetes heard this dialogue, he went away. [These incidents 
must have intervened between cc. 35 and 386 of Gregory of Tours. } 

(c) Evodius quotes another sentence, not certainly from the Acts 
of Andrew, but more in their manner than in that of John or Peter: 

In the Acts written by Leucius, which the Manichees receive, 
it is thus written: 

Yor the deceitful figments and pretended shows and collection 
(force, compelling) of visible things do not even proceed from 
their own nature, but from that man who of his own will has 
become worse through seduction. 

It is obscure enough, in original and version: but is the kind of 
thing that would appeal to those who thought of material things and 
phenomena as evil. 

We do not wonder that such narratives as that which Evodius 
quotes have been expunged, either by Gregory or his source, from the 
text. 

The next passage is a fragment of some pages in length found 
by M. Bonnet in a Vatican MS. (Gr. 808) of tenth to eleventh 
century. There is no doubt that it is a piece of the original Acts. 
It is highly tedious in parts. 


Andrew in prison discourses to the brethren. 


1... is there in you altogether slackness? are ye not yet 
convinced of yourselves that ye do not yet bear his goodness? let 
us be reverent, let us rejoice with ourselves in the bountiful 
(ungrudging) fellowship which cometh of him. Let us say unto 
ourselves: Blessed is our race! by whom hath it been loved? 
blessed is our state! of whom hath it obtained mercy? we are 
not cast on the ground, we that have been recognized by so great 
highness: we are not the offspring of time, afterward io be 
dissolved by time; we are not a contrivance (product) of motion, 
made to be again destroyed by itself, nor things of earthly birth. 
ending again therein. We belong, then, to a greatness, unto 
which we aspire, of which we are the property, and peradventure 


ACTS OF ANDREW 851 


to a greatness that hath mercy upon us. We belong to the better; 
therefore we flee from the worse: we belong to the beautiful, for 
whose sake we reject the foul; to the righteous, by whom we cast 
away the unrighteous ; to the merciful, by whom we reject the 
unmerciful; to the Saviour, by whom we recognize the destroyer; 
to the light, by whom we have cast away the darkness; to the One, 
by whom we have turned away from the many; to the heavenly, 
by whom we have learned to know the earthly; to the abiding, 
by whom we have seen the transitory. If we desire to offer unto 
God that hath had mercy on us a worthy thanksgiving or con- 
fidence or hymn or boasting, what better cause (theme) have we 
than that we have been recognized by him? 

2 And having discoursed thus to the brethren, he sent them 
away every one to his house, saying to them: Neither are ye 
ever forsaken of me, ye that are servants of Christ, because of the 
love that is in him: neither again shall I be forsaken of you, 
because of his intercession (mediation). And every one departed 
unto his house: and there was among them rejoicing after this 
sort for many days, while Aegeates took not thought to prosecute 
the accusation against the Apostle. Every one of them then was 
confirmed at that time in hope toward the Lord, and they 
assembled without fear in the prison, with Maximilla, Iphidamia, 
and the rest, continually{, being sheltered by the protection and 
grace of the Lord. 

3 But one day Aegeates, as he was hearing causes, remembered 
the matter concerning Andrew: and as one seized with madness, 
he left the cause which he had in hand, and rose up from the 
judgement seat and ran quickly to the praetorium, inflamed with 
love of Maximilla and desiring to persuade her with flatteries. 
And Maximilla was beforehand with him, coming from the prison, 
and entering the house. And he went in and said to her: 

4, Maximilla, thy parents counted me worthy of being thy 
consort, and gave me thine hand in marriage, not looking to 
wealth or descent or renown, but it may be to my good dis- 
position of soul: and, that I may pass over much that I might 
utter in reproach of thee, both of that which I have enjoyed at 
thy parents’ hands and thou from me during all our life, I am 
come, leaving the court, to learn of thee this one thing: answer 
me then reasonably; if thou wert as the wife of former days, living 
with me in the way we know, sleeping, conversing, bearing off- 
spring with me, I would deal well with thee in all points; nay 
more, I would set free the stranger whom I hold in prison: but 
if thou wilt not—to thee I would do nothing harsh, for indeed 
I cannot; but him, whom thou affectionest more than me, I will 
afflict yet more. Consider, then, Maximilla, to whether of the 
two thou inclinest, and answer me to-morrow; for I am wholly 
armed for this emergency. 

5 And with these words he went out; but Maximilla again at 


352 ACTS OF ANDREW 


the accustomed hour, with Iphidamia, went to Andrew: and 
putting his hands before her own eyes, and then putting them to 
her mouth, she began to declare to him the whole matter of the 
demand of Aegeates. And Andrew answered her: 

I know, Maximilla my child, that thou thyself art moved to 
resist the whole attraction (promise) of nuptial union, desiring 
to be quit of a foul and polluted way of life: and this hath long 
been firmly held in thine (MS. mine) intention; but now thou 
wishest for the further testimony of mine opinion. I testify, O 
Maximilla: do it not; be not vanquished by the threat of 
Aegeates: be not overcome by his discourse: fear not his 
shameful counsels: fall not to his artful flatteries: consent not 
to surrender thyself to his impure spells; but endure all his 
torments, looking unto us for a little space, and thou shalt see 
him wholly numbed and withering away from thee and from all 
that are akin to thee. But (For) that which I most needed to say 
to thee—for I rest not till I fulfil the business which is seen, and 
which cometh to pass in thy person—hath escaped me: and 
rightly in thee do I behold Eve repenting, and in myself Adam 
returning; for that which she suffered in ignorance, thou now 
(for whose soul I strive) settest right by returning: and that 
which the spirit suffered which was overthrown with her and 
slipped away from itself, is set right in me, with thee who seest 
thyself being brought back. For her defect thou hast remedied 
by not suffering like her; and his imperfection I have perfected 
by taking refuge with God; that which she disobeyed thou hast 
obeyed: that whereto he consented I flee from: and that which 
they both transgressed we have been aware of; for it is ordained 
that every one should correct (and raise up again) his own fall. 

6 I, then, having said this as I have said it, would go on to 
speak as followeth: Well done, O nature that art being saved, 
for ;thou hast been strongt and hast not hidden thyself (from 
God like Adam)! Well done, O soul that criest out of what thou 
hast suffered, and returnest unto thyself! Well done, O man that 
understandest what is thine and dost press on to what is thine ! 
Well done, thou that hearest what is spoken, for I see thee to be 
greater than things that are thought or spoken! I recognize thee 
as more powerful than the things which seemed to overpower 
thee; as more beautiful than those which cast thee down into 
foulness, which brought thee down into captivity. Perceiving 
then, O man, all this in thyself, that thou art immaterial, holy, 
light, akin to him that is unborn, that thou art intellectual, 
heavenly, translucent, pure, above the flesh, above the world, 
above rulers, above principalities, over whom thou art in truth, 
then comprehend thyself in thy condition and receive full know- 
ledge and understand wherein thou excellest: and beholding 
thine own face in thine essence, break asunder all bonds—I say 
not only those that are of thy birth, but those that are above 


ACTS OF ANDREW 353 


birth, whereof we have set forth to thee the names which are 
exceeding great—desire earnestly to see him that is revealed unto 
thee, him who doth not come into being, whom perchance thou 
alone shalt recognize with confidence. 

7 These things have I spoken of thee, Maximilla, for in their 
meaning the things I have spoken reach unto thee. Like as Adam 
died in Eve because he consented unto her tconfession}, so do 
I now live in thee that keepest the Lord’s commandment and 
stablishest thyself in the rank (dignity) of thy being. But the 
threats of Aegeates do thou trample down, Maximilla, knowing 
that we have God that hath mercy on us. And let not his noise 
move thee, but continue chaste; and let him punish me not only 
with such torments as bonds, but let him cast me to the beasts 
or burn me with fire, and throw me from a precipice. And what 
need I say? there is but this one body; let him abuse that as he 
will, for it is akin to himself. 

8 And yet again unto thee is my speech, Maximilla: I say unto 
thee, give not thyself over unto Aegeates: withstand his am- 
bushes; for indeed, Maximilla, I have seen my Lord saying unto 
me: Andrew, Aegeates’ father the devil will loose thee from this 
prison. Thine, therefore, let it be henceforth to keep thyself 
chaste and pure, holy, unspotted, sincere, free from adultery, 
not reconciled to the discourses of our enemy, unbent, unbroken, 
tearless, unwounded, not storm-tossed, undivided, not stumbling, 
without fellow-feeling for the works of Cain. For if thou give 
not up thyself, Maximilla, to what is contrary to these, I also 
shall rest, though I be thus forced to leave this life for thy sake, 
that is, for mine own. But if I were thrust out hence, even I, 
who, it may be, might avail through thee to profit others that 
are akin to me, and if thou wert persuaded by the discourse of 
Aegeates and the flatteries of his father the serpent, so that thou 
didst turn unto thy former works, know thou that on thine 
account I should be tormented until thou thyself sawest that 
I had contemned life for the sake of a soul which was not 
worthy. 

9 I entreat, therefore, the wise man that is in thee that thy 
mind continue jclear seeingt. I entreat thy mind that is not 
seen, that it be preserved whole: I beseech thee, love thy Jesus, 
and yield not unto the worse. Assist me, thou whom I entreat 
as a man, that I may become perfect: help me also, that thou 
mayest recognize thine own true nature: feel with me in my 
suffering, that thou mayest take knowledge of what I suffer, and 
escape suffering: see that which I see, and thou shalt be blind 
to what thou seest: see that which thou shouldst, and thou shalt 
not see that thou shouldst not: hearken to what I say, and cast 
away that which thou hast heard. 

10 These things have I spoken unto thee and unto every one 
that heareth, if he will hear. But thou, O Stratocles, said he, 


870 Aa 


854 ACTS OF ANDREW 


looking toward him, Why art thou so oppressed, with many 
tears and groanings to be heard afar off? what is the lowness of 
spirit that is on thee? why thy much pain and thy great anguish ? 
dost thou take note of what is said, and wherefore I pray thee 
to be disposed in mind as my child? (or, my child, to be com- 
posed in mind): dost thou perceive unto whom my words are 
spoken ? hath each of them taken hold on thine understanding ? 
have they whetted (MS. touched) thine intellectual part ? have I 
thee as one that hath hearkened to me? do I find myself in thee ? 
is there in thee one that speaketh whom I see to be mine own? 
doth he love him that speaketh in me and desire to have fellowship 
with him? doth he wish to be made one with him? doth he 
hasten to become his friend? doth he yearn to be joined with 
him? doth he find in him any rest? hath he where to lay his 
head? doth nought oppose him there? nought that is wroth 
with him, resisteth him, hateth him, fleeth from him, is savage, 
avoideth, turneth away, starteth off, is burdened, maketh war, 
talketh with others, is flattered by others, agreeth with others? 
Doth nothing else disturb him? Is there one within that is 
strange to me? an adversary, a breaker of peace, an enemy, a 
cheat, a sorcerer, a crooked dealer, unsound, guileful, a hater of 
men, a hater of the word, one like a tyrant, boastful, puffed up, 
mad, akin to the serpent, a weapon of the devil, a friend of the 
fire, belonging to darkness ? Is there in thee any one, Stratocles, 
that cannot endure my saying these things? Whoisit? Answer: 
do I talk in vain? have I spoken in vain? Nay, saith the man 
in thee, Stratocles, who now again weepeth. 

11 And Andrew took the hand of Stratocles and said: I have 
him whom I loved; I shall rest on him whom I look for; for thy 
yet groaning, and weeping without restraint, is a sign unto me 
that I have already found rest, that I have not spoken to thee 
these words which are akin to me, in vain. 

12 And Stratocles answered him: Think not, most blessed 
Andrew, that there is aught else that afflicteth me but thee; for 
the words that come forth of thee are like arrows of fire shot 
against me, and every one of them reacheth me and _ verily 
burneth me up. That part of my soul which inclineth to what 
I hear is tormented, divining the affliction that is to follow, for 
thou thyself departest, and, I know, nobly: but hereafter when 
I seek thy care and affection, where shall I find it, or in whom? 
I have received the seeds of the words of salvation, and thou 
wast the sower: but that they should sprout up and grow needs 
none other but thee, most blessed Andrew. And what else have 
I say to thee but this? I need much mercy and help from 
thee, to become worthy of the seed I have from thee, which 
will not otherwise increase perpetually or grow up into the light 
sea thou willest it, and prayest for them and for the whole 
of me. 


ACTS OF ANDREW 355 


18 And Andrew answered him: This, my child, was what 
I beheld in thee myself. And I glorify my Lord that my thought 
of thee walked not on the void, but knew what it said. But that 
ye may know the truth, to-morrow doth Aegeates deliver me up 
to be crucified: for Maximilla the servant of the Lord will enrage 
the enemy that is in him, unto whom he belongeth, by not 
consenting to that which is hateful to her; and by turning 
against me he will think to console himself. 

14 Now while the apostle spake these things, Maximilla was 
not there, for she having heard throughout the words wherewith 
he answered her, and being in part composed by them, and of 
such a mind as the words pointed out, set forth not inadvisedly 
nor without purpose and went to the praetorium. And she 
bade farewell to all the life of the flesh, and when Aegeates 
brought to her the same demand which he had told her to 
consider, whether she would lie with him, she rejected it; and 
thenceforth he bent himself to putting Andrew to death, and 
thought to what death he should expose him. And when of alk 
deaths crucifixion alone prevailed with him, he went away with 
his like and dined; and Maximilla, the Lord going before her in 
the likeness of Andrew, with Iphidamia came back to the prison; 
and there being therein a great gathering of the brethren, she 
found Andrew discoursing thus: 

15 I, brethren, was sent forth by the Lord as an apostle unto 
these regions whereof my Lord thought me worthy, not to teach 
any man, but to remind every man that is akin to such words, 
that they live in evils which are temporal, delighting in their 
injurious delusions: wherefrom I have always exhorted you also 
to depart, and encouraged you to press toward things that 
endure, and to take flight from all that is transitory (flowing) ; 
for ye see that none of you standeth, but that all things, even to 
the customs of men, are easily changeable. And this befalleth 
because the soul is untrained and erreth toward nature and 
holdeth pledges foft its error. I therefore account them blessed 
who have become obedient unto the word preached, and thereby 
see the mysteries of their own nature; for whose sake all things 
have been builded up. 

16 I enjoin you therefore, beloved children, build yourselves 
firmly upon the foundation that hath been laid for you, which 
is unshaken, and against which no evil-willer can conspire. Be, 
then, rooted upon this foundation: be established, remembering 
what ye have seen (or heard) and all that hath come to pass while 
I walked with you all. Ye have seen works wrought through me 
which ye have no power to disbelieve, and such signs come to 
pass as perchance even dumb nature will proclaim aloud; I have 
delivered you words which I pray may so be received by you as 
the words themselves would have it. Be established then, 
beloved, upon all that ye have seen, and heard, and partaken of, 


356 ACTS OF ANDREW 


And God on whom ye have believed shall have mercy on you and 
present you unto himself, giving you rest unto all ages. 

17 Now as for that which is to befall me, let it not really 
trouble you as some strange spectacle, that the servant of God, 
unto whom God himself hath granted much in deeds and words, 
should by an evil man be driven out of this temporal life: for 
not only unto me will this come to pass, but unto all them that 
have loved and believed on him and confess him. The devil that 
is wholly shameless will arm his own children against them, 
that they may consent unto him; and he will not have his 
desire. 

And wherefore he essayeth this I will tell you. From the begin- 
ning of all things, and if I may so say, since he that hath no 
beginning came down to be under his rule, the enemy that is a foe 
to peace driveth away from (God) such a one as doth not belong 
indeed to him, but is some one of the weaker sort and not fully 
enlightened (?), nor yet able to recognize himself. And because 
he knoweth him not, therefore must he be fought against by him 
(the devil). For he, thinking that he possesseth him and is his 
master for ever, opposeth him so much, that he maketh their 
enmity to be a kind of friendship: for suggesting to him his own 
thoughts, he often portrayeth them as pleasurable and specious 
(MS. deceitful), by which he thinketh to prevail over him. He 
was not, then, openly shown to be an enemy, for he feigned a 
friendship that was worthy of him. 

18 And this his work he carried on so long that} he (man) 
forgat to recognize it, but he (the devil) knew it himself: that is, 
he, because of his gifts <was not seen to be an enemy>. But 
when the mystery of grace was lighted up, and the counsel of 
rest manifested, and the light of the word shown, and the race of 
them that were saved was proved, warring against many 
pleasures, <he, seeing> the enemy himself despised, and himself, 
through the goodness of him that had mercy on us, derided 
because of his own gifts, by which he had thought to triumph 
over man—he began to plot against us with hatred and enmity 
and assaults; and this hath he determined, not to cease from us 
till he thinketh to separate us (from God). 

For before, our enemy was without care, and offered us a feigned 
friendship which was worthy of him, and was able not to fear 
that we, deceived by him, should depart from him. But when the 
light of dispensation was kindled, it made <his enmity), I say 
not stronger, <but more plain>. For it exposed that part of his 
nature which was hidden and which thought to escape notice, and 
made it confess what it is. 

Knowing therefore, brethren, that which shall be, let us be 
vigilant, not discontented, not making a proud figure, not 
carrying upon our souls marks of him which are not our own: 
‘but wholly lifted upward by the whole word, let us all gladly 


ACTS OF ANDREW 357 


await the end, and take our flight away from him, that he may 
be henceforth shown as he is, who <perverteth ?> our nature unto. 
(or against) our... 


THE MARTYRDOM 


The original text of this, as Flamion shows, has to be picked out of 
several Greek and Latin authorities. 

Bonnet prints the Martyrdom in several forms (Act. Apost. Apocr. 
ii. 1): on pp. 1-37 we have the Passion in three texts. 

The uppermost is the Latin letter of the presbyters and deacons 
of Achaia. This, as Bonnet has proved, is the original of the two Greek 
versions printed below it. The first editors of this Letter thought it 
might be a genuine document. But it is really an artificial thing. 
The greater part of it consists of a dialogue between Andrew and 
Aegeates: the narrative of the actual Passion is rather brief. 

Of the two Greek versions, the first, which begins “A ois é@6aApois is 
a faithful version of the Latin. 

The other, which begins “Arep rois ép0adpois, has a number of 
insertions taken from the original Acts, ultimately, perhaps through 
the medium of a ‘Passion’, circulated separately, such as we have 
had in the cases of John, Paul, and Peter. This text is called by 
Flamion the Lpitre grecque. Ep. gr. 

On pp. 88-45 follows the fragment of discourses which has just been 
translated. Very likely this is a relic of a separate Passion cut off 
from the end of the original Acts. 

On pp. 46-57 is the ‘Martyrium prius’. This tells (after speaking 
of the dispersion of the apostles) of the cure and conversion of Lesbius, 
destruction of temples, dismissal of Lesbius by Caesar, vision of 
Andrew that Aegeates is to put him to death, arrest of Andrew, and 
martyrdom. It contains many speeches. This is Mart. I. 

On pp. 58-64 is the ‘Martyrium alterum’ in two texts, which begins 
at once with the arrest of the apostle by Aegeates—after he has spent 
the night in discoursing to the brethren. 

Mart. II, A, B are the two texts of this. ; 

Besides these Bonnet has published in the Analecta Bollandiana 
and separately (as Supplementum Codicis Apocryphi, ii, 1895) the 
following documents: ‘ 

1. Acts of Andrew with Encomium: called for short Laudatio, 
which recounts the journeys at considerable length, and some of the 
miracles which we have seen in Gregory, and then the Passion (cc. 
44-9) and the Translation to Constantinople. ‘ 

2. A Greek Martyrdom, of which cc. 1-8 recount the journeys, and 
from 9 onwards the Passion, with a good deal of matter from the 
original Acts. This is called Narratio. 

3. A Latin Passion—that known to Gregory, which begins Conver- 
sante et docente: it forms the end of Book III of Abdias’ Historia 
Aposiolica, and is there tacked on to Gregory’s book of Miracles. 

Using all these sources, Flamion has with great pains indicated 
which portions he assigns to the original Acts; and I shall follow him 
here. The resultant text is a kind of mosaic, of which the sources shall 
be indicated in the margin. 


358 
Narr, 22. 
Mart. II, 
A ls 
Ybid. 
Narr. 24 
(Mart. IT, 
A. 8). 


ACTS OF ANDREW 


And after he had thus discoursed throughout the 
night to the brethren, and prayed with them and com- 
mitted them unto the Lord, early in the morning Aegeates 
the proconsul sent for the apostle Andrew out of the 
prison and said to him: The end of thy judgement is at 
hand, thou stranger, enemy of this present life and foe 
of all mine house. Wherefore hast thou thought good 
to intrude into places that are not thine, and to corrupt 
my wife who was of old obedient unto me? why hast 
thou done this against me and against all Achaia? 
Therefore shalt thou receive from me a gift in recom- 
pense of that thou hast wrought against me. 

And he commanded him to be scourged by seven men 
and afterward to be crucified: and charged the execu- 
tioners that his legs should be left unpierced, and so he 
should be hanged up: thinking by this means to torment 
him the more. 

Now the report was noised throughout all Patrae that 
the stranger, the righteous man, the servant of Christ, 
whom Aegeates held prisoner, was being crucified, having 
done nothing amiss: and they ran together with one 
accord unto the sight, being wroth with the proconsul 
because of his impious judgement. 

And as the executioners led him unto the place 
to fulfil that which was commanded them, Stratocles 
heard what was come to pass, and ran hastily and 
overtook them, and beheld the blessed Andrew violently 
haled by the executioners like a malefactor. And he 
spared them not, but beating every one of them soundly 
and tearing their coats from top to bottom, he caught 
Andrew away from them, saying: Ye may thank the 
blessed man who hath instructed me and taught me to 
refrain from extremity of wrath: for else I would have 
showed you what Stratocles is able to do, and what 
is the power of the foul Aegeates. For we have learnt to 
endure that which others inflict upon us. And he took 
the hand of the apostle and went with him to the place 
by the sea-shore where he was to be crucified. 

But the soldiers who had received him from the 
proconsul left him with Stratocles, and returned and 
told Aegeates, saying: As we went with Andrew, 
Stratocles prevented us, and rent our coats and pulled 
him away from us and took him with him, and lo, here 
we are as thou seest. And Aegeates answered them: 
Put on other raiment and go and fulfil that which 
I commanded you, upon the condemned man: but be 
not seen of Stratocles, neither answer him again if he 
ask aught of you; for I know the rashness of his soul, 


ACTS OF ANDREW 


what it is; and if he were provoked he would not even 
spare me. And they did as Aegeates said unto them. 

But as Stratocles went with the apostle unto the 
place appointed, Andrew perceived that he was wroth 
with Aegeates and was reviling him in a low voice, and 
said unto him: My child Stratocles, I would have thee 
henceforth possess thy soul unmoved, and remove from 
thyself this temper, and neither be inwardly disposed 
thus toward the things that seem hard to thee, nor be 
inflamed outwardly: for it becometh the servant of 
Jesus to be worthy of Jesus. And another thing will 
I say unto thee and to the brethren that walk with me: 
that the man that is against us, when he dareth aught 
against us and findeth not one to consent unto him, is 
smitten and beaten and wholly deadened because he 
hath not accomplished that which he undertook; let 
us therefore, little children, have him alway before our 
eyes, lest if we fall asleep he slaughter us (you) like an 
adversary. 

And as he spake this and yet more unto Stratocles 
and them that were with him, they came to the place 
where he was to be crucified: and (seeing the cross set 
up at the edge of the sand by the sea-shore) he left 
them all and went to the cross and spake unto it (as 
unto a living creature, with a loud voice): 

Hail, O cross, yea be glad indeed! Well know I that 
thou shalt henceforth be at rest, thou that hast for a long 
time been wearied, being set up and awaiting me. I come 
unto thee whom I know to belong to me. I come unto 
thee that hast yearned after me. I know thy mystery, 
for the which thou art set up: for thou art planted in 
the world to establish the things that are unstable: 
and the one part of thee stretcheth up toward heaven 
that thou mayest signify the heavenly word (or, the word 
that is above) (the head of all things): and another part 
of thee is spread out to the right hand and the left that 
it may put to flight the envious and adverse power of 
the evil one, and gather into one the things that are 
scattered abroad (or, the world): And another part of 
thee is planted in the earth, and securely set in the 
depth, that thou mayest join the things that are in the 
earth and that are under the earth unto the heavenly 
things (Laud. that thou mayest draw up them that be 
under the earth and them that are held in the places 
beneath the earth, and join, &c.). 

O cross, device (contrivance) of the salvation of the 
Most High! O cross, trophy of the victory [of Christ] 
over the enemies! O cross, planted upon the earth and 


3593 


Mart. II, 
Ae 


Narr. 26 
(Mart. IT, 
A). 


Laudatio 
46, 

Mart I, 14 
(Ep. Gr. 
10). 


Mart I. 


360 


Mart. I, 
Laud. 


ip. Gr., 


Narr. 28. 


Laud., 
Mart. I, 
Ep. Gr., 


Narr. 28. 


Narr., 
Ep. Gr., 


Mart. IT. 


ACTS OF ANDREW 


having thy fruit in the heavens! O name of the cross, 
filled with all things (lit. a thing filled with all). 

Well done, O cross, that hast bound down the mobility 
of the world (or, the circumference)! Well done, O shape 
of understanding that hast shaped the shapeless (earth ?)! 
Well done, O unseen chastisement that sorely chastisest 
the substance of the knowledge that hath many gods, 
and drivest out from among mankind him that devised 
it! Well done, thou that didst clothe thyself with the 
Lord, and didst bear the thief as a fruit, and didst call 
the apostle to repentance, and didst not refuse to 
accept us! 

But how long delay I, speaking thus, and embrace not 
the cross, that by the cross I may be made alive, and 
by the cross (win) the common death of all and depart 
out of life ? 

Come hither ye ministers of joy unto me, ye servants 
of Aegeates: accomplish the desire of us both, and bind 
the lamb unto the wood of suffering, the man unto the 
maker, the soul unto the Saviour. 

And the blessed Andrew having thus spoken, standing 
upon the earth, looked earnestly upon the cross, and 
bade the brethren that the executioners should come 
and do that which was commanded them; for they stood 
afar off. 

And they came and bound his hands and his feet and 
nailed them not; for such a charge had they from 
Aegeates; for he wished to afflict him by hanging him 
up, and that in the night he might be devoured alive 
by dogs (Laud. that he might be wearied out and permit 
Maximilla to live with him). And they left him hanging 
and departed from him. 

And when the multitudes that stood by of them that 
had been made disciples in Christ by him saw that they 
had done unto him none of the things accustomed with 
them that are crucified, they hoped to hear something 
again from him. For as he hung, he moved his head and 
smiled. And Stratocles asked him, saying: Wherefore 
smilest thou, servant of God? thy laughter maketh us 
to mourn and weep because we are bereaved of thee. 
And the blessed Andrew answered him: Shall I not laugh, 
my son Stratocles, at the vain assault (ambush) of 
Aegeates, whereby he thinketh to punish us? we are 
strangers unto him and his conspiracies. He hath not 
<ears> to hear; for if he had, he would have heard that 
the man of Jesus cannot be punished, because he is 
henceforth known of him. 

And thereafter he spake unto them all in common, 


ACTS OF ANDREW 


for the heathen also were come together, being wroth 
at the unjust judgement of Aegeates. 

Ye men that are here present, and women and 
children, old and young, bond and free, and all that 
will hear, take ye no heed of the vain deceit of this 
present life, but heed us rather who hang here for the 
Lord’s sake and are about to depart out of this body: 
and renounce all the lusts of the world and contemn 
(spit upon) the worship of the abominable idols, and 
run unto the true worshipping of our God that lieth not, 
and make yourselves a temple pure and ready to receive 
the word. (Narr. then becomes obviously late: Ep. Gr., 
which is far shorter, ends: And hasten to overtake my 
soul as it hasteneth toward heavenly things, and in 
a word despise all temporal things, and establish your 
minds as men believing in Christ.) 

And the multitudes hearing the things which he 
spake departed not from the place; and Andrew con- 
tinued speaking yet more unto them, for a day and 
a night. And on the day following, beholding his 
endurance and constancy of soul and wisdom of spirit 
and strength of mind, they were wroth, and hastened 
with one accord unto Aegeates, to the judgement-seat 
where he sat, and cried out against him, saying: What 
is this judgement of thine, O proconsul? thou hast 
ill judged! thou hast condemned unjustly: thy court 
is against law! What evil hath this man done? wherein 
hath he offended? The city is troubled: thou injurest 
us all! destroy not Caesar’s city! give us the righteous 
man! restore us the holy man! slay not a man dear to 
God! destroy not a man gentle and pious! lo, two days 
is he hanged up and yet liveth, and hath tasted nothing, 
and yet refresheth all us with his words, and lo, we 
believe in the God whom he preacheth. Take down the 
righteous man and we will all turn philosophers ; loose 
the chaste man and all Patrae will be at peace; set free 
the wise man and ali Achaia shall be set free by him! 
(or, obtain mercy.) 

But when at the first Aegeates would not hear them, 
but beckoned with the hand to the people that they 
should depart, they were filled with rage and were at 
the point to do him violence, being in number about 
two thousand (Narr., Ep. Gr., Mart. II: 20,000). 

And when the proconsul saw them to be after a sort 
mad, he feared lest there should be a rising against him, 
and rose up from the judgement-seat and went with 
them, promising to release Andrew. And some went 
before and signified to the apostle and to the rest of 


361 


Narr., 
Ep. Gr. 


Ep. Gr., 
Narr., 
Mart. II, 
Conver- 
sante. 


862 


Narr. 


Laud., 
Ep. Gr. 


Ep. Gr., 
Narr., 
Conver- 
sante. 


ACTS OF ANDREW 


the people that were there, wherefore the proconsul was 
coming. And all the multitude of the disciples rejoiced, 
together with Maximilla and Iphidamia and Stratocles. 
But when Andrew heard it, he began to say: O the 
dullness and disobedience and simplicity of them whom 
I have taught! how much have I spoken, and even to 
this day I have not persuaded them to flee from the love 
of earthly things! but they are yet bound unto them 
and continue in them, and will not depart from them. 
What meaneth this affection and love and sympathy 
with the flesh? how long heed ye worldly and temporal 
things? how long understand ye not the things that 
be above us, and press not to overtake them? leave me 
henceforth to be put to death in the manner which ye 
behold, and let no man by any means loose me from 
these bonds; for so is it appointed unto me to depart 
out of the body and be present with the Lord, with whom 
also I am crucified. And this shall be accomplished. 
And he turned unto Aegeates and said with a loud 
voice: Wherefore art thou come, Aegeates, that art an 
alien unto me? what wilt thou dare afresh, what con- 
trive, or what fetch? tell us that thou hast repented 
and art come to loose us? nay, not if thou repentest, 
indeed, Aegeates, will I now consent unto thee; not if 
thou promise me all thy substance will I depart from 
myself; not if thou say that thou art mine will I trust 
thee. And dost thou, proconsul, loose him that is <not> 
bound? him that hath been set free? that hath been 
recognized by his kinsman? that hath obtained mercy 
and is beloved of him? dost thou loose him that is alien 
to thee? the stranger? that only appeareth to thee? 
I have one with whom I shall be for ever, with whom 
I shall converse for unnumbered ages. Unto him do 
I go, unto him do I hasten, who made thee also known 
unto me, who said to me: Understand thou Aegeates 
and his gifts: let not that fearful one affright thee, nor 
think that he holdeth thee who art mine. He is thine 
enemy: he is pestilent, a deceiver, a corrupter, a mad- 
man, a sorcerer, a cheat, a murderer, wrathful, without 
compassion. Depart therefore from me, thou worker of 
all iniquity. (Hp. Gr. He is thine enemy. ‘Therefore 
I know thee, through him that permitted me to know. 
I depart from thee. For I and they that are akin to me 
hasten toward that which is ours, and leave thee to be what 
thou wast, and what thou knowest not thyself to be.) 
And the proconsul hearing this stood speechless, and 
as it were beside himself; but as all the city made an 
uproar that he should loose Andrew, he drew near to 


ACTS OF ANDREW 3863 


the cross to loose him and take him down. But the 
blessed Andrew cried out with a loud voice: Suffer not, 
Lord, thine Andrew that hath been bound upon thy 
cross, to be loosed again; give not me that am upon thy 
mystery to the shameless devil; O Jesu Christ, let not 
thine adversary loose him that is hung upon thy grace; 
O Father, let not this mean (little) one humble any more 
him that hath known thy greatness. But do thou, 
Jesu Christ, whom I have seen, whom I hold, whom 
I love, in whom I am and shall be, receive me in peace 
into thine everlasting tabernacles, that by my going out 
there may be an entering in unto thee of many that are 
akin to me, and that they may rest in thy majesty. 
And having so said, and yet more glorified the Lord, he 
gave up the ghost, while we all wept and lamented at 
our parting from him. 

And after the decease of the blessed Andrew, Maxi- 
milla together with Stratocles, caring nought for them 
that stood by, drew near and herself loosed his body: and 
when it was evening she paid it the accustomed care 
and buried it (hard by the sea-shore). And she con- 
tinued separate from Aegeates because of his brutal 
soul and his wicked manner of life: and she led a 
reverend and quiet life, filled with the love of Christ, 
among the brethren. Whom Aegeates solicited much, 
and promised that she should have the rule over his 
affairs; but being unable to persuade her, he arose in 
the dead of night and unknown to them of his house 
cast himself down from a great height and perished. 

But Stratocles, which was his brother after the flesh, 
would not touch aught of the things that were left of his 
substance; for the wretched man died without off- 
spring: but said: Let thy goods go with thee, Aegeates. 

For of these things we have no need, for they are Narr. 
polluted; but for me, let Christ be my friend and I his 
servant; and all my substance do I offer unto him in 
whom I have believed, and I pray that by worthy 
hearing of the blessed teaching of the apostle I may 
appear a partaker with him in the ageless and unending 
kingdom. And so the uproar of the people ceased, and 
all were glad at the amazing and untimely and sudden 
fall of the impious and lawless Aegeates. 


[Not much of this last paragraph from Narr. can be original. All 
the texts end with a statement that the apostle suffered on the 30th of 
November.] 


364 


ACTS OF THOMAS 


This is the only one of the five primary romances which we possess 
in its entirety. It is of great length and considerable interest. The 
Stichometry (see p. 24) gives it only 1,600 lines: this is far too 
little: it may probably apply only to a portion of the Acts, single 
episodes of which, in addition to the Martyrdom, may have been 
current separately. We do, in fact, find some separate miracles in 
some of the oriental versions. 

There is a consensus of opinion among Syriac scholars that our 
Greek text of these Acts is a version from Syriac. The Syriac original 
was edited and translated by Wright in his Apocryphal Acts, and 
older fragments have since been published by Mrs. Lewis (Horae 
Semiticae IV, 1904. Mythological Acts of the Apostles). 

Certain hymns occur in the Syriac which were undoubtedly com- 
posed in that language: most notable is the Hymn of the Soul (edited 
separately by A. A. Bevan, and others) which is not relevant to the 
context. It has been ascribed to Bardaisan the famous Syrian heretic. 
Only one Greek MS. of the Acts (the Vallicellian, at Rome, Bonnet’s 
MS. U, of the eleventh century) contains it; it is paraphrased by 
Nicetas of Thessalonica in his Greek réchauffé of the Acts. 

There is, in fact, no room to doubt that the whole text of the Acts, 
as preserved complete in MS. U and partially in other manuscripts, is 
a translation from the Syriac. But in the Martyrdom four manuscripts 
(including a very important Paris copy—Gr. 1510, of eleventh century, 
and another of ninth century) present a quite different, and superior, 
text, indubitably superior in one striking point: that whereas Syr. places 
the great prayer of Thomas in the twelfth Act, some little time before 
the Martyrdom (ch. 144sqq.), the four manuscripts place it immediately 
before, after ch. 167, and this is certainly the proper place for it. 

It is, I believe, still arguable (though denied by the Syriacists) that 
here is a relic of the original Greek text: in other words, the Acts were 
composed in Greek, and early rendered into Syriac. Becoming scarce 
or being wholly lost in Greek they were retranslated out of Syriac into 
Greek. But meanwhile the original Greek of the Martyrdom had 
survived separately, and we have it here. This was M. Bonnet’s view, 
and it is one which I should like to adopt. 

At the very least, we have a better text of the Martyrdom preserved 
in these four manuscripts than in U and its congeners. 

As to other versions. The Latin Passions—one probably by Gregory 
of Tours—have been much adulterated. We have also Ethiopic 
versions of some episodes, and there is also an Armenian one of which 
little use has been made. However, versions are of little account in 
this case, where we have such comparatively good authorities as the 
Greek and Syriac for the whole book. 

My version is made from the Greek text, (Bonnet, 1908) with an eye 
on the Syriac as rendered by Wright and by Mrs. Lewis and Bevan. 


ACTS OF THOMAS 865 
ACTS OF THE HOLY APOSTLE THOMAS 


The First Act, when he went into India with Abbanes the merchant. 


At that season all we the apostles were at Jerusalem, Simon 
which is called Peter and Andrew his brother, James the son of 
Zebedee and John his brother, Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas 
and Matthew the publican, James the son of Alphaeus and 
Simon the Canaanite, and Judas the brother of James: and we 
divided the regions of the world, that every one of us should go 
unto the region that fell to him and unto the nation whereunto 
the Lord sent him. 

According to the lot, therefore, India fell unto Judas Thomas, 
which is also the twin: but he would not go, saying that by 
reason of the weakness of the flesh he could not travel, and ‘I am 
an Hebrew man; how can I go amongst the Indians and preach 
the truth?’ And as he thus reasoned and spake, the Saviour 
appeared unto him by night and saith to him: Fear not, Thomas, 
go thou unto India and preach the word there, for my grace is 
with thee. But he would not obey, saying: Whither thou 
wouldest send me, send me, but elsewhere, for unto the Indians 
I will not go. 

2 And while he thus spake and thought, it chanced that there 
was there a certain merchant come from India whose name was 
Abbanes, sent from the King Gundaphorus,! and having com- 
mandment from him to buy a carpenter and bring him unto him. 

Now the Lord seeing him walking in the market-place at noon 
said unto him: Wouldest thou buy a carpenter? And he said 
to him: Yea. And the Lord said to him: I have a slave that 
is a carpenter and I desire to sell him. And so saying he showed 
him Thomas afar off, and agreed with him for three litrae of 
silver unstamped, and wrote a deed of sale, saying: I, Jesus, the 
son of Joseph the carpenter, acknowledge that I have sold my 
slave, Judas by name, unto thee Abbanes, a merchant of Gunda- 
phorus, king of the Indians. And when the deed was finished, 
the Saviour took Judas Thomas and led him away to Abbanes 
the merchant; and when Abbanes saw him he said unto him: 
Is this thy master? And the apostle said: Yea, he is my Lord. 
And he said: I have bought thee of him. And the apostle held 
his peace. 

8 And on the day following the apostle arose early, and having 
prayed and besought the Lord he said: I will go whither thou 
wilt, Lord Jesus; thy will be done. And he departed unto 
Abbanes the merchant, taking with him nothing at all save only 
his price. For the Lord had given it unto him, saying: Let 

1 Gundaphorus is an historical personage who reigned over a part of 
India in the first century after Christ. His coins bear his name in 
Greek, as ‘Hyndopherés’. 


866 ACTS OF THOMAS 


thy price also be with thee, together with my grace, wheresoever 
thou goest. 

And the apostle found Abbanes carrying his baggage on 
board the ship; so he also began to carry it aboard with him. 
And when they were embarked in the ship and were set down, 
Abbanes questioned the apostle, saying: What craftsmanship 
knowest thou? And he said: In wood J can make ploughs and 
yokes and augers (ox-goads, Syr.), and boats and oars for 
boats and masts and pulleys; and in stone, pillars and temples 
and court-houses for kings. And Abbanes the merchant said 
to him: Yea, it is of such a workman that we have need. 
They began then to sail homeward; and they had a favourable 
wind, and sailed prosperously till they reached Andrapolis, a 
royal city. 

4 And they left the ship and entered into the city, and lo, there 
were noises of flutes and water-organs, and trumpets sounded 
about them; and the apostle inquired, saying: What is this 
festival that is in this city? And they that were there said to 
him: Thee also have the gods brought to make merry in this 
city. For the king hath an only daughter, and now he giveth 
her in marriage unto an husband: this rejoicing, therefore, and 
assembly of the wedding to-day is the festival which thou hast 
seen. And the king hath sent heralds to proclaim everywhere 
that all should come to the marriage, rich and poor, bond and 
free, strangers and citizens: and if any refuse and come not to the 
marriage he shall answer for it unto the king. And Abbanes 
hearing that, said to the apostle: Let us also go, lest we offend 
the king, especially seeing we are strangers. And he said: Let 
us go. 

And after they had put up in the inn and rested a little space 
they went to the marriage; and the apostle seeing them all 
set down (reclining), laid himself, he also, in the midst, and all 
looked upon him, as upon a stranger and one come from a foreign 
land: but Abbanes the merchant, being his master, laid himself 
in another place. 

5 And as they dined and drank, the apostle tasted nothing; 
so they that were about him said unto him: Wherefore art thou 
come here, neither eating nor drinking? but he answered them, 
saying: I am come here for somewhat greater than the food 
or the drink, and that I may fulfil the king’s will. For the 
heralds proclaim the king’s message, and whoso hearkeneth not 
to the heralds shall be subject to the king’s judgement. 

So when they had dined and drunken, and garlands and 
unguents were brought to them, every man took of the unguent, 
and one anointed his face and another his beard and another 
other parts of his body; but the apostle anointed the top of his 
head and smeared a little upon his nostrils, and dropped it into 
his ears and touched his teeth with it, and carefully anointed 


ACTS OF THOMAS 367 


the parts about his heart: and the wreath that was brought to 
him, woven of myrtle and other flowers, he took, and set it on his 
head, and took a branch of calamus and held it in his hand. 

Now the flute-girl, holding her flute in her hand, went about 
to them all and played, but when she came to the place where 
the apostle was, she stood over him and played at his head for 
a long space: now this flute-girl was by race an Hebrew. 

6 And as the apostle continued looking on the ground, one of 
the cup-bearers stretched forth his hand and gave him a buffet ; 
and the apostle lifted up his eyes and looked upon him that 
smote him and said: My God will forgive thee in the life to come 
this iniquity, but in this world thou shalt show forth his wonders, 
and even now shall I behold this hand that hath smitten me 
dragged by dogs. And having so said, he began to sing and to 
say this song: 

The damsel is the daughter of light, in whom consisteth and 
dwelleth the proud brightness of kings, and the sight of her is 
delightful, she shineth with beauty and cheer. Her garments 
are like the flowers of spring, and from them a waft of fragrance 
is borne; and in the crown of her head the king is established, 
which with his immortal food (ambrosia) nourisheth them that 
are founded upon him; and in her head is set truth, and with 
her feet she showeth forth joy. And her mouth is opened, and it 
becometh her well: thirty and two are they that sing praises to 
her. Her tongue is like the curtain of the door, which waveth 
to and fro for them that enter in: her neck is set in the fashion 
of steps which the first maker hath wrought, and her two hands 
signify and show, proclaiming the dance of the happy ages, and 
her fingers point out the gates of the city. Her chamber is 
bright with light, and breatheth forth the odour of balsam and 
all spices, and giveth out a sweet smell of myrrh and Indian 
leaf, and within are myrtles strown on the floor, and <garlands> 
of all manner of odorous flowers, and the }door-posts(?)} are 
adorned with jreedst. 7 And surrounding her her groomsmen 
keep her, the number of whom is seven, whom she herself hath 
chosen. And her bridesmaids are seven, and they dance before 
her. And twelve in number are they that serve before her and are 
subject unto her, which have their aim and their look toward 
the bridegroom, that by the sight of him they may be enlightened; 
and for ever shall they be with her in that eternal joy, and shall 
be at that marriage whereto the princes are gathered together, 
and shall attend at that banquet whereof the eternal ones are 
accounted worthy, and shall put on royal raiment and be clad 
in bright robes; and in joy and exultation shall they both be, 
and shall glorify the Father of all, whose proud light they have 
received, and are enlightened by the sight of their lord; whose 
immortal food they have received, that hath no failing (excre- 
mentum, Syr.), and have drunk of the wine that giveth them 


868 ACTS OF THOMAS 


neither thirst nor desire. And they have glorified and praised, 
with the living spirit, the Father of truth and the mother of 
wisdom. 

8 And when he had sung and ended this song, all that were 
there present gazed upon him; and he kept silence; and they 
saw that his likeness was changed, but that which was spoken 
by him they understood not, forasmuch as he was an Hebrew 
and that which he spake was said in the Hebrew tongue. But 
the flute-girl alone heard all of it, for she was by race an Hebrew; 
and she went away from him and played to the rest, but for the 
most part she gazed and looked upon him, for she loved him 
well, as a man of her own nation; moreover he was comely to 
look upon beyond all that were there. And when the flute-girl 
had played to them all and ended, she sat down over against 
him, gazing and looking earnestly upon him. But he looked 
upon no man at all, neither took heed of any, but only kept his 
eyes looking toward the ground, waiting the time when he might 
depart thence. 

But the cup-bearer that had buffeted him went down to the 
well to draw water; and there chanced to be a lion there, and it 
slew him and left him lying in that place, having torn his limbs 
in pieces, and forthwith dogs seized his members, and among 
them one black dog holding his right hand in his mouth bare it 
into the place of the banquet. 

9 And all when they saw it were amazed and inquired which 
of them it was that was missing. And when it became manifest 
that it was the hand of the cup-bearer which had smitten the 
apostle, the flute-girl brake her flute and cast it away and went 
and sat down at the apostle’s feet, saying: This is either a god 
or an apostle of God, for I heard him say in the Hebrew tongue: 
‘I shall now see the hand that hath smitten me dragged by dogs’, 
which thing ye also have now beheld; for as he said, so hath it 
come about. And some believed her, and some not. 

But when the king heard of it, he came and said to the apostle: 
Rise up and come with me, and pray for my daughter: for she 
is mine only-begotten, and to-day I give her in marriage. But 
the apostle was not willing to go with him, for the Lord was not 
yet revealed unto him in that place. But the king led him away 
against his will unto the bride-chamber that he might pray 
for them. 

10 And the apostle stood, and began to pray and to speak 
thus: My Lord and my God, that travellest with thy servants, 
that guidest and correctest them that believe in thee, the refuge 
and rest of the oppressed, the hope of the poor and ransomer of 
captives, the physician of the souls that lie sick and saviour of 
all creation, that givest life unto the world and strengthenest 
souls; thou knowest things to come, and by our means accom- 
plishest them: thou Lord art he that revealeth hidden mysteries 


ACTS OF THOMAS 369 


and maketh manifest words that are secret: thou Lord art the 
planter of the good tree, and of thine hands are all good works 
engendered: thou Lord art he that art in all things and passest 
through all, and art set in all thy works and manifested in the 
working of them all. Jesus Christ, Son of compassion and 
perfect saviour, Christ, Son of the living God, the undaunted 
power that hast overthrown the enemy, and the voice that was 
heard of the rulers, and made all their powers to quake, the 
ambassador that wast sent from the height and camest down 
even unto hell, who didst open the doors and bring up thence 
them that for many ages were shut up in the treasury of dark- 
ness, and showedst them the way that leadeth up unto the 
height: I beseech thee, Lord Jesu, and offer unto thee supplica- 
tion for these young persons, that thou wouldest do for them the 
things that shall help them and be expedient and profitable for 
them. And he laid his hands on them and said: The Lord shall 
be with you, and left them in that place and departed. 

11 And the king desired the groomsmen to depart out of the 
bride-chamber; and when all were gone out and the doors were 
shut, the bridegroom lifted up the curtain of the bride-chamber 
to fetch the bride unto him. And he saw the Lord Jesus bearing 
the likeness of Judas Thomas and speaking with the bride— 
even of him that but now had blessed them and gone out from 
them, the apostle; and he saith unto him: Wentest thou not 
out in the sight of all? how then art thou found here? But the 
Lord said to him: I am not Judas which is also called Thomas, 
but I am his brother. And the Lord sat down upon the bed 
and bade them also sit upon chairs, and began to say unto 
them: 

12 Remember, my children, what my brother spake unto you 
and what he delivered before you: and know this, that if ye 
abstain from this foul intercourse, ye become holy temples, 
pure, being quit of impulses and pains, seen and unseen, and 
ye will acquire no cares of life or of children, whose end is destruc- 
tion: and if indeed ye get many children, for their sakes ye 
become grasping and covetous, stripping orphans and over- 
reaching widows, and by so doing subject yourselves to grievous 
punishments. For the more part of children become useless, 
oppressed of devils, some openly and some invisibly, for they 
become either lunatic or half withered or blind or deaf or dumb 
or paralytic or foolish; and if they be sound, again they will be 
vain, doing useless or abominable acts; for they will be caught 
either in adultery or murder or theft or fornication, and by all 
these will ye be afflicted. 

But if ye be persuaded and keep your souls chaste before God, 
there will come unto you living children whom these blemishes 
touch not, and ye shall be without care, leading a tranquil life 
without grief or anxiety, looking to receive that incorruptible 


870 Bb 


370 ACTS OF THOMAS 


and true marriage, and ye shall be therein groomsmen entering 
into that bride-chamber which is full of immortality and light. 

18 And when the young people heard these things, they 
believed the Lord and gave themselves up unto him, and 
abstained from foul desire and continued so, passing the night 
in that place. And the Lord departed from before them, saying 
thus: The grace of the Lord shall be with you. 

And when the morning was come the king came to meet them, 
and furnished a table and brought it in before the bridegroom 
andthe bride. And he found them sitting over against each other, 
and the face of the bride he found unveiled, and the bridegroom 
was right joyful. 

And the mother came unto the bride and said: Why sittest 
thou so, child, and art not ashamed, but art as if thou hadst 
lived with thine husband a long season? And her father said: 
Because of thy great love toward thine husband dost thou not 
even veil thyself? 

14 And the bride answered and said: Verily, father, I am in 
great love, and I pray my Lord that the love which I have per- 
ceived this night may abide with me, and I will ask for that 
husband of whom I have learned to-day: and therefore I will 
no more veil myself, because the mirror (veil) of shame is removed 
from me; and therefore am I no more ashamed or abashed, 
because the deed of shame and confusion is departed far from 
me; and that I am not confounded, it is because my astonish- 
ment hath not continued with me; and that I am in cheerfulness 
and joy, it is because the day of my joy hath not been troubled; 
and that I have set at nought this husband and this marriage 
that passeth away from before mine eyes, it is because I am joined 
in another marriage; and that I have had no intercourse with 
a husband that is temporal, whereof the end is with lasciviousness 
and bitterness of soul, it is because I am yoked unto a true 
husband. 

15 And while the bride was saying yet more than this, the 
bridegroom answered and said: I give thee thanks, O Lord, 
that hast been proclaimed by the stranger, and found in us; 
who hast removed me far from corruption and sown life in me; 
who hast rid me of this disease that is hard to be healed and 
cured and abideth for ever, and hast implanted sober health 
in me; who hast shown me thyself and revealed unto me all 
my state wherein I am; who hast redeemed me from falling 
and led me to that which is better, and set me free from temporal 
things and made me worthy of those that are immortal and 
everlasting ; that hast made thyself lowly even down to me and 
my littleness, that thou mayest present me unto thy greatness 
and unite me unto thyself; who hast not withheld thine own 
bowels from me that was ready to perish, but hast shown me 
how to seek myself and know who I was, and who and in what 


ACTS OF THOMAS 871 


manner I now am, that I may again become that which I was: 
whom I knew not, but thyself didst seek me out: of whom I was 
not aware, but thyself hast taken me to thee: whom I have 
perceived, and now am not able to be unmindful of him: whose 
love burneth within me, and I cannot speak it as is fit, but that 
which I am able to say of it is little and scanty, and not fitly 
proportioned unto his glory: yet he blameth me not that presume 
to say unto him even that which I know not: for it is because of 
his love that I say even this much. 

16 Now when the king heard these things from the bridegroom 
and the bride, he rent his clothes and said unto them that stood 
by him: Go forth quickly and go about the whole city, and take 
and bring me that man that is a sorcerer who by ill fortune 
came unto this city; for with mine own hands I brought him 
into this house, and I told him to pray over this mine ill-starred 
daughter; and whoso findeth and bringeth him to me, I will 
give him whatsoever he asketh of me. They went, therefore, 
and went about seeking him, and found him not; for he had 
set sail. They went also unto the inn where he had lodged and 
found there the flute-girl weeping and afflicted because he had 
not taken her with him. And when they told her the matter 
that had befallen with the young people she was exceeding glad 
at hearing it, and put away her grief and said: Now have I also 
found rest here. And she rose up and went unto them, and was 
with them a long time, until they had instructed the king also. 
And many of the brethren also gathered there until they heard 
the report of the apostle, that he was come unto the cities of 
India and was teaching there: and they departed and joined 
themselves unto him. 


The Second Act : concerning his coming unto the king Gundaphorus. 


17 Now when the apostle was come into the cities of India 
with Abbanes the merchant, Abbanes went to salute the king 
Gundaphorus, and reported to him of the carpenter whom he had 
brought with him. And the king was glad, and commanded him 
to come in to him. So when he was come in the king said unto 
him: What craft understandest thou? The apostle said unto 
him: The craft of carpentering and of building. The king saith 
unto him: What craftsmanship, then, knowest thou in wood, and 
what in stone? The apostle saith: In wood: ploughs, yokes, 
goads, pulleys, and boats and oars and masts; and in stone: 
pillars, temples, and court-houses for kings. And the king said: 
Canst thou build me a palace? And he answered: Yea, I can 
both build and furnish it; for to this end am I come, to build 
and to do the work of a carpenter. 

18 And the king took him and went out of the city gates and 
began to speak with him on the way concerning the building of 
the court-house, and of the foundations, how they should be 


372 ACTS OF THOMAS 


laid, until they came to the place wherein he desired that the 
building should be; and he said: Here will I that the building 
should be. And the apostle said: Yea, for this place is suitable 
for the building. But the place was woody and there was much 
water there. So the king said: Begin to build. But he said: 
I cannot begin to build now at this season. And the king said: 
When canst thou begin? And he said: I will begin in the month 
Dius and finish in Xanthicus. But the king marvelled and said: 
Every building is builded in summer, and canst thou in this 
very winter build and make ready a palace? And the apostle 
said: Thus it must be, and no otherwise is it possible. And the 
king said: If, then, this seem good to thee, draw me a plan, how 
the work shall be, because I shall return hither after some long 
time. And the apostle took a reed and drew, measuring the 
place; and the doors he set toward the sunrising to look 
toward the light, and the windows toward the west to the 
breezes, and the bakehouse he appointed to be toward the south, 
and the aqueduct for the service toward the north. And the 
king saw it and said to the apostle: Verily thou art a craftsman, 
and it befitteth thee to be a servant of kings. And he left much 
money with him and departed from him. 

19 And from time to time he sent money and provision, and 
victual for him and the rest of the workmen. But Thomas 
receiving it all dispensed it, going about the cities and the villages 
round about, distributing and giving alms to the poor and afflicted, 
and relieving them, saying: The king knoweth how to obtain 
recompense fit for kings, but at this time it is needful that the 
poor should have refreshment. 

After these things the king sent an ambassador unto the 
apostle, and wrote thus: Signify unto me what thou hast done, 
or what I shall send thee, or of what thou hast need. And the 
apostle sent unto him, saying: The palace (praetorium) is builded 
and only the roof remaineth. And the king hearing it sent him 
again gold and silver (lit. unstamped), and wrote unto him: Let 
the palace be roofed, if itis done. And the apostle said unto the 
Lord: I thank thee O Lord in all things, that thou didst die for 
a little space that I might live for ever in thee, and that thou hast 
sold me that by me thou mightest set free many. And he ceased 
not to teach and to refresh the afflicted, saying: This hath the 
Lord dispensed unto you, and he giveth unto every man his 
food: for he is the nourisher of orphans and steward of the 
widows, and unto all that are afflicted he is relief and rest. 

20 Now when the king came to the city he inquired of his 
friends concerning the palace which Judas that is called Thomas 
was building for him. And they told him: Neither hath he 
built a palace nor done aught else of that he promised to perform, 
but he goeth about the cities and countries, and whatsoever he 
hath he giveth unto the poor, and teacheth of a new God, and 


ACTS OF THOMAS 3873 


healeth the sick, and driveth out devils, and doeth many other 
wonderful things; and we think him to be a sorcerer. Yet his 
compassions and his cures which are done of him freely, and 
moreover the simplicity and kindness of him and his faith, do 
declare that he is a righteous man or an apostle of the new God 
whom he preacheth; for he fasteth continually and prayeth, and 
eateth bread only, with salt, and his drink is water, and he 
weareth but one garment alike in fair weather and in winter, and 
receiveth nought of any man, and that he hath he giveth unto 
others. And when the king heard that, he rubbed his face with 
his hands, and shook his head for a long space. 

21 And he sent for the merchant which had brought him, and 
for the apostle, and said unto him: Hast thou built me the palace ? 
And he said: Yea. And the king said: When, then, shall we go 
and see it? but he answered him and said: Thou canst not see 
it now, but when thou departest this life, then thou shalt see it. 
And the king was exceeding wroth, and commanded both the 
merchant and Judas which is called Thomas to be put in bonds 
and cast into prison until he should inquire and learn unto whom 
the king’s money had been given, and so destroy both him and 
the merchant. 

And the apostle went unto the prison rejoicing, and said to the 
merchant: Fear thou nothing, only believe in the God that is 
preached by me, and thou shalt indeed be set free from this 
world, but from the world to come thou shalt receive life. And 
the king took thought with what death he should destroy them. 
And when he had determined to flay them alive and burn them 
with fire, in the same night Gad the king’s brother fell sick, and 
by reason of his vexation and the deceit which the king had 
suffered he was greatly oppressed; and sent for the king and 
said unto him: O king my brother, I commit unto thee mine 
house and my children; for I am vexed by reason of the provo- 
cation that hath befallen thee, and lo, I die; and if thou visit 
not with vengeance upon the head of that sorcerer, thou wilt 
give my soul no rest in hell. And the king said to his brother: 
All this night have I considered how I should put him to death, 
and this hath seemed good to me, to flay him and burn him with 
fire, both him and the merchant which brought him (Syr. Then 
the brother of the king said to him: And if there be anything 
else that is worse than this, do it to him; and I give thee charge 
of my house and my children). 

22 And as they talked together, the soul of his brother Gad 
departed. And the king mourned sore for Gad, for he loved him 
much, and commanded that he should be buried in royal and 
precious apparel (Syr. sepulchre). Now after this angels took 
the soul of Gad the king’s brother and bore it up into heaven, 
showing unto him the places and dwellings that were there, and 
inquired of him: In which place wouldest thou dwell? And 


874 ACTS OF THOMAS 


when they drew near unto the building of Thomas the apostle 
which he had built for the king, Gad saw it and said unto the 
angels: I beseech you, my lords, suffer me to dwell in one of the 
lowest rooms of these. And they said to him: Thou canst not 
dwell in this building. And he said: Wherefore? And they say 
unto him: This is that palace which that Christian builded for 
thy brother. And he said: I beseech you, my lords, suffer me 
to go to my brother, that I may buy this palace of him; for my 
brother knoweth not of what sort it is, and he will sell it unto me. 

23 Then the angels let the soul of Gad go. And as they were 
putting his grave clothes upon him, his soul entered into him, 
and he said to them that stood about him: Call my brother unto 
me, that I may ask one petition of him. Straightway therefore 
they told the king, saying: Thy brother is revived. And the 
king ran forth with a great company and came unto his brother, 
and entered in and stood by his bed as one amazed, not being 
able to speak to him. And his brother said: I know and am 
persuaded, my brother, that if any man had asked of thee the 
half of thy kingdom, thou wouldest have given it him for my 
sake; therefore I beg of thee to grant me one favour which I ask 
of thee, that thou wouldest sell me that which I ask of thee. 
And the king answered and said: And what is it which thou 
askest me to sell thee? And he said: Convince me by an oath 
that thou wilt grant it me. And the king sware unto him: One 
of my possessions, whatsoever thou shalt ask, I will give thee. 
And he saith to him: Sell me that palace which thou hast in the 
heavens? And the king said: Whence should I have a palace in 
the heavens? And he said: Even that which that Christian 
built for thee which is now in the prison, whom the merchant 
brought unto thee, having purchased him of one Jesus: I mean 
that Hebrew slave whom thou desiredst to punish as having 
suffered deceit at his hand: whereat I was grieved and died, and 
am now revived. 

24 Then the king considering the matter, understood it of 
those eternal benefits which should come to him and which 
concerned him, and said: That palace I cannot sell thee, but 
I pray to enter into it and dwell therein and to be accounted 
worthy of the inhabiters of it; but if thou indeed desirest to buy 
such a palace, lo, the man liveth and shall build thee one better 
than it. And forthwith he sent and brought out of prison the 
apostle and the merchant that was shut up with him, saying: 
I entreat thee, as a man that entreateth the minister of God, that 
thou wouldest pray for me and beseech him whose minister thou 
art to forgive me and overlook that which I have done unto thee 
or thought to do, and that I may become a worthy inhabiter of 
that dwelling for the which I took no pains, but thou hast builded 
it for me, labouring alone, the grace of thy God working with thee, 
and that I also may become a servant and serve this God whom 


ACTS OF THOMAS 875 


thou preachest. And his brother also fell down before the 
apostle and said: I entreat and supplicate thee before thy God 
that I may become worthy of his ministry and service, and that 
it may fall to me to be worthy of the things that were shown unto 
me by his angels. 

25 And the apostle, filled with joy, said: I praise thee, O Lord 
Jesu, that thou hast revealed thy truth in these men; for thou 
only art the God of truth, and none other, and thou art he that 
knoweth all things that are unknown to the most; thou, Lord, art 
he that in all things showest compassion and sparest men. For 
men by reason of the error that is in them have overlooked thee, 
but thou hast not overlooked them. And now at my supplication 
and request do thou receive the king and his brother and join 
them unto thy fold, cleansing them with thy washing and 
anointing them with thine oil from the error that encompasseth 
them: and keep them also from the wolves, bearing them into 
thy meadows. And give them drink out of thine immortal 
fountain which is neither fouled nor drieth up; for they entreat 
and supplicate thee and desire to become thy servants and 
ministers, and for this they are content even to be persecuted of 
thine enemies, and for thy sake to be hated of them and to be 
mocked and to die, like as thou for our sake didst suffer all these 
things, that thou mightest preserve us, thou that art Lord and 
verily the good shepherd. And do thou grant them to have 
confidence in thee alone, and the succour that cometh of thee, 
and the hope of their salvation which they look for from thee 
alone; and that they may be grounded in thy mysteries and 
receive the perfect good of thy graces and gifts, and flourish in 
thy ministry and come to perfection in thy Father. 

26 Being therefore wholly set upon the apostle, both the king 
Gundaphorus and Gad his brother followed him and departed 
not from him at all, and they also relieved them that had need, 
giving unto all and refreshing all. And they besought him that 
they also might henceforth receive the seal of the word, saying unto 
him: Seeing that our souls are at leisure and eager toward God, 
give thou us the seal; for we have heard thee say that the God 
whom thou preachest knoweth his own sheep by his seal. And the 
apostle said unto them: I also rejoice and entreat you to receive 
this seal, and to partake with me in this eucharist and blessing of 
the Lord, and to be made perfect therein. For this is the Lord 
and God of all, even Jesus Christ whom I preach, and he is the 
father of truth, in whom I have taught you to believe. And he 
commanded them to bring oil, that they might receive the seal 
by the oil. They brought the oil therefore, and lighted many 
lamps; for it was night (Syr. whom I preach: and the king 
gave orders that the bath should be closed for seven days, and 
that no man should bathe in it: and when the seven days were 
done, on the eighth day they three entered into the bath by 


376 ACTS OF THOMAS 


night that Judas might baptize them. And many lamps were 
lighted in the bath). 

27 And the apostle arose and sealed them. And the Lord was 
revealed unto them by a voice, saying: Peace be unto you, 
brethren. And they heard his voice only, but his likeness they 
saw not, for they had not yet received the added sealing of the 
seal (Syr. had not been baptized). And the apostle took the oil 
and poured it upon their heads and anointed and chrismed them, 
and began to say (Syr. And Judas went up and stood upon 
the edge of the cistern and poured oil upon their heads and 
said): 

Come, thou holy name of the Christ that is above every name. 

Come, thou power of the Most High, and the compassion that 
is perfect. 

Come, gift (charism) of the Most High. 

Come, compassionate mother. 

Come, communion of the male. 

Come, she that revealeth the hidden mysteries. 

Come, mother of the seven houses, that thy rest may be in the 
eighth house. 

Come, elder of the five members, mind, thought, reflection, 
consideration, reason ; communicate with these young men.t 

Come, holy spirit, and cleanse their reins and their heart, and 
give them the added seal, in the name of the Father and Son and 
Holy Ghost. 

And when they were sealed, there appeared unto them a youth 
holding a lighted torch, so that their lamps became dim at the 
approach of the light thereof. And he went forth and was no 
more seen of them. And the apostle said unto the Lord: Thy 
light, O Lord, is not to be contained by us, and we are not able to 
bear it, for it is too great for our sight. 

And when the dawn came and it was morning, he brake bread 
and made them partakers of the eucharist of the Christ. And 
they were glad and rejoiced. 

And many others also, believing, were added to them, and 
came into the refuge of the Saviour. 

28 And the apostle ceased not to preach and to say unto them: 
Ye men and women, boys and girls, young men and maidens, 
strong men and aged, whether bond or free, abstain from fornica- 
tion and covetousness and the service of the belly: for under 
these three heads all iniquity cometh about. For fornication 
blindeth the mind and darkeneth the eyes of the soul, and is an 
impediment to the life (conversation) of the body, turning the 
whole man unto weakness and casting the whole body into 
sickness. And greed putteth the soul into fear and shame; 
being within the body it seizeth upon the goods of others, and 
is under fear lest if it restore other men’s goods to their owners 


1 See Professor Burkitt’s note at the end of this Act. 


ACTS OF THOMAS 877 


it be put to shame. And the service of the belly casteth the soul 
into thoughts and cares and vexations, taking thought lest it 
come to be in want, and have need of those things that are far 
from it. If, then, ye be rid of these ye become free of care and 
grief and fear, and that abideth with you which was said by the 
Saviour: Take no thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall 
take thought for the things of itself. Remember also that word 
of him of whom I spake: Look at the ravens and see the fowls 
of the heaven, that they neither sow nor reap nor gather into 
barns, and God dispenseth unto them; how much more unto 
you, O ye of little faith? But look ye for his coming and have 
your hope in him and believe on his name. For he is the judge 
of quick and dead, and he giveth to every one according to their 
deeds, and at his coming and his latter appearing no man hath 
any word of excuse when he is to be judged by him, as though he 
had not heard. For his heralds do proclaim in the four quarters 
(climates) of the world. Repent ye, therefore, and believe the 
promise and receive the yoke of meekness and the light burden, 
that ye may live and not die. These things get, these keep. Come 
forth of the darkness that the light may receive you! Come unto 
him that is indeed good, that ye may receive grace of him and 
implant his sign in your souls. 

29 And when he had thus spoken, some of them that stood by 
said: It is time for the creditor to receive the debt. And he said 
unto them: He that is lord of the debt desireth alway to receive 
more; but let us give him that which is due. And he blessed them, 
and took bread and oil and herbs and salt and blessed and gave 
unto them; but he himself continued his fast, for the Lord’s day 
was coming on (Syr. And he himself ate, because the Sunday was 
dawning). 

And when night fell and he slept, the Lord came and stood at 
his head, saying: Thomas, rise early, and having blessed them all, 
after the prayer and the ministry go by the eastern road two 
miles and there will I show thee my glory: for by thy going shall 
many take refuge with me, and thou shalt bring to light the nature 
and power of the enemy. And he rose up from sleep and said 
unto the brethren that were with him: Children, the Lord would 
accomplish somewhat by me to-day, but let us pray, and entreat 
of him that we may have no impediment toward him, but that 
as at all times, so now also it may be done according to his desire 
and will by us. And having so said, he laid his hands on them and 
blessed them, and brake the bread of the eucharist and gave it 
them, saying: This eucharist shall be unto you for compassion and 
mercy, and not unto judgement and retribution. And they said 
Amen. 


378 ACTS OF THOMAS 


Note by Professor F. C. Burkitt, D.D. 


In the Acts of Thomas, 27, the apostle, being about to baptize 
Gundaphorus the King of India with his brother Gad, invokes the 
holy name of the Christ, and among other invocations says (according 
to the best Greek text): 

‘Come, O elder of the five members, mind, idea, thoughtfulness, 
consideration, reasoning, communicate with these youths.’ 

What is the essential distinction of these five words for ‘mind’, 
and what is meant by the ‘elder’ (mpecBirepos)? We turn to the 
Syriac, as the original language in which our tale was composed, 
though our present text, which rests here on two manuscripts, has 
now and then been bowdlerized in the direction of more conventional 
phraseology, a process that the Greek has often escaped. Here in the 
Syriac we find (Wright, p. 193, 1. 18; E. Tr., p. 166, last line but one): 

‘Come, Messenger of reconciliation, and communicate with the minds 
of these youths.’ 

The word for ‘Come’ is fem., while ‘Messenger’ (Izgaddd) is masc. 
This is because the whole prayer is an invocation of the Holy Spirit, 
which in old Syriac is invariably treated as feminine. The word for 
Messenger is that used in the Manichaean cosmogony for a heavenly 
Spirit sent from the Divine Light: this Spirit appeared as androgynous, 
so that the use of the word here with the feminine verb is not inappro- 
priate.t It further leads us to look out for other indications of 
Manichaean phraseology in the passage. But first it suggests to us 
that mpecBvrepos in our passage is a corruption of, or is used for, 
mpeoBevrns, ‘an ambassador’. 

As for the five words for ‘mind’, they are clearly the equivalents 
of hauwnd, mad‘d, re‘yand, mahshébhathd, tar‘tthaé, named by Theodore 
bar Khoéni as the Five Shekhinas, or Dwellings, or Manifestations, of 
the Father of Greatness, the title by which the Manichaeans spoke of 
the ultimate Source of Light. There is a good discussion of these 
five words by M. A. Kugener in F. Cumont’s Recherches sur le Mani- 
chéisme i, p. 10, note 8. In English we may say: 

hauna means ‘sanity’, 
mad‘a “F ‘reason’, 
reyand i ‘mind’, 
mahshabhétha ,, ‘imagination’, 
taritha ‘intention’. 

The Greek terms, used here and also in Acta Archelai, § 9,2 are in 
my opinion merely equivalents for the Syriac terms. 


Act the Third: concerning the serpent 


80 And the apostle went forth to go where the Lord had 
bidden him; and when he was near to the second mile (stone) 
and had turned a little out of the way, he saw the body of a 
comely youth lying, and said: Lord, is it for this that thou 
hast brought me forth, to come hither that I might see this 


? So also it is used of ‘holiness’ in Wright, p. 255, 1. 6, another fem. 
* The Greek is preserved by Epiphanius, Panar. 645. 


ACTS OF THOMAS 3879 


(trial) temptation? thy will therefore be done as thou desirest. 
And he began to pray and to say: O Lord, the judge of quick 
and dead, of the quick that stand by and the dead that lie 
here, and master and father of all things; and father not only 
of the souls that are in bodies but of them that have gone forth 
of them; for of the souls also that are in pollutions (al. bodies) 
thou art lord and judge; come thou at this hour wherein I call 
upon thee and show forth thy glory upon him that lieth here. 
And he turned himself unto them that followed him and said: 
This thing is not come to pass without cause, but the enemy 
hath effected it and brought it about that he may assault (?) 
us thereby; and see ye that he hath not made use of another 
sort, nor wrought through any other creature save that which 
is his subject. 

31 And when he had so said, a great (Syr. black) serpent 
(dragon) came out of a hole, beating with his head and shaking 
his tail upon the ground, and with (using) a loud voice said unto 
the apostle: I will tell before thee the cause wherefor I slew 
this man, since thou art come hither for that end, to reprove 
my works. And the apostle said: Yea, say on. And the serpent: 
There is a certain beautiful woman in this village over against 
us; and as she passed by me (or my place) I saw her and was 
enamoured of her, and I followed her and kept watch upon her; 
and I found this youth kissing her, and he had intercourse with 
her and did other shameful acts with her: and for me it was 
easy to declare them before thee, for I know that thou art the 
twin brother of the Christ and alway abolishest our nature 
(Syr. easy for me to say, but to thee I do not dare to utter them 
because I know that the ocean-flood of the Messiah will destroy 
our nature): but because I would not affright her, I slew 
him not at that time. but waited for him till he passed by in 
the evening and smote and slew him, and especially because 
he adventured to do this upon the Lord’s day. 

And the apostle inquired of him, saying: Tell me of what seed 
and of what race thou art. 32 And he said unto him: I am a 
reptile of the reptile nature and noxious son of the noxious 
father: of him that hurt and smote the four brethren which stood 
upright (om. Syr.: the elements or four cardinal points may be 
meant): I am son to him that sitteth on a throne over all the 
earth, that receiveth back his own from them that borrow : 
I am son to him that girdeth about the sphere: and I am kin 
to him that is outside the ocean, whose tail is set in his own 
mouth: I am he that entered through the barrier (fence) into 
paradise and spake with Eve the things which my father bade 
me speak unto her: I am he that kindled and inflamed Cain 
to kill his own brother, and on mine account did thorns and 
thistles grow up in the earth: I am he that cast down the angels 
from above and bound them in lusts after women, that children 


380 ACTS OF THOMAS 


born of earth might come of them and I might work my will 
in them: I am he that hardened Pharaoh’s heart that he should 
slay the children of Israel and enslave them with the yoke of 
cruelty: Iam he that caused the multitude to err in the wilderness 
when they made the calf: I am he that inflamed Herod and 
enkindled Caiaphas unto false accusation of a lie before Pilate; 
for this was fitting to me: I am he that stirred up Judas and 
bribed him to deliver up the Christ: I am he that inhabiteth 
and holdeth the deep of hell (Tartarus); but the Son of God 
hath wronged me, against my will, and taken (chosen) them that 
were his own from me: I am kin to him that is to come from 
the east, unto whom also power is given to do what he will 
upon the earth. 

88 And when that serpent had spoken these things in the 
hearing of all the people, the apostle lifted up his voice on high 
and said: Cease thou henceforth, O most shameless one, and 
be put to confusion and die wholly, for the end of thy destruction 
is come; and dare not to tell of what thou hast done by them 
that have become subject unto thee. And I charge thee in the 
name of that Jesus who until now contendeth with you for the 
men that are his own, that thou suck out thy venom which thou 
hast put into this man, and draw it forth and take it from him. 
But the serpent said: Not yet is the end of our time come as 
thou hast said. Wherefore compellest thou me to take back 
that which I have put into this man, and to die before my time? 
for mine own father, when he shall draw forth and suck out 
that which he hath cast into the creation, then shall his end 
come. And the apostle said unto him: Show, then, now the nature 
of thy father. And the serpent came near and set his mouth 
upon the wound of the young man and sucked forth the gall 
out of it. And by little and little the colour of the young man 
which was as purple, became white, but the serpent swelled 
up. And when the serpent had drawn up all the gall into him- 
self, the young man leapt up and stood, and ran and fell at the 
apostle’s feet: but the serpent being swelled up, burst and 
died, and his venom and gall were shed forth; and in the place 
where his venom was shed there came a great gulf, and that 
serpent was swallowed up therein. And the apostle said unto 
the king and his brother: Take workmen and fill up that place, 
and lay foundations and build houses upon them, that it may 
be a dwelling-place for strangers. 

34 But the youth said unto the apostle with many tears: 
Wherein have I sinned against thee? for thou art a man that 
hast two forms, and wheresoever thou wilt, there thou art found, 
and art restrained of no man, as I behold. For I saw that man 
that stood by thee and said unto thee: I have many wonders 
to show forth by thy means and I have great works to accom- 
plish by thee, for which thou shalt receive a reward; and thou 


ACTS OF THOMAS 881 


shalt make many to live, and they shall be in rest in light eternal 
as children of God. Do thou then, saith he, speaking unto thee 
of me, quicken this youth that hath been stricken of the enemy, 
and be at all times his overseer. Well, therefore, art thou come 
hither, and well shalt thou depart again unto him, and yet he 
never shall leave thee at any time. But I am become without 
care or reproach: and he hath enlightened me from the care of the 
night and I am at rest from the toil of the day: and I am set free 
from him that provoked me to do thus, sinning against him 
that taught me to do contrary thereto: and I have lost him 
that is the kinsman of the night that compelled me to sin by 
his own deeds, and have found him that is of the light, and is 
my kinsman. I have lost him that darkeneth and blindeth 
his own subjects that they may not know what they do and, 
being ashamed at their own works, may depart from him, and 
their works come to an end; and have found him whose works 
are light and his deeds truth, which if a man doeth he repenteth 
not of them. And I have left him with whom lying abideth, 
and before whom darkness goeth as a veil, and behind him 
followeth shame, shameless in indolence; and I have found him 
that showeth me fair things that I may take hold on them, 
even the son of the truth, that is akin unto concord, who scattereth 
away the mist and enlighteneth his own creation, and healeth 
the wounds thereof and overthroweth the enemies thereof. 
But I beseech thee, O man of God, cause me to behold him 
again, and to see him that is now become hidden from me, 
that I may also hear his voice whereof I am not able to express 
the wonder, for it belongeth not to the nature of this bodily 
organ. 

[Before this speech Syr. (Wright) inserts one of equal length, 
chiefly about man’s free will and fall. But the fifth-century 
palimpsest edited by Mrs. Lewis agrees with the Greek.] 

85 And the apostle answered him, saying: If thou depart 
from these things whereof thou hast received knowledge, as 
thou hast said, and if thou know who it is that hath wrought 
this in thee, and learn and become a hearer of him whom now 
in thy fervent love thou seekest; thou shalt both see him and 
be with him for ever, and in his rest shalt thou rest, and shalt 
be in his joy. But if thou be slackly disposed toward him and 
turn again unto thy former deeds, and leave that beauty and 
that bright countenance which now was showed thee, and forget 
the shining of his light which now thou desirest, not only wilt 
thou be bereaved of this life but also of that which is to come, 
and thou wilt depart unto him whom thou saidst thou hadst 
lost, and will no more behold him whom thou saidst thou hadst 
found. 

36 And when the apostle had said this, he went into the city 
holding the hand of that youth, and saying unto him: These 


882 ACTS OF THOMAS 


things which thou hast seen, my child, are but a few of the many 
which God hath; for he doth not give us good tidings concerning 
these things that are seen, but greater things than these doth 
he promise us; but so long as we are in the body we are not 
able to speak and show forth those which he shall give unto 
our souls. If we say that he giveth us light, it is this which is 
seen, and we have it: and if we say it of wealth, which is and 
appeareth in the world, we name it (we speak of something 
which is in the world, Syr.), and we need it not, for it hath been 
said: Hardly shall a rich man enter into the kingdom of heaven: 
and if we speak of apparel of raiment wherewith they that are 
luxurious in this life are clad, it is named (we mention something 
that nobles wear, Syr.), and it hath been said: They that wear 
soft raiment are in the houses of kings. And if of costly banquets, 
concerning these we have received a commandment to beware of 
them, not to be weighed down with revelling and drunkenness and 
cares of this life—speaking of things that are—and it hath been 
said: Take no thought for your life (soul), what ye shall eat 
or what ye shall drink; neither for your body, what ye shall 
put on, for the soul is more than the meat and the body than 
the raiment. And of rest, if we speak of this temporal rest, a 
judgement is appointed for this also. But we speak of the world 
which is above, of God and angels, of watchers and holy ones, 
of the immortal (ambrosial) food and the drink of the true vine, 
of raiment that endureth and groweth not old, of things which 
eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither have they entered into 
the heart of sinful men, the things which God hath prepared 
for them that love him. Of these things do we converse and of 
these do we bring good tidings. Do thou therefore also believe 
on him that thou mayest live, and put thy trust in him, and 
thou shalt not die. For he is not persuaded with gifts, that 
thou shouldest offer them to him, neither is he in need of sacrifices, 
that thou shouldest sacrifice unto him. But look thou unto 
him, and he will not overlook thee; and turn unto him, and he 
will not forsake thee. For his comeliness and his beauty will 
make thee wholly desirous to love him: and indeed he per- 
mitteth thee not to turn thyself away. 

37 And when the apostle had said these things unto that 
youth, a great multitude joined themselves wnto them. And the 
apostle looked and saw them raising themselves on high that 
they might see him, and they were going up into high places; 
and the apostle said unto them: Ye men that are come unto 
the assembly of Christ, and would believe on Jesus, take exampie 
hereby, and see that if ye be not lifted up, ye cannot see me 
who am little, and are not able to spy me out who am like unto 
you. If, then, ye cannot see me who am like you unless ye lift 
yourselves up a little from the earth, how can ye see him that 
dwelleth in the height and now is found in the depth, unless 


ACTS OF THOMAS 883 


ye first lift yourselves up out of your former conversation, and 
your unprofitable deeds, and your desires that abide not, and 
the wealth that is left here, and the possession of earth that 
groweth old, and the raiment that corrupteth, and the beauty 
that waxeth old and vanisheth away, and yet more out of the 
whole body wherein all these things are stored up, and which 
groweth old and becometh dust, returning unto its own nature ? 
For it is the body which maintaineth all these things. But rather 
believe on our Lord Jesus Christ, whom we preach, that your 
hope may be in him and in him ye may have life world without 
end, that he may become your fellow traveller in this land of 
error, and may be to you an harbour in this troublous sea. And 
he shall be to you a fountain springing up in this thirsty land 
and a chamber full of food in this place of them that hunger, 
and a rest unto your souls, yea, and a physician for your bodies. 

88 Then the multitude of them that were gathered together 
hearing these things wept, and said unto the apostle: O man 
of God, the God whom thou preachest, we dare not say that 
we are his, for the works which we have done are alien unto 
him and not pleasing to him; but if he will have compassion 
on us and pity us and save us, overlooking our former deeds, 
and will set us free from the evils which we committed being 
in error, and not impute them unto us nor make remembrance 
of our former sins, we will become his servants and will accom- 
plish his will unto the end. And the apostle answered them 
and said: He reckoneth not against you, neither taketh account 
of the sins which ye committed being in error, but overlooketh 
your transgressions which ye have done in ignorance. 


The Fourth Act: concerning the colt 


39 And while the apostle yet stood in the highway and spake 
with the multitude, a she ass’s colt came and stood before him 
(Syr. adds, And Judas said: It is not without the direction of 
God that this colt has come hither. But to thee I say, O colt, 
that by the grace of our Lord there shall be given to thee speech 
before these multitudes who are standing here; and do thou 
say whatsoever thou wilt, that they may believe in the God 
of truth whom we preach. And the mouth of the colt was 
opened, and it spake by the power of our Lord and said to him) 
and opened its mouth and said: Thou twin of Christ, apostle 
of the Most High and initiate in the hidden word of Christ, 
who receivest his secret oracles, fellow worker with the Son 
of God, who being free hast become a bondman, and being 
sold hast brought many into liberty. Thou kinsman of the 
great race that hath condemned the enemy and redeemed his 
own, that hast become an occasion of life unto many in the 


1 Cf. Peter, ch. II. 


884 ACTS OF THOMAS 


land of the Indians ; for thou hast come (against thy will, Syr.) 
unto men that were in error, and by thy appearing and thy 
divine words they are now turning unto the God of truth which 
sent thee: mount and sit upon me and repose thyself until thou 
enter into the city. And the apostle answered and said: O Jesu 
Christ (Son) that understandest the perfect mercy! O tran- 
quillity and quiet that now art spoken of (speakest, Syr.) by 
(among) brute beasts! O hidden rest, that art manifested by 
thy working, Saviour of us and nourisher, keeping us and resting 
in alien bodies ! O Saviour of our souls! spring that is sweet and 
unfailing ; fountain secure and clear and never polluted ; defender 
and helper in the fight of thine own servants, turning away and 
scaring the enemy from us, that fightest in many battles for us 
and makest us conquerors in all; our true and undefeated 
champion (athlete) ; our holy and victorious captain: glorious, 
and giving unto thine own a joy that never passeth away, and 
a relief wherein is none affliction; good shepherd that givest 
thyself for thine own sheep, and hast vanquished the wolf and 
redeemed thine own lambs and led them into a good pasture: we 
glorify and praise thee and thine invisible Father and thine holy 
Spirit [and] the mother of all creation. 

40 And when the apostle had said these things, all the multitude 
that were there looked upon him, expecting to hear what he 
would answer to the colt. And the apostle stood a long time 
as it were astonied, and looked up into heaven and said to the 
colt: Of whom art thou and to whom belongest thou? for 
marvellous are the things that are shown forth by thy mouth, 
and amazing and such as are hidden from the many. And the 
colt answered and said: I am of that stock that served Balaam, 
and thy lord also and teacher sat upon one that appertained 
unto me by race. And I also have now been sent to give thee rest 
by thy sitting upon me: and (that) I may receive (Syr. these may 
be confirmed in) faith, and unto me may be added that portion 
which now I shall receive by thy service wherewith I serve thee; 
and when I have ministered unto thee, it shall be taken from 
me. And the apostle said unto him: He is able who granted 
thee this gift, to cause it to be fulfilled unto the end in thee and 
in them that belong unto thee by race: for as to this mystery 
I am weak and powerless. And he would not sit upon him. But 
the colt besought and entreated him that he might be blessed of 
him by ministering unto him. Then the apostle mounted him 
and sat upon him; and they followed him, some going before 
and some following after, and.all of them ran, desiring to see 
the end, and how he would dismiss the colt. 

41 But when he came near to the city gates he dismounted 
from him, saying: Depart, and be thou kept safe where thou 
wert. And straightway the colt fell to the ground at the apostle’s 
feet and died. And all they that were present were sorry and 


ACTS OF THOMAS 885 


said to the apostle: Bring him to life and raise him up. But he 
answered and said unto them: I indeed am able to raise him 
by the name of Jesus Christ: but this is by all means expedient 
(or, this is <not>) by any means expedient). For he that gave 
him speech that he might talk was able to cause that he should 
not die; and I raise him not, not as being unable, but because 
this is that which is expedient and profitable for him. And he 
bade them that were present to dig a trench and bury his body, 
and they did as they were commanded. 


The Fifth Act: concerning the devil that took up his 
abode in the woman 


42 And the apostle entered into the city and all the multitude 
followed him. And he thought to go unto the parents of the 
young man whom he had made alive when he was slain by the 
serpent; for they earnestly besought him to come unto them 
and enter into their house. But a very beautiful woman on 
a sudden uttered an exceeding loud cry, saying: O Apostle 
of the new God that art come into India, and servant of that 
holy and only good God; for by thee is he preached, the Saviour 
of the souls that come unto him, and by thee are healed the 
bodies of them that are tormented by the enemy, and thou 
art he that is become an occasion of life unto all that turn unto 
him: command me to be brought before thee that I may tell 
thee what hath befallen me, and peradventure of thee I may 
have hope, and these that stand by thee may be more confident 
in the God whom thou preachest. For I am not a little tormented 
by the adversary now this five years’ space [one Greek MS. 
And the apostle bade her come unto him, and the woman stood 
before him and said: I, O servant of him that is indeed God, 
am a woman: the rest have, As a woman] I was sitting at the 
first in quiet, and peace encompassed me on every side and I had 
no care for anything, for I took no thought for any other. 43 And 
it fell out one day that as I came out from the bath there met 
me a man troubled and disturbed, and his voice and speech 
seemed to me exceeding faint and dim; and he stood before 
me and said: J and thou will be in one love, and we will have 
intercourse together as a man with his wife. And I answered 
and said to him: I never had to do with my betrothed, for I 
refused to marry, and how shall I yield myself to thee that 
wouldest have intercourse with me in adulterous wise? And 
having so said, I passed on, and I said to my handmaid that 
was with me: Sawest thou that youth and his shamelessness, 
how boldly he spake with me, and had no shame? but she said 
to me: I saw an old man speaking to thee. And when I was 
in mine house and had dined my soul suggested unto me some 
suspicion, and especially because he was seen of me in two forms; 
and having this in my mind I fell asleep. He came, therefore, 


870 cc 


386 ACTS OF THOMAS 


in that night and was joined unto me in his foul intercourse. 
And when it was day I saw him and fled from him, and on the 
night following that! he came and abused me; and now as thou 
seest me I have spent five years being troubled by him, and 
he hath not departed from me. But I know and am persuaded 
that both devils and spirits and destroyers are subject unto 
thee and are filled with trembling at thy prayers: pray thou 
therefore for me and drive away from me the devil that ever 
troubleth me, that I also may be set free and be gathered unto 
the nature that is mine from the beginning, and receive the 
grace that hath been given unto my kindred. 

44 And the apostle said: O evil that cannot be restrained! 
O shamelessness of the enemy! O envious one that art never 
at rest! O hideous one that subduest the comely! O thou of 
many forms! As he will he appeareth, but his essence cannot 
be changed. O the crafty and faithless one! O the bitter tree, 
whose fruits are like unto him! O the devil that overcometh 
them that are alien to him! O the deceit that useth impudence! 
O the wickedness that creepeth like a serpent, and that is of 
his kindred! (Syr. wrongly adds a clause bidding the devil 
show himself.) And when the apostle said this, the malicious one 
came and stood before him, no man seeing him save the woman 
and the apostle, and with an exceeding loud voice said in the 
hearing of all: 45 What have we to do with thee, thou apostle 
of the Most High! What have we to do with thee, thou servant 
of Jesus Christ? What have we to do with thee, thou counsellor 
of the holy Son of God? Wherefore wilt thou destroy us, whereas 
our time is not yet come? Wherefore wilt thou take away our 
power? for unto this hour we had hope and time remaining to 
us. What have we to do with thee? Thou hast power over 
thine own, and we over ours. Wherefore wilt thou act tyrannously 
against us, when thou thyself teachest others not to act tyran- 
nously? Wherefore dost thou crave other men’s goods and 
not suffice thyself with thine own? Wherefore art thou made 
like unto the Son of God which hath done us wrong? for thou 
resemblest him altogether as if thou wert born of him. For 
we thought to have brought him under the yoke like as we 
have the rest, but he turned and made us subject unto him: 
for we knew him not; but he deceived us with his form of all 
uncomeliness and his poverty and his neediness: for seeing him 
to be such, we thought that he was a man wearing flesh, and 
knew not that it is he that giveth life unto men. And he gave 
us power over our own, and that we should not in this present 
time leave them but have our walk in them: but thou wouldest 
get more than thy due and that which was given thee, and 
afflict us altogether. 


1 or on the night akin to him. Syr. Lewis, he used to come in the 
shape of his race. Syr. Wright, he used to come in a terrible form. 


ACTS OF THOMAS 887 


46 And having said this the devil wept, saying: I leave thee, 
my fairest consort, whom long since I found and rested in thee; 
I forsake thee, my sure sister, my beloved in whom I was well 
pleased. What I shall do I know not, or on whom I shall call 
that he may hear me and help me. I know what I will do: 
I will depart unto some place where the report of this man hath 
not been heard, and peradventure I shall call thee, my beloved, 
by another name (Syr. for thee my beloved I shall find a sub- 
stitute). And he lifted up his voice and said: Abide in peace, 
for thou hast taken refuge with one greater than I, but I will 
depart and seek for one like thee, and if I find her not, I will 
return unto thee again: for I know that whilst thou art near 
unto this man thou hast a refuge in him, but when he departeth 
thou wilt be such as thou wast before he appeared, and him thou 
wilt forget, and I shall have opportunity and confidence : but now 
I fear the name of him that hath saved thee. And having so said 
the devil vanished out of sight : only when he departed fire and 
smoke were seen there : and all that stood there were astonied. 

47 And the apostle seeing it, said unto them: This devil 
hath shown nought that is alien or strange to him, but his own 
nature, wherein also he shall be consumed, for verily the fire 
shall destroy him utterly and the smoke of it shall be scattered 
abroad. And he began to say: 

Jesu, the hidden mystery that hath been revealed unto us, 
thou art he that hast shown unto us many mysteries; thou that 
didst call me apart from all my fellows and spakest unto me three 
(one, Syr.) words wherewith I am inflamed, and am not able 
to speak them unto others. Jesu, man that wast slain, dead, 
buried! Jesu, God of God, Saviour that quickenest the dead, 
and healest the sick! Jesu, that wert in need like <a poor man) 
and savest as one that hath no need, that didst catch the fish 
for the breakfast and the dinner and madest all satisfied with 
a little bread. Jesu, that didst rest from the weariness of way- 
faring like a man, and walkedst on the waves like a God. 48 Jesu 
most high, voice arising from perfect mercy, Saviour of all, the 
right hand of the light, overthrowing the evil one in his own 
nature, and gathering all his nature into one place; thou of 
many forms, that art only begotten, first-born of many brethren, 
God of the Most High God, man despised until now (Syr. and 
humble). Jesu Christ that neglectest us not when we call upon 
thee, that art become an occasion of life unto all mankind, that 
for us wast judged and shut up in prison, and loosest all that 
are in bonds, that wast called a deceiver and redeemest thine 
own from error: I beseech thee for these that stand here and 
believe on thee, for they entreat to obtain thy gifts, having 
good hope in thy help, and having their refuge in thy greatness; 
they hold their hearing ready to listen unto the words that are 
spoken by us. Let thy peace come and tabernacle in them 


388 ACTS OF THOMAS 


and renew them from their former deeds, and let them put off 
the old man with his deeds, and put on the new that now is 
proclaimed unto them by me. 

49 And he laid his hands on them and blessed them, saying: 
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ shall be upon you for ever. 
And they said, Amen. And the woman besought him, saying: 
O apostle of the Most High, give me the seal, that that enemy 
return not again unto me. Then he caused her to come near 
unto him (Syr. went to a river which was close by there), and 
laid his hands upon her and sealed her in the name of the Father 
and the Son and the Holy Ghost; and many others also were 
sealed with her. And the apostle bade his minister (deacon) 
to set forth a table; and he set forth a stool which they found 
there, and spread a linen cloth upon it and set on the bread of 
blessing; and the apostle stood by it and said: Jesu, that hast 
accounted us worthy to partake of the eucharist of thine holy 
body and blood, lo, we are bold to draw near unto thine eucharist 
and to call upon thine holy name: come thou and communicate 
unto us (Syr. adds more). 

50 And he began to say: Come, O perfect compassion, Come, 
O communion of the male, Come, she that knoweth the mysteries 
of him that is chosen, Come, she that hath part in all the combats 
of the noble champion (athlete), Come, the silence that revealeth 
the great things of the whole greatness, Come, she that mani- 
festeth the hidden things and maketh the unspeakable things 
plain, the holy dove that beareth the twin young, Come, the 
hidden mother, Come, she that is manifest in her deeds and 
giveth joy and rest unto them that are joined unto her: Come 
and communicate with us in this eucharist which we celebrate 
in thy name and in the love-feast wherein we are gathered 
together at thy calling. (Syr. has other clauses and not few 
variants.) And having so said he marked out the cross upon the 
bread, and brake it, and began to distribute it. And first he 
gave unto the woman, saying: This shall be unto thee for remis- 
sion of sins and eternal transgressions (Syr. and for the ever- 
lasting resurrection). And after her he gave unto all the others 
also which had received the seal (Syr. and said to them: Let this 
eucharist be unto you for life and rest, and not for judgement and 
vengeance. And they said, Amen. Cf. 29 fin.). 


The Sixth Act: of the youth that murdered the woman. 


51 Now there was a certain youth who had wrought an 
abominable deed, and he came near and received of the 
eucharist with his mouth: but his two hands withered up, so 
that he could no more put them unto his own mouth. And they 
that were there saw him and told the apostle what had befallen; 
and the apostle called him and said unto him: Tell me, my child, 
aud be not ashamed, what was it that thou didst and camest 


ACTS OF THOMAS 38yu 


hither? for the eucharist of the Lord hath convicted thee. 
For this gift which passeth among many doth rather heal them 
that with faith and love draw near thereto, but thee it hath 
withered away; and that which is come to pass hath not befallen 
without some effectual cause. And the youth, being convicted 
by the eucharist of the Lord, came and fell at the apostle’s feet 
and besought him, saying: I have done an evil deed, yet 
I thought to do somewhat good. I was enamoured of a woman 
that dwelleth at an inn without the city, and she also loved me; 
and when I heard of thee and believed, that thou proclaimest 
a living God, I came and received of thee the seal with the rest; 
for thou saidst: Whosoever shall partake in the polluted union, 
and especially in adultery, he shall not have life with the God 
whom I preach. Whereas therefore I loved her much, I entreated 
her and would have persuaded her to become my consort in 
chastity and pure conversation, which thou also teachest: but she 
would not. When, therefore, she consented not, I took a sword 
and slew her: for I could not endure to see her commit adultery 
with another man. 

52 When the apostle heard this he said: O insane union, 
how runnest thou unto shamelessness! O unrestrained lust, 
how hast thou stirred up this man to do this! O work of the 
serpent, how art thou enraged against thine own! And the 
apostle bade water to be brought to him in a bason; and when 
the water was brought, he said: Come, ye waters from the living 
waters, that were sent unto us, the true from the true, the rest 
that was sent unto us from the rest, the power of salvation 
that cometh from that power which conquereth all things and 
subdueth them unto its own will: come and dwell in these 
waters, that the gift of the Holy Ghost may be perfectly con- 
summated in them. And he said unto the youth: Go, wash thy 
hands in these waters. And when he had washed they were 
restored; and the apostle said unto him: Believest thou in our 
Lord Jesus Christ that he is able to do all things? And he said: 
Though I be the least, yet I believe. But I committed this deed, 
thinking that I was doing somewhat good: for I besought her, 
as I told thee, but she would not obey me, to keep herself chaste. 

58 And the apostle said to him: Come, let us go unto the 
inn where thou didst commit this deed. And the youth went 
before the apostle in the way; and when they came to the inn 
they found her lying dead. And the apostle when he saw her 
was sorry; for she was a comely girl. And he commanded her 
to be brought into the midst of the inn: and they laid her on 
a bed and brought her forth and set her down in the midst of 
the court of the inn. And the apostle laid his hand upon her 
and began to say: Jesu, who alway showest thyself unto us— 
for this is thy will, that we should at all times seek thee, and 
thyself hast given us this power, to ask and to receive, and hast 


890 ACTS OF THOMAS 


not only permitted this, but hast taught us to pray: who art 
not seen of our bodily eyes, but art never hidden from the eyes 
of our soul, and in thine aspect art concealed, but in thy works 
art manifested unto us: and in thy many acts we have known 
thee so far as we are able, and thyself hast given us thy gifts 
without measure, saying: Ask and it shall be given unto you, 
seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you: 
we beseech thee, therefore, having the fear (suspicion) of our 
sins; and we ask of thee, not riches, not gold, not silver, not 
possessions, not aught else of the things which come of the earth 
and return again unto the earth; but this we ask of thee and 
entreat, that in thine holy name thou wouldest raise up the 
woman that lieth here, by thy power, to the glory and faith of 
them that stand by. 

54 And he said unto the youth (Syr. ‘Stretch thy mind towards 
our Lord,’ and he signed him with the cross), having signed 
(sealed) him: Go and take hold on her hand and say unto her: 
I with my hands slew thee with iron, and with my hands in the 
faith of Jesus I raise thee up. So the youth went to her and 
stood by her, saying: I have believed in thee, Christ Jesu. 
And he looked unto Judas Thomas the apostle and said to him: 
Pray for me that my Lord may come to my help, whom I also 
call upon. And he laid his hand upon her hand and said: Come, 
Lord Jesu Christ: unto her grant thou life and unto me the 
earnest of faith in thee. And straightway as he drew her hand 
she sprang up and sat up, looking upon the great company that 
stood by. And she saw the apostle also standing over against 
her, and leaving the bed she leapt forth and fell at his feet and 
caught hold on his raiment, saying: I beseech thee, my lord, 
where is that other that was with thee, who left me not to remain 
in that fearful and cruel place, but delivered me unto thee, saying: 
Take thou this woman, that she may be made perfect, and 
hereafter be gathered into her place ? 

55 And the apostle said unto her: Relate unto us where 
thou hast been. And she answered: Dost thou who wast with 
me and unto whom I was delivered desire to hear? And she 
began to say:+ A man took me who was hateful to look upon, 
altogether black, and his raiment exceedingly foul, and took me 
away to a place wherein were many pits (chasms), and a great 
stench and hateful odour issued thence. And he caused me to 
look into every pit, and I saw in the (first) pit flaming fire, and 
wheels of fire ran round there, and souls were hanged upon 
those wheels, and were dashed (broken) against each other; 
and very great crying and howling was there, and there was none 
to deliver. And that man said to me: These souls are of thy 
tribe, and when the number of their days is accomplished (lit. 

1 This description of hell-torments is largely derived from the 
Apocalypse of Peter, which see. 


ACTS OF THOMAS 391 


in the days of the number) they are (were) delivered unto torment 
and affliction, and then are others brought in in their stead, and 
likewise these into another place. These are they that have 
reversed the intercourse of male and female. And I looked 
and saw infants heaped one upon another and struggling with 
each other as they lay on them. And he answered and said to 
me: These are the children of those others, and therefore are 
they set here for a testimony against them. (Syr. omits this 
clause of the children, and lengthens and dilutes the preceding 
speech.) 

56 And he took me unto another pit, and I stooped and looked 
and saw mire and worms welling up, and souls wallowing there, 
and a great gnashing of teeth was heard thence from them. 
And that man said unto me: These are the souls of women which 
forsook their husbands and committed adultery with others, 
and are brought into this torment. Another pit he showed me, 
whereinto I stooped and looked and saw souls hanging, some 
by the tongue, some by the hair, some by the hands, and some 
head downward by the feet, and tormented (smoked) with smoke 
and brimstone; concerning whom that man that was with me 
answered me: The souls which are hanged by the tongue are 
slanderers, that uttered lying and shameful words, and were not 
ashamed; and they that are hanged by the hair are unblushing 
ones which had no modesty and went about in the world bare- 
headed; and they that are hanged by the hands, these are they 
that took away and stole other men’s goods, and never gave aught 
to the needy nor helped the afflicted, but did so, desiring to 
take all, and had no thought at all of justice or of the law; 
and they that hang upside down by the feet, these are they 
that lightly and readily ran in evil ways and disorderly paths, 
not visiting the sick nor escorting them that depart this life, and 
therefore each and every soul receiveth that which was done by 
it. (Syr. omits almost the whole section.) 

57 Again he took me and showed me a cave exceeding dark, 
breathing out a great stench, and many souls were looking out 
desiring to get somewhat of the air, but their keepers suffered 
them not to look forth. And he that was with me said: This 
is the prison of those souls which thou sawest: for when they 
have fulfilled their torments for that which each did, thereafter 
do others succeed them: and there be some that are wholly 
consumed and (some, Syr.) that are delivered over unto other 
torments. And they that kept the souls which were in the dark 
cave said unto the man that had taken me: Give her unto us 
that we may bring her in unto the rest until the time cometh 
for her to be delivered unto torment. But he answered them: 
I give her not unto you, for I fear him that delivered her to me: 
for I was not charged to leave her here, but I take her back 
with me until I shall receive order concerning her. And he 


392 ACTS OF THOMAS 


took me and brought me unto another place wherein were men 
being sharply tormented (Syr. where men were). And he that 
was like unto thee took me and delivered me to thee, saying thus 
to thee: Take her, for she is one of the sheep that have gone 
astray. And I was taken by thee, and now am I before thee. 
I beseech thee, therefore, and supplicate that I may not depart 
unto those places of punishment which I have seen. 

58 And the apostle said: Ye have heard what this woman 
hath related: and there are not these torments only, but others 
also, worse than these; and ye, if ye turn not unto this God 
whom I preach, and abstain from your former works and the 
deeds which ye committed without knowledge, shall have your 
end in those torments. Believe therefore on Christ Jesus, and 
he will forgive you the sins ye have committed hitherto, and will 
cleanse you from all your bodily lusts that abide on the earth, 
and will heal you of all your trespasses which follow you and 
depart with you and are found upon (before) you. Put off 
therefore every one of you the old man, and put on the new, 
and forsake your former walk and conversation; and let them 
that stole steal no more, but live by labouring and working; 
and let the adulterous no more fornicate, lest they deliver them- 
selves unto eternal torment; for adultery is before God exceeding 
evil beyond other sins. And put away from you covetousness 
and lying and drunkenness and slandering, and render not evil 
for evil: for all these things are strange and alien unto the God 
who is preached by me: but rather walk ye in faith and meekness 
and holiness and hope, wherein God delighteth, that ye may 
become his own, expecting of him the gifts which some few 
only do receive. 

59 All the people therefore believed and gave their souls 
obediently unto the living God and Christ Jesus, rejoicing in 
the blessed works of the Most High and in his holy service. And 
they brought much money for the service of the widows: for 
the apostle had them gathered together in the cities, and unto 
all of them he sent provision by his own ministers (deacons), 
both clothes and nourishment. And he himself ceased not preach- 
ing and speaking to them and showing that this is Jesus Christ 
whom the scriptures proclaimed, who is come and was crucified, 
and raised the third day from the dead. And next he showed 
them plainly, beginning from the prophets, the things concerning 
the Christ, that it was necessary that he should come, and that 
in him should be accomplished all things that were foretold of 
him. And the fame of him went forth into all the cities and 
countries, and all that had sick or them that were oppressed by 
unclean spirits brought them, and some they laid in the way 
whereby he should pass, and he healed them all by the power of 
the Lord. Then all that were healed by him said with one 
accord: Glory be to thee, Jesu, who hast granted us all alike 


ACTS OF THOMAS 893 


healing through thy servant and apostle Thomas. And now 
being whole and rejoicing, we beseech thee that we may be of 
thy flock, and be numbered among thy sheep; receive us there- 
fore, Lord, and impute not unto us our transgressions and our 
former faults which we committed being in ignorance. 

60 And the apostle said: Glory be to the only-begotten of 
the Father! Glory be to the first-born of many brethren! Glory 
be to thee, the defender and helper of them that come unto thy 
refuge! that sleepest not, and awakest them that are asleep, 
that livest and givest life to them that lie in death! O God, 
Jesu Christ, Son of the living God, redeemer and helper, refuge 
and rest of all that are weary (labour) in thy work, giver of 
healing to them that for thy name’s sake bear the burden and 
heat of the day: we give thanks for (to) the gifts that are given 
us of thee and granted us by thy help and thy dispensation that 
cometh unto us from thee. 

61 Perfect thou therefore these things in us unto the end, 
that we may have the boldness that is in thee: look upon us, 
for for thy sake have we forsaken our homes and our parents, 
and for thy sake have we gladly and willingly become strangers: 
look upon us, Lord, for we have forsaken our own possessions for 
thy sake, that we might gain thee, the possession that cannot 
be taken away: look upon us, Lord, for we have forsaken them 
that belong unto us by race, that we might be joined unto thy 
kinship: look upon us, Lord, that have forsaken our fathers 
and mothers and fosters, that we might behold thy Father, and 
be satisfied with his divine food: look upon us, Lord, for for thy 
sake have we forsaken our bodily consorts and our earthly 
fruits, that we might be partakers in that enduring and true 
fellowship, and bring forth true fruits, whose nature is from 
above, which no man can take from us, with whom we shall 
abide and who shall abide with us. 


The Seventh Act: of the Captain. 


62 Now while the apostle Thomas was proclaiming throughout 
all India the word of God, a certain captain of the king Misdaeus 
(Mazdai, Syr.) came to him and said unto him: I have heard of 
thee that thou takest no reward of any man, but even that thou 
hast thou givest to them that need. For if thou didst receive 
rewards, I would have sent thee a great sum, and would not have 
come myself, for the king doeth nought without me: for I have 
much substance and am rich, even one of the rich men of 
India. And I have never done wrong to any; but the contrary 
hath befallen me. I have a wife, and of her I had a daughter, 
and I am well affectioned toward her, as also nature requireth, 
and have never made trial of another wife. Now it chanced that 
there was a wedding in our city, and they that made the marriage 
feast were well beloved of me: they came in therefore and bade 


894 ACTS OF THOMAS 


me to it, bidding also my wife and her daughter. Forasmuch 
then as they were my good friends I could not refuse: I sent 
her therefore, though she desired not to go, and with them I sent 
also many servants: so they departed, both she and her daughter, 
decked with many ornaments. 

63 And when it was evening and the time was come to depart 
from the wedding I sent lamps and torches to meet them: and 
I stood in the street to espy when she should come and I should 
see her with my daughter. And as I stood I heard a sound of 
lamentation. Woe for her! was heard out of every mouth. 
And my servants with their clothes rent came to me and told 
me what was done. We saw, said they, a man and a boy with 
him. And the man laid his hand upon thy wife, and the boy 
upon thy daughter: and they fled from them: and we smote 
(wounded) them with our swords, but our swords fell to the 
ground. And the same hour the women fell down, gnashing their 
teeth and beating their heads upon the earth; and seeing this 
we came to tell it thee. And when I heard this of my servants 
I rent my clothes and smote my face with my hands, and 
becoming like one mad I ran along the street, and came and 
found them cast in the market-place; and I took them and 
brought them to my house, and after a long space they awaked 
and stood up, and sat down. 

64 I began therefore to inquire of my wife: What is it that 
hath befallen thee? And she said to me: Knowest thou not 
what thou hast done unto me? for I prayed thee that I might 
not go to the wedding, because I was not of even health in my 
body; and as I went on the way and came near to the aqueduct 
wherein the water floweth, I saw a black man standing over 
against me nodding at me with his head, and a boy like unto 
him standing by him; and I said to my daughter: Look at 
those two hideous men, whose teeth are like milk and their lips 
like soot. And we left them and went towards the aqueduct; 
and when it was sunset and we departed from the wedding, as 
we passed by with the young men and drew near the aqueduct, 
my daughter saw them first, and was affrighted and fled towards 
me; and after her I also beheld them coming against us: and 
the servants that were with us fled from them (Syr.) and they 
struck us, and cast down both me and my daughter. And when 
she had told me these things, the devils came upon them again 
and threw them down: and from that hour they are not able 
to come forth, but are shut up in one room or a second (Syr. in 
a room within another): and on their account I suffer much, 
and am distressed: for the devils throw them down wheresoever 
they find them, and strip them naked. I beseech and supplicate 
thee before God, help me and have pity on me, for it is now 
three years that a table hath not been set in my house, and my 
wife and my daughter have not sat at a table: and especially 


ACTS OF THOMAS 895 


for mine unhappy daughter, which hath not seen any good at 
all in this world. 

65 And the apostle, hearing these things from the captain, 
was greatly grieved for him, and said unto him: Believest thou 
that Jesus will heal them? And the captain said: Yea. And the 
apostle said: Commit thyself then unto Jesus, and he will heal 
them and procure them succour. And the captain said : Show me 
him, that I may entreat him and believe in him. And the apostle 
said: He appeareth not unto these bodily eyes, but is found by 
the eyes of the mind. The captain therefore lifted up his voice 
and said: I believe thee, Jesu, and entreat and supplicate thee, 
help my little faith which I have in thee. And the apostle com- 
manded Xenophon (Syr. Xanthippus) the deacon to assemble all 
the brethren; and when the whole multitude was gathered, the 
apostle stood in the midst and said: 

66 Children and brethren that have believed on the Lord, 
abide in this faith, preaching Jesus who was proclaimed unto you 
by me, to bring you hope in him; and forsake not (be not for- 
saken of) him, and he will not forsake you. While ye sleep in 
this slumber that weigheth down the sleepers, he, sleeping not, 
keepeth watch over you; and when ye sail and are in peril and 
none can help, he walking upon the waters supporteth and 
aideth. For I am now departing from you, and it appeareth 
not if I shall again see you according to the flesh. Be ye not 
therefore like unto the people of Israel, who losing sight of their 
pastors for an hour, stumbled. But I leave unto you Xenophon 
the deacon in my stead; for he also like myself proclaimeth 
Jesus: for neither am I aught, nor he, but Jesus only; for I also 
am a man clothed with a body, a son of man like one of you; 
for neither have I riches as it is found with some, which also 
convict them that possess them, being wholly useless, and left 
behind upon the earth, whence also they came, and they bear 
away with them the transgressions and blemishes of sins which 
befall men by their means. And scantly are rich men found in 
almsgiving: but the merciful and lowly in heart, these shall 
inherit the kingdom of God: for it is not beauty that endureth 
with men, for they that trust in it, when age cometh upon them, 
shall suddenly be put to shame: all things therefore have their 
time; in their season are they loved and hated. Let your 
hope then be in Jesus Christ the Son of God, which is always 
loved, and always desired: and be mindful of us, as we of you: 
for we too, if we fulfil not the burden of the commandments, 
are not worthy to be preachers of this name, and hereafter shall 
we pay the price (punishment) of our own head. 

67 And he prayed with them and continued with them a long 
time in prayer and supplication, and committing them unto the 
Lord, he said: O Lord that rulest over every soul that is in the 
body; Lord, Father of the souls that have their hope in thee 


396 ACTS OF THOMAS 


and expect thy mercies: that redeemest from error the men 
that are thine own and settest free from bondage and corruption 
thy subjects that come unto thy refuge: be thou in the flock of 
Xenophon and anoint it with holy oil, and heal it of sores, and 
preserve it from the ravening wolves. And he laid his hand on 
them and said: The peace of the Lord shall be upon you and 
shall journey with us. 


The Eighth Act: of the wild asses. 


68 The apostle therefore went forth to depart on the way: 
and they all escorted him, weeping and adjuring him to make 
remembrance of them in his prayers and not to forget them. 
He went up then and sat upon the chariot, leaving all the brethren, 
and the captain came and awaked the driver, saying: I entreat 
and pray that I may become worthy to sit beneath his feet, 
and I will be his driver upon this way, that he also may become 
my guide in that way whereby few go. 

69 And when they had journeyed about two miles, the apostle 
begged of the captain and made him arise and caused him to sit 
by him, suffering the driver to sit in his own place. And as they 
went along the road, it came to pass that the beasts were wearied 
with the great heat and could not be stirred at all. And the 
captain was greatly vexed and wholly cast down, and thought to 
run on his own feet and bring other beasts for the use of the 
chariot; but the apostle said: Let not thine heart be troubled 
nor affrighted, but believe on Jesus Christ whom I have pro- 
claimed unto thee, and thou shalt see great wonders. And he 
looked and saw a herd of wild asses feeding by the wayside, and 
said to the captain: If thou hast believed on Christ Jesus, go 
unto that herd of wild asses and say: Judas Thomas the apostle 
of Christ the new God saith unto you: Let four of you come, of 
whom we have need (or, of whom we may have use). 

70 And the captain went in fear, for they were many; and as 
he went, they came to meet him; and when they were near, he 
said unto them: Judas Thomas the apostle of the new God com- 
mandeth you: Let four of you come, of whom I have need. And 
when the wild asses heard it, they ran with one accord and came to 
him, and when they came they did him reverence. [Syr. has a long 
prayer: And Judas Thomas the apostle of our Lord lifted up his 
voice in praise and said: Glorious art thou, God of truth and 
Lord of all natures, for thou didst will with thy will, and make all 
thy works and finish all thy creatures, and bring them to the 
rule of their nature, and lay upon them all thy fear that they 
might be subject to thy command. And thy will trod the path 
from thy secrecy to manifestation, and was caring for every soul 
that thou didst make, and was spoken of by the mouth of all the 
prophets, in all visions and sounds and voices; but Israel did not 

1 Syr. has no division here, 


ACTS OF THOMAS 897 


obey because of their evil inclination. And thou, because thou 
art Lord of all, hast a care for the creatures, so that thou spreadest 
over us thy mercy in him who came by thy will and put on the 
body, thy creature, which thou didst will and form according to 
thy glorious wisdom. He whom thou didst appoint in thy 
secrecy and establish in thy manifestation, to him thou hast 
given the name of Son, he who was thy will, the power of thy 
thought; so that ye are by various names, the Father and the 
Son and the Spirit, for the sake of the government of thy creatures, 
for the nourishing of all natures, and ye are one in glory and 
power and will; and ye are divided without being separated, and 
are one though divided; and all subsists in thee and is subject 
to thee, because all is thine. And I rely upon thee, Lord, and 
by thy command have subjected these dumb beasts, that thou 
mightest show thy ministering power upon us and upon them, 
because it is needful, and that thy name might be glorified in us 
and in the beasts that cannot speak.] And the apostle said unto 
them: Peace be unto you. Yoke ye four of you in the stead 
of these beasts that have come to a stand. And every one of 
them came and pressed to be yoked: there were then four 
stronger than the rest, which also were yoked. And the rest, some 
went before and some followed. And when they had journeyed 
a little way he dismissed the colts, saying: I say unto you the 
inhabiters of the desert, depart unto your pastures, for if I had 
had need of all, ye would all have gone with me; but now go 
unto your place wherein ye dwell. And they departed quietly 
until they were no more seen. 

71 Now as the apostle and the captain and the driver went on, 
the wild asses drew the chariot quietly and evenly, lest they 
should disturb the apostle of God. And when they came near to 
the city gate they turned aside and stood still before the doors 
of the captain’s house. And the captain said: It is not possible 
for me to relate what hath happened, but when I see the end 
I will tell it. The whole city therefore came to see the wild asses 
under the yoke; and they had heard also the report of the 
apostle that he was to come and visit them. And the apostle 
asked the captain: Where is thy dwelling, and whither dost thou 
bring us? And he said to him: Thou thyself knowest that we 
stand before the doors, and these which by thy commandment 
are come with thee know it better than I. 

72 And having so said he came down from the chariot. The 
apostle therefore began to say: Jesu Christ, that art blasphemed 
by the ignorance of thee in this country; Jesu, the report of 
whom is strange in this city; Jesu, that receivest all (Syr. sendest 
on before) the apostles in every country and in every city, and 
all thine that are worthy are glorified in thee; Jesu, that didst 
take a form and become as a man, and wert seen of all us that 
thou mightest not separate us from thine own love: thou, Lord, 


398 ACTS OF THOMAS 


art he that gavest thyself for us, and with thy blood hast pur- 
chased us and gained us as a possession of great price: and what 
have we to give thee, Lord, in exchange for thy life which thou 
gavest for us? for that which we would give, thou gavest us: and 
this is, that we should entreat of thee and live. 

73 And when he had so said, many assembled from every 
quarter to see the apostle of the new God. And again the apostle 
said: Why stand we idle? Jesu, Lord, the hour is come: what 
wilt thou have done? command therefore that that be fulfilled 
which needeth to be done. Now the captain’s wife and her 
daughter were sore borne down by the devils, so that they of the 
house thought they would rise up no more: for they suffered them 
not to partake of aught, but cast them down upon their beds, 
recognizing no man until that day when the apostle came 
thither. And the apostle said unto one of the wild asses that 
were yoked on the right hand: Enter thou within the gate, and 
stand there and call the devils and say to them: Judas Thomas 
the apostle and disciple of Jesus Christ saith unto you: Come 
forth hither: for on your account am I sent and unto them that 
pertain to you by race, to destroy you and chase you unto your 
place, until the time of the end come and ye go down into your 
own deep of darkness. 

74 And that wild ass went in, a great multitude being with 
him, and said: Unto you I speak, the enemies of Jesus that is 
called Christ: unto you I speak that shut your eyes lest ye see the 
light: unto you I speak, children of Gehenna and of destruction, 
of him that ceaseth not from evil until now, that alway reneweth 
his workings and the things that befit his being: unto you I speak, 
most shameless, that shall perish by your own hands. And what 
I shall say of your destruction and end, and what I shall tell, 
I know not. For there are many things and innumerable to the 
hearing: and greater are your doings than the torment that is 
reserved for you (Syr. however great your bodies, they are too 
small for your retributions). But unto thee I speak, devil, and 
to thy son that followeth with thee: for now am I sent against 
you. And wherefore should I make many words concerning your 
nature and root, which yourselves know and are not ashamed ? 
but Judas Thomas the apostle of Christ Jesus saith unto you, he 
that by much love and affection is sent hither: Before all this 
multitude that standeth here, come forth and tell me of what 
race ye are. 

75 And straightway the woman came forth with her daughter, 
both like dead persons and dishonoured in aspect: and the 
apostle beholding them was grieved, especially for the girl, and 
saith unto the devils: God forbid that for you there should be 
sparing or propitiation, for ye know not to spare nor to have 
py but in the name of Jesus, depart from them and stand by 
their side. 


ACTS OF THOMAS 899 


And when the apostle had so said, the women fell down and 
became as dead; for they neither had breath nor uttered speech: 
but the devil answered with a loud voice and said : Art thou come 
hither again, thou that deridest our nature and race? art thou 
come again, that blottest out our devices? and as I take it, thou 
wouldest not suffer us to be upon the earth at all: but this at 
this time thou canst not accomplish. And the apostle guessed 
that this devil was he that had been driven out from that other 
woman. 

76 And the devil said: I beseech thee, give me leave to depart 
even whither thou wilt, and dwell there and take commandment 
from thee, and I will not fear the ruler that hath authority over 
me. For like as thou art come to preach good tidings, so I also 
am come to destroy; and like as, if thou fulfil not the will of him 
that sent thee, he will bring punishment upon thy head, so I also, 
if I do not the will of him that sent me, before the season and 
time appointed, shall be sent unto mine own nature; and like 
as thy Christ helpeth thee in that thou doest, so also my father 
helpeth me in that I do; and like as for thee he prepareth vessels 
worthy of thine inhabiting, so also for me he seeketh out vessels 
whereby I may accomplish his deeds; and like as he nourisheth 
and provideth for his subjects, so also for me he prepareth 
chastisements and torments, with them that become my dwelling- 
places (Syr. those in whom I dwell); and like as for a recompense 
of thy working he giveth thee eternal life, so also unto me he 
giveth for a reward of my works eternal destruction; and like 
as thou art refreshed by thy prayer and thy good works and 
spiritual thanksgivings, so I also am refreshed by murders and 
adulteries and sacrifices made with wine upon altars (Syr. sacri- 
fices and libations of wine); and like as thou convertest men 
unto eternal life, so I also pervert them that obey me unto 
eternal destruction and torment: and thou receivest thine own 
and I mine. 

77 And when the devil had said these things and yet more, 
the apostle said: Jesus commandeth thee and thy son by me to 
enter no more into the habitation of man: but go ye forth and 
depart and dwell wholly apart from the habitation of men. And 
the devils said unto him: Thou hast laid on us a harsh com- 
mandment: but what wilt thou do unto them that now are 
concealed from thee? for they that have wrought all the images 
rejoice in them more than thee: and many of them do the more 
part worship, and perform their will, sacrificing to them and 
bringing them food, by libations and by wine and water and 
offering with oblations. And the apostle said: They also shall 
now be abolished, with their works. And suddenly the devils 
vanished away: but the women lay cast upon the earth as it 
were dead, and without speech. 

78 And the wild asses stood together and parted not one from 


400 ACTS OF THOMAS 


another; but he to whom speech was given by the power of the 
Lord—while all men kept silence, and looked to see what they 
would do—the wild ass said unto the apostle: Why standest 
thou idle, O apostle of Christ the Most High, who looketh that 
thou shouldest ask of him the best of learning? Wherefore then 
tarriest thou? (Syr. that thou shouldest ask him, and he would give 
thee? Why delayest thou, good disciple?) for lo, thy teacher 
desireth to show by thy hands his mighty works. Why standest 
thou still, O herald of the hidden one? for thy (Lord) willeth to 
manifest through thee his unspeakable things, which he re- 
serveth for them that are worthy of him, to hear them. Why 
restest thou, O doer of mighty works in the name of the Lord? 
for thy Lord encourageth thee and engendereth boldness in thee. 
Fear not, therefore; for he will not forsake the soul that be- 
longeth unto thee by birth. Begin therefore to call upon him 
and he will readily hearken to thee. Why standest thou marvel- 
ling at all his acts and his workings? for these are small things 
which he hath shown by thy means. And what wilt thou tell 
concerning his great gifts? for thou wilt not be sufficient to 
declare them. And why marvellest thou at his cures of the 
body which he worketh? (Syr. which come to an end) especially 
when thou knowest that healing of his which is secure and 
lasting, which he bringeth forth by his own nature? And why 
lookest thou unto this temporal life, and hast no thought of that 
which is eternal (Syr. when thou canst every day think on that 
which is eternal) ? 

79 But unto you the multitudes that stand by and look to see 
these that are cast down raised up, I say, believe in the apostle 
of Jesus Christ: believe the teacher of truth, believe him that 
showeth you the truth, believe Jesus, believe on the Christ that was 
born, that the born may live by his life: who also was raised up 
through infancy, that perfection might appear by his manhood 
(man). He did teach his own disciples: for he is the teacher 
of the truth and maketh wise men wise (Syr. who went to 
school that through him perfect wisdom might be known: he 
taught his teacher because he was the teacher of verity and the 
master of the wise). Who also offered the gift in the temple that 
he might show that all the (every) offering was sanctified. 'This 
is his apostle, the shewer-forth of truth: thisis he that performeth 
the will of him that sent him. But there shall come false apostles 
and prophets of lawlessness, whose end shall be according to 
their deeds; preaching indeed and ordaining to flee from ungodli- 
ness, but themselves at all times detected in sins; clad indeed 
with sheep’s clothing, but within, ravening wolves. Who suffice 
not themselves with one wife but corrupt many women; who, 
saying that they despise children, destroy many children (boys), 
for whom they will pay the penalty ; that content not themselves 
with their own possessions, but desire that all useless things 


ACTS OF THOMAS 401 


should minister unto them only; professing to be his disciples; 
and with their mouth they utter one thing, but in their heart 
they think another; charging other men to beware of evil, but 
they themselves perform nought that is good; who are accounted 
temperate, and charge other men to abstain from fornication, 
theft, and covetousness, but in all these things do they themselves 
walk secretly, teaching other men not to do them. 

80 And when the wild ass had declared all these things, all 
men gazed upon him. And when he ceased the apostle said: 
What I shall think concerning thy beauty, O Jesu, and what 
I shall tell of thee, I know not, or rather I am not able, for I have 
no power to declare it, O Christ that art in rest, and only wise, 
that only knowest the inward of the heart and understandest the 
thought. Glory be to thee, merciful and tranquil. Glory to thee, 
wise word. Glory to thy compassion that was born unto us. Glory 
to thy mercy that was spread out over us. Glory to thy greatness 
that was made small for us. Glory to thy most high kingship 
that was humbled for us. Glory to thy might which was en- 
feebled for us. Glory to thy Godhead that for us was seen in 
likeness of men. Glory to thy manhood that died for us that it 
might make us live. Glory to thy resurrection from the dead; 
for thereby rising and rest cometh unto our souls. Glory and 
praise (good report) to thine ascending into the heavens; for 
thereby thou hast shewed us the path of the height, and promised 
that we shall sit with thee on thy right hand and with thee judge 
the twelve tribes of Israel. Thou art the heavenly word of the 
Father: thou art the hidden light of the understanding, shewer 
of the way of truth, driver away of darkness, and blotter-out 
of error. 

81 Having thus spoken, the apostle stood over the women, 
saying: My Lord and my God, I am not divided from thee (or 
doubt not concerning thee), nor as one unbelieving do I call upon 
thee, who art always our helper and succourer and raiser-up; 
who breathest thine own power into us and encouragest us and 
givest confidence in love unto thine own servants. I beseech thee, 
let these souls be healed and rise up and become such as they 
were before they were smitten of the devils. And when he thus 
spake the women turned and sat up. And the apostle bade the 
captain that his servants should take them and bring them 
within (Syr. and give them food, for they had not eaten for 
many days). And when they were gone in, the apostle said unto 
the wild asses, Follow me. And they went after him until he had 
brought them without the gate. And when they had gone out, he 
said to them: Depart in peace unto your pastures. The wild 
asses therefore went away willingly; and the apostle stood and 
took heed to them lest they should be hurt of any, until they had 
gone afar off and were no more seen. And the apostle returned 
with the multitude into the house of the captain. 


870 pd 


402 ACTS OF THOMAS 


The Ninth Act: of the wife of Charisius. 


82 Now it chanced that a certain woman, the wife of Charisius, 
that was next unto the king, whose name was Mygdonia, came to 
see and behold the new name and the new God who was being 
proclaimed, and the new apostle who had come to visit their 
country: and she was carried by her own servants; and because 
of the great crowd and the narrow way they were not able to 
bring her near unto him. And she sent unto her husband to send 
her more to minister to her; and they came and approached her, 
pressing upon the people and beating them. And the apostle 
saw it and said to them: Wherefore overthrow ye them that 
come to hear the word, and are eager for it? and ye desire to be 
near me but are far off; as it was said of the multitude that came 
unto the Lord: Having eyes ye see not, and having ears ye hear 
not ; and he said to the multitudes : He that hath ears to hear, let 
him hear; and: Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy 
laden, and I will give you rest. 

83 And looking upon them that carried her, he said unto them: 
This blessing and this admonition [Here and elsewhere there 
is a marked divergence between the texts of U and P, the Roman 
and Paris MSS.: Bonnet prints them separately. P is on the 
whole much shorter. Syr. differs from both. I follow U, but it is 
very corrupt.] which was promised unto them is for you that are 
heavily burdened now. Ye are they that carry burdens grievous 
to be borne, and are borne about by her command. And though 
ye are men, they lay on you loads as on brute beasts, for they 
that have authority over you think that ye are not men such as 
themselves, whether bond or free. For neither shall posses- 
sions profit the rich, nor poverty save the poor from judgement ; 
nor have we received a commandment which we are not able to 
perform ; nor hath he laid on us burdens grievous to be borne 
which we are not able to carry; nor building which men build; 
nor to hew stones and prepare houses, as your craftsmen do by 
their own knowledge. But this commandment have we received 
of the Lord, that that which pleaseth not us when it is done by 
another, this we should not do to any other man. 

84 Abstain therefore first from adultery, for this is the begin- 
ning of all evils; and next from theft, which enticed Judas 
Iscariot, and brought him unto hanging ; (and from covetousness, ) 
for as many as yield unto covetousness see not that which they do; 
and from vainglory and from all foul deeds, especially them of 
the body, whereby cometh eternal condemnation. For this is the 
chief city of all evils; and likewise it bringeth them that hold 
their heads (necks) high unto tyranny, and draweth them down 
unto the deep, and subdueth them under its hands that they 
see not what they do; wherefore the things done of them are 
hidden from them. 


ACTS OF THOMAS 403 


85 But do ye become well-pleasing unto God in all good things, 
in meekness and quietness: for these doth God spare, and granteth 
eternal life and setteth death at nought. And in gentleness 
which followeth on all good things, and overcometh all enemies 
and alone receiveth the crown of victory: with gentleness (Syr.), 
and stretching out of the hand to the poor, and supplying the 
want of the needy, and distributing to them that are in necessity, 
especially them that walk in holiness. For this is chosen before 
God and leadeth unto eternal life: for this is before God the chief 
city of all good: for they that strive not in the course (stadium) 
of Christ shall not obtain holiness. And holiness did appear 
from God, doing away fornication, overthrowing the enemy, 
well-pleasing unto God: for she is an invincible champion 
(athlete), having honour from God, glorified of many: she is an 
ambassador of peace, announcing peace: if any gain her he 
abideth without care, pleasing the Lord, expecting the time of 
redemption: for she doeth nothing amiss, but giveth life and 
rest and joy unto all that gain her. [P has nothing of this, and 
Syr. makes better sense, but is not very interesting. ] 

86 But meekness hath overcome death and brought him under 
authority, meekness hath enslaved the enemy (U and P and Syr. 
now present the same text), meekness is the good yoke : meekness 
feareth not and opposeth not the many: meekness is peace and 
joy and exaltation of rest. Abide ye therefore in holiness and 
receive freedom from me, and be near unto meekness, for in 
these three heads is portrayed the Christ whom I proclaim unto 
you. Holiness is the temple of Christ, and he that dwelleth in 
her getteth her for an habitation <Syr. and temperance is the 
rest of God), because for forty days and forty nights he fasted, 
tasting nothing: and he that keepeth her shall dwell in her as on 
a mountain. And meekness is his boast: for he said unto Peter 
our fellow apostle: Turn back thy sword and put it again into 
the sheath thereof: for if I had willed so to do, could I not have 
brought more than twelve legions of angels from my Father ? 

87 And when the apostle had said these things in the hearing 
of all the multitude, they trode and pressed upon one another: 
and the wife of Charisius the king’s kinsman leapt out of her 
chair and cast herself on the earth before the apostle, and caught 
his feet and besought and said: O disciple of the living God, thou 
art come into a desert country, for we live in the desert, being 
like to brute beasts in our conversation; but now shall we be 
saved by thy hands; I beseech thee, therefore, take thought of 
me, and pray for me, that the compassion of the God whom thou 
preachest may come upon me, and I may become his dwelling-place 
and be joined in prayer and hope and faith in him, and I also 
may receive the seal and become an holy temple and he may 
dwell in me. 

88 And the apostle said: I do pray and entreat for you all, 


404 ACTS OF THOMAS 


brethren, that believe on the Lord, and for you, sisters, that hope 
in Christ, that in all of you the word of God may tabernacle [and 
have his tabernacle therein]: for we have no power over them 
(Syr. because ye are given power over your own souls). And he 
began to say unto the woman Mygdonia: Rise up from the earth 
and compose thyself (take off thine ornaments, P; be mindful of 
thyself, Syr.). For this attire that is put on shall not profit thee, 
nor the beauty of thy body, nor thine apparel, neither yet the 
fame of thy rank, nor the authority of this world, nor the polluted 
intercourse with thine husband shall avail thee if thou be be- 
reaved of the true fellowship: for the appearance (fantasy) of 
ornamenting cometh to nought, and the body waxeth old and 
changeth, and raiment weareth out, and authority and lordship 
pass away (U corrupt; P abridges; Syr. has: passeth away 
accompanied with punishment, according as each person hath con- 
ducted himself in it), and the fellowship of procreation also passeth 
away, and is as it were condemnation. Jesus only abideth ever, 
and they that hope in him. Thus he spake, and said unto the 
woman: Depart in peace, and the Lord shall make thee worthy 
of his own mysteries. But she said: I fear to go away, lest thou 
forsake me and depart unto another nation. But the apostle said 
to her: Even if I go, I shall not leave thee alone, but Jesus of his 
compassion will be with thee. And she fell down and did him 
reverence and departed unto her house. 

89 Now Charisius, the kinsman of Misdaeus the king, bathed 
himself and returned and laid him down to dine. And he 
inquired concerning his wife, where she was; for she had not 
come out of her own chamber to meet him as she was wont. 
And her handmaids said to him: She is not well. And he entered 
quickly into the chamber and found her lying on the bed and 
veiled: and he unveiled her and kissed her, saying: Wherefore 
art thou sorrowful to-day? And she said: I am not well. And 
he said unto her: Wherefore then didst thou not keep the guise 
of thy freedom (Syr. pay proper respect to thy position as a free 
woman) and remain in thy house, but didst go and listen unto 
vain speeches and look upon works of sorcery? but rise up and 
dine with me, for I cannot dine without thee. But she said to 
him: To-day I decline it, for I am greatly afeared. 

90 And when Charisius heard this of Mygdonia, he would not 
go forth to dinner, but bade his servants bring her to dine with 
him (Syr. bring food to him that he might sup in her presence): 
when then they brought it in, he desired her to dine with him, 
but she excused herself; since then she would not, he dined alone, 
saying unto her: On thine account I refused to dine with Misdaeus 
the king, and thou, wast thou not willing to dine with me? but she 
said: It is because I am not well. Charisius therefore rose up 
as he was wont and would sleep with her, but she said: Did 
I not tell thee that for to-day I refused it? 


ACTS OF THOMAS 405 


91 When he heard that he went to another bed and slept; and 
awaking out of sleep he said: My lady Mygdonia, hearken to 
the dream which I have seen. I saw myself lie at meat near to 
Misdaeus the king, and a dish of all sorts was set before us: and 
I saw an eagle come down from heaven and carry off from before 
me and the king two partridges, which he set against his heart; 
and again he came over us and flew about above us; and the 
king bade a bow to be brought to him; and the eagle again caught 
away from before us a pigeon and a dove, and the king shot an 
arrow at him, and it passed through him from one side to the 
other and hurt him not; and he being unscathed rose up into 
his own nest. And I awoke, and I am full of fear and sore vexed, 
because I had tasted of the partridge, and he suffered me not to 
put it to my mouth again. And Mygdonia said unto him: Thy 
dream is good: for thou every day eatest partridges, but this 
eagle had not tasted of a partridge until now. 

92 And when it was morning Charisius went and dressed 
himself and shod his right foot with his left shoe ; and he stopped, 
and said to Mygdonia: What then is this matter? for look, the 
dream and this action of mine! But Mygdonia said to him: And 
this also is not evil, but seemeth to me very good; for from an 
unlucky act there will be a change unto the better. And he 
washed his hands and went to salute Misdaeus the king. 

93 And likewise Mygdonia rose up early and went to salute 
Judas Thomas the apostle, and she found him discoursing with 
the captain and all the multitude, and he was advising them 
and speaking of the woman which had received the Lord in her 
soul, whose wife she was; and the captain said: She is the 
wife of Charisius the kinsman of Misdaeus the king. And: Her 
husband is a hard man, and in every thing that he saith to the 
king he obeyeth him: and he will not suffer her to continue in 
this mind which she hath promised; for often-times hath he 
praised her before the king, saying that there is none other like 
her in love: all things therefore that thou speakest unto her are 
strange unto her. And the apostle said: If verily and surely 
the Lord hath risen upon her soul and she hath received the seed 
that was cast on her, she will have no care of this temporal life, 
nor fear death, neither will Charisius be able to harm her at all: 
for greater is he whom she hath received into her soul, if she have 
received him indeed. 

94 And Mygdonia hearing this said unto the apostle: In 
truth, my lord, I have received the seed of thy words, and I will 
bear fruit like unto such seed. The apostle saith: Our souls give 
praise and thanks unto thee, O Lord, for they are thine: our 
bodies give thanks unto thee, which thou hast accounted worthy 
to become the dwelling-place of thy heavenly gift. And he said 
also to them that stood by: Blessed are the holy, whose souls 
have never condemned them, for they have gained them and are 


406 ACTS OF THOMAS 


not divided against themselves: blessed are the spirits of the 
pure, and they that have received the heavenly crown whole 
from the world (age) which hath been appointed them: blessed 
are the bodies of the holy, for they have been made worthy to 
become temples of God, that Christ may dwell in them: blessed 
are ye, for ye have power to forgive sins: blessed are ye if ye 
lose not that which is committed unto you, but rejoicing and 
departing bear it away with you: blessed are ye the holy, for 
unto you it is given to ask and receive: blessed are ye meek, 
for you hath God counted worthy to become heirs of the heavenly 
kingdom. Blessed are ye meek, for ye are they that have over- 
come the enemy: blessed are ye meek, for ye shall see the face 
of the Lord. Blessed are ye that hunger for the Lord’s sake, 
for for you is rest laid up, and your souls rejoice from henceforth. 
Blessed are ye that are quiet, (for ye have been counted worthy) 
to be set free from sin [and from the exchange of clean and 
unclean beasts]. And when the apostle had said these things 
in the hearing of all the multitude, Mygdonia was the more 
confirmed in the faith and glory and greatness of Christ. 

95 But Charisius the kinsman and friend of Misdaeus the king 
came to his breakfast and found not his wife in the house; and 
he inquired of all that were in his house: Whither is your mistress 
gone? And one of them answered and said: She is gone unto 
that stranger. And when he heard this of his servant, he was 
wroth with the other servants because they had not straightway 
told him what was done: and he sat down and waited for her. 
And when it was evening and she was come into the house he 
said to her: Where wast thou? And she answered and said: 
With the physician. And he said: Is that stranger a physician ? 
And she said: Yea, he is a physician of souls: for most physicians 
do heal bodies that are dissolved, but he souls that are not 
destroyed. Charisius, hearing this, was very angry in his mind 
with Mygdonia because of the apostle, but he answered her 
nothing, for he was afraid; for she was above him both in wealth 
and birth: but he departed to dinner, and she went into her 
chamber. And he said to the servants: Call her to dinner. 
But she would not come. 

96 And when he heard that she would not come out of her 
chamber, he went in and said unto her: Wherefore wilt thou not 
dine with me and perchance not sleep with me as the wont is? 
yea, concerning this I have the greater suspicion, for I have 
heard that that sorcerer and deceiver teacheth that a man should 
not live with his wife, and that which nature requireth and the 
godhead hath ordained he overthroweth. When Charisius said 
these things, Mygdonia kept silence. He saith to her again: 
My lady and consort Mygdonia, be not led astray by deceitful 
and vain words, nor by the works of sorcery which I have heard 
that this man performeth in the name of Father, Son, and Holy 


ACTS OF THOMAS 407 


Ghost; for it was never yet heard in the world that any raised 
the dead, and, as I hear, it is reported of this man that he raiseth 
dead men. And for that he neither eateth nor drinketh, think 
not that for righteousness’ sake he neither eateth nor drinketh, 
but this he doth because he possesseth nought; for what should 
he do which hath not even his daily bread? And he hath one 
garment because he is poor; and as for his not receiving aught 
of any (he doth so, to be sure, because he knoweth in himself 
that he doth not verily heal any man, Syr.). 

97 And when Charisius so said, Mygdonia was silent as any 
stone; but she prayed, asking when it should be day, that she 
might go to the apostle of Christ. And he withdrew from her 
and went to dinner heavy in mind, for he thought to sleep with 
her according to the wont. And when he was gone out, she 
bowed her knees and prayed, saying: Lord God and Master, 
merciful Father, Saviour Christ, do thou give me strength to 
overcome the shamelessness of Charisius, and grant me to keep 
the holiness wherein thou delightest, that I also may by it find 
eternal life. And when she had so prayed she laid herself on her 
bed and veiled herself. 

98 But Charisius having dined came upon her, and she cried 
out, saying: Thou hast no more any room by me: for my Lord 
Jesus is greater than thou, who is with me and resteth in me. 
And he laughed and said: Well dost thou mock, saying this of 
that sorcerer, and well dost thou deride him, who saith : Ye have 
no life with God unless ye purify yourselves. And when he had 
so said he essayed to sleep with her, but she endured it not and 
cried out bitterly and said: I call upon thee, Lord Jesu, forsake 
me not! for with thee have I made my refuge; for when I learned 
that thou art he that seekest out them that are veiled in ignorance, 
and savest them that are held in error And now I entreat thee 
whose report I have heard and believed, come thou to my help, 
and save me from the shamelessness of Charisius, that his foulness 
may not get the upper hand of me. And she smote her hands 
together (tied his hands, Syr.) and fled from him naked, and as 
she went forth she pulled down the curtain of the bed-chamber 
and wrapped it about her; and went to her nurse, and slept there 
with her. 

99 But Charisius was in heaviness all night, and smote his 
face with his hands, and he was minded to go that very hour 
and tell the king concerning the violence that was done him, 
but he considered with himself, saying: If the great heaviness 
which is upon me compelleth me to go now unto the king, who 
will bring me in to him? for I know that my abuse hath over- 
thrown me from my high looks and my vainglory and majesty, 
and hath cast me down into this vileness and separated my 
sister Mygdonia from me. Yea, if the king himself stood before 
the doors at this hour, I could not have gone out and answered 


408 ACTS OF THOMAS 


him. But I will wait until dawn; and I know that whatsoever 
I ask of the king, he granteth it me: and I will tell him of the 
madness of this stranger, how that it tyrannously casteth down 
the great and illustrious into the depth. For it is not this that 
grieveth me, that I am deprived of her companying, but for her 
am I grieved, because her greatness of soul is humbled: being 
an honourable lady in whom none of her house ever found fault 
(condemned), she hath fled away naked, running out of her own 
bedchamber; and I know not whither she is gone; and it may 
be that she is gone mad by the means of that sorcerer, and in 
her madness hath gone forth into the market-place to seek him; 
for there is nothing that appeareth unto her lovable except him 
and the things that are spoken by him. 

100 And so saying he began to lament and say: Woe to me, 
O my consort, and to thee besides! for I am too quickly bereaved 
of thee. Woe is me, my most dear one, for thou excellest all 
my race: neither son nor daughter have I had of thee that 
I might find rest in them; neither hast thou yet dwelt with me 
a full year, and an evil eye hath caught thee from me. Would 
that the violence of death had taken thee, and I should yet have 
reckoned myself among kings and nobles: but that I should 
suffer this at the hands of a stranger, and belike he is a slave that 
hath run away, to mine ill fortune and the sorrow of mine unhappy 
soul! Let there be no impediment for me until I destroy him 
and avenge this night; and may I not be well-pleasing before 
Misdaeus the king if he avenge me not with the head of this 
stranger; (and I will also tell him) of Siphor the captain who 
hath been the occasion of this. For by his means did the stranger 
appear here, and lodgeth at his house: and many there be that 
go in and come out, whom he teacheth a new doctrine; saying 
that none can live if he quit not all his substance and become 
a renouncer like himself: and he striveth to make many 
partakers with him. 

101 And as Charisius thought on these things, the day dawned; 
and after the night (?) he put on a mean habit, and shod himself, 
and went downcast and in heaviness to salute the king. And 
when the king saw him he said: Wherefore art thou sorrowful, 
and comest in such garb? and I see that thy countenance is 
changed. And Charisius said unto the king: I have a new thing 
to tell thee and a new desolation which Siphor hath brought into 
India, even a certain Hebrew, a sorcerer, whom he hath sitting 
in his house and who departeth not from him: and many are 
there that go in to him: whom also he teacheth of a new God, 
and layeth on them new laws such as never yet were heard, saying: 
It is impossible for you to enter into that eternal life which 
I proclaim unto you, unless ye rid you of your wives, and likewise 
the wives of their husbands. And it chanced that mine unlucky 
wife also went to him and became a hearer of his words, and she 


ACTS OF THOMAS 409 


believed them, and in the night she forsook me and ran unto the 
stranger. But send thou for both Siphor and that sorcerer that 
is hid with (in) him, and visit it (?) on their head, lest all that 
are of our nation perish. 

102 And when Misdaeus his friend heard this he saith to him: 
Be not grieved nor heavy, for I will send for him and avenge 
thee, and thou shalt have thy wife again, and the others that 
cannot I will avenge. And the king went forth and sat on the 
judgement seat, and when he was set he commanded Siphor 
the captain to be called. They went therefore unto his house 
and found him sitting on the right hand of the apostle and 
Mygdonia at his feet, hearkening to him with all the multitude. 
And they that were sent from the king said unto Siphor: Sittest 
thou here listening to vain words, and Misdaeus the king in his 
wrath thinketh to destroy thee because of this sorcerer and 
deceiver whom thou hast brought into thine house? And Siphor 
hearing it was cast down, not because of the king’s threat against 
him, but for the apostle, because the king was disposed contrary 
to him. And he said to the apostle: I am grieved concerning 
thee: for I told thee at the first that that woman is the wife of 
Charisius the king’s friend and kinsman, and he will not suffer 
her to perform that she hath promised, and all that he asketh 
of the king he granteth him. But the apostle said unto Siphor: 
Fear nothing, but believe in Jesus that pleadeth for us all, for 
unto his refuge are we gathered together. And Siphor, hearing 
that, put his garment about him and went unto Misdaeus the king, 

103 And the apostle inquired of Mygdonia: What was the 
cause that thy husband was wroth with thee and devised this 
against us? And she said: Because I gave not myself up unto 
his corruption (destruction): for he desired last night to subdue 
me and subject me unto that passion which he serveth: and he 
to whom I have committed my soul delivered me out of his 
hands; and I fled away from him naked, and slept with my 
nurse: but that which befell him I know not, wherefore he hath 
contrived this. The apostle saith: These things will not hurt 
us; but believe thou on Jesus, and he shall overthrow the wrath 
of Charisius and his madness and his impulse; and he shall be 
a companion unto thee in the fearful way, and he shall guide 
thee into his kingdom, and shall bring thee unto eternal life, 
giving thee that confidence which passeth not away nor changeth. 

104 Now Siphor stood before the king, and he inquired of 
him: Who is that sorcerer and whence, and what teacheth he, 
whom thou hast lurking in thine house? And Siphor answered 
the king: Thou art not ignorant, O king, what trouble and 
grief I, with my friends, had concerning my wife, whom thou 
knowest and many others remember, and concerning my 
daughter, whom I value more than all my possessions, what 
a time and trial I suffered; for I became a laughing-stock and 


410 ACTS OF THOMAS 


a curse in all our country. And I heard the report of this man, 
and went to him and entreated him, and took him and brought 
him hither. And as I came by the way I saw wonderful and 
amazing things: and here also many did hear the wild ass, 
and concerning that devil whom he drove out, and healed my 
wife and daughter, and now are they whole; and he asked no 
reward but requireth faith and holiness, that men should become 
partakers with him in that which he doeth: and this he teacheth, 
to worship and fear one God, the ruler of all things, and Jesus 
Christ his Son, that they may have eternal life. And that which 
he eateth is bread and salt, and his drink is water from evening 
unto evening, and he maketh many prayers; and whatsoever 
he asketh of his God, he giveth him. And he teacheth that 
this God is holy and mighty, and that Christ is living and maketh 
alive, wherefore also he chargeth them that are there present to 
come unto him in holiness and purity and love and faith. 

105 And when Misdaeus the king heard these things of Siphor, 
he sent many soldiers unto the house of Siphor the captain, to 
bring Thomas the apostle and all that were found there. And 
they that were sent entered in and found him teaching much 
people; and Mygdonia sat at his feet. And when they beheld 
the great multitude that were about him, they feared, and 
departed to their king and said: We durst not say aught unto 
him, for there was a great multitude about him, and Mygdonia 
sitting at his feet was listening to the things that were spoken 
by him. And when Misdaeus the king and Charisius heard these 
things, Charisius leaped out from before the king and drew much 
people with him and said: I will bring him, O king, and Mygdonia 
whose understanding he hath taken away. And he came to the 
house of Siphor the captain, greatly disturbed, and found him 
(Thomas) teaching: but Mygdonia he found not, for she had 
withdrawn herself unto her house, having learnt that it had been 
told her husband that she was there. 

106 And Charisius said unto the apostle: Up, thou wicked 
one and destroyer and enemy of mine house: for me thy sorcery 
harmeth not, for I will visit thy sorcery on thine head. And when 
he so said, the apostle looked upon him and said unto him: 
Thy threatenings shall return upon thee, for me thou wilt not 
harm any whit: for greater than thee and thy king and all your 
army is the Lord Jesus Christ in whom I have my trust. And 
Charisius took a kerchief (turban, Syr.) of one of his slaves and 
cast it about the neck of the apostle, saying: Hale him and bring 
him away; let me see if his God is able to deliver him out of my 
hands. And they haled him and led him away to Misdaeus 
the king. And the apostle stood before the king, and the king 
said to him: Tell me who thou art and by what power thou 
doest these things. But the apostle kept silence. And the king 
commanded his officers (subjects) that he should be scourged 


ACTS OF THOMAS 411 


with an hundred and twenty-eight (hundred and fifty, Syr.) 
blows, and bound, and be cast into the prison; and they bound 
him and led him away. And the king and Charisius considered 
how they should put him to death, for the multitude worshipped 
him as God. And they had it in mind to say: The stranger hath 
reviled the king and is a deceiver. 

107 But the apostle went unto the prison rejoicing and 
exulting, and said: I praise thee, Jesu, for that thou hast not 
only made me worthy of faith in thee, but also to endure much 
for thy sake. I give thee thanks therefore, Lord, that thou hast 
taken thought for me and given me patience: I thank thee, 
Lord, that for thy sake I am called a sorcerer and a wizard. 
Receive thou me therefore with the blessing (Syr. let me receive of 
the blessing) of the poor, and of the rest of the weary, and of the 
blessings of them whom men hate and persecute and revile, and 
speak evil words of them. For lo, for thy sake I am hated: lo, 
for thy sake I am cut off from the many, and for thy sake they 
call me such an one as I am not. 

108 And as he prayed, all the prisoners looked on him, and 
besought him to pray for them: and when he had prayed and 
was set down, he began to utter a psalm in this wise: 


{Here follows the Hymn of the Soul: a most remarkable 
composition, originally Syriac, and certainly older than the 
Acts, with which it has no real connexion. We have it in Greek 
in one manuscript, the Vallicellian, and in a paraphrase by Nicetas 
of Thessalonica, found and edited by Bonnet.] 


1 When I was an infant child 

in the palace of my Father, 

and resting in the wealth and luxury of my nurturers, 

out of the East, our native country, my parents provisioned 
me and sent me. 

And of the wealth of those their treasures they put together 
a load, 

both great and light, that I might carry it alone. 

Gold is the load, of them that are above (or of the land of the 
Ellaeans or Gilaeans), 

and silver of the great treasures (or of Gazzak the great), | 

7 and stones, chalcedonies from the Indians, 
and pearls from <the land of) the Kosani (Kushan). 

8 And they armed me with adamant <which breaketh iron), 

9 and they took off from me (Gr. put on me) the garment set 
with gems, spangled with gold, which they had made for 
me because they loved me, 

10 and the robe that was yellow in hue, made for my stature. | 
11 And they made a covenant with me, and inscribed it on mine 
understanding, that I should <not)> forget it, and said: 

12 Ifthou go down into Egypt, and bring back thence the one pearl 


aon FP wh 


412 ACTS OF THOMAS 


18 which is there <in the midst of the sea) girt about by the 
devouring serpent, 

14 thou shalt put on <again>) the garment set with gems, and 
that robe whereupon it resteth (or which is thereon), 

15 and become with thy brother that is next unto us (Gr. of the 
well-remembered) an heir (Gr. herald) in our kingdom. 

109. 16 And I came out of the East by a road difficult and 
fearful, with two guides, 

17 and I was untried in travelling by it. 

18 And I passed by the borders of the Mosani (Maishan) where 
is the resort of the merchants of the East, 

19 and reached the land of the Babylonians <and came unto the 
walls of Sarbug>. 

20 But when I entered into Egypt, the guides left me which 
had journeyed with me. 

21 And I set forth by the quickest way to the serpent, and by 
his hole I abode, 

22 watching for him to slumber and sleep, that I might take 
my pearl from him. 

23 And forasmuch as I was alone I made mine aspect strange, 
and appeared as an alien to my people. 

24 And there I saw my kinsman from the East, the free-born 

25 a lad i grace and beauty, a son of princes (or an anointed 
one). 

26 He came unto me and dwelt with me, 

27 and I had him for a companion, and made him my friend and 
partaker in my journey (or merchandise). 

28 And I charged him to beware of the Egyptians, and of par- 
taking of those unclean things (or consorting with those 
unclean men). 

29 And I put on their raiment, lest I should seem strange, as one 
that had come from without 

30 to recover the pearl; and lest the Egyptians should awake 
the serpent against me. 

31 But, I know not by what occasion, they learned that I was 
not of their country. 

82 And with guile they mingled for me a deceit, and I tasted of 
their food. 

33 And I knew no more that I was a king’s son, and I became 
a servant unto their king. 

84 And I forgat also the pearl for which my fathers had sent me, 

85 ad by means of the heaviness of their food I fell into a deep 
sleep. 

110. 86 But when this befell me, my fathers also were ware of 
it, and grieved for me, 

87 and a proclamation was published in our kingdom, that all 
should meet at our doors. 

88 And then the kings of Parthia and they that bare office and 
the great ones of the East 


39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 


48 


ACTS OF THOMAS 413 


made a resolve concerning me, that I should not be left in 
Egypt, _ 

and the princes wrote unto me signifying thus (and every 
noble signed his name to it, Syr.): 

From the (thy) Father the King of kings, and thy mother that 
ruleth the East, 

and thy brother that is second unto us; unto our son that is 
in Egypt, peace. 

Rise up and awake out of sleep, and hearken unto the words 
of the letter, 

and remember that thou art a son of kings; lo, thou hast 
come under the yoke of bondage. 

Remember the pearl for the which thou wast sent into Egypt 
(Gr. puts this after 46). 

Remember thy garment spangled with gold, 

<and the glorious mantle which thou shouldest wear and 
wherewith thou shouldest deck thyself.> 

Thy name is named in the book of life, 

and with thy brother }whom thou hast received} <thou shalt 
be> in our kingdom. 


111. 49 <And my letter was a letter) 


50 


and the King [as ambassador] sealed it <with his right 
hand» 

because of the evil ones, even the children of the Babylonians 
and the tyrannous demons of Labyrinthus (Sarbug, Syr.). 

<It flew like the eagle, the king of all fowls. 

It flew and lighted down by me, and became all speech.» 

And I at the voice of it and the feeling of it started up out 
of sleep, 

and I took it up and kissed it <and brake the seal) and read it. 

And it was written concerning that which was recorded in 
mine heart. 

And I remembered forthwith that I was a son of kings, and 
my freedom yearned (sought) after its kind. 

I remembered also the pearl for the which I was sent down 
into Egypt, 

and I began (or came) with charms against the terrible serpent, 

and I overcame him (or put him to sleep) by naming the name 
of my Father upon him, 

<and the name of our second in rank, and of my mother the 
queen of the East). . 

And I caught away the pearl and turned back to bear it unto 
my fathers. r 

And I stripped off the filthy garment and left it in their land, 

and directed my way forthwith to the light of my fatherland 
in the Kast. 

And on the way I found my letter that had awakened me, 

and it, like as it had taken a voice and raised me when I slept, 
so also guided me with the light that came from it. 


414 ACTS OF THOMAS 


66 For at times the royal garment of silk <shone> before mine eyes, 

67 <and with its voice and its guidance it also encouraged me 
to speed,» 

68 and with love leading me and drawing me onward, 

69 I passed by Labyrinthus (Sarbug), and I left Babylon upon 
my left hand, 

70 and I came unto Meson (Meséné; Maishan) the great, 71 that 
lieth on the shore of the sea, 

72 <and my bright robe which I had taken off, and the mantle 
wherewith I had been clad, 

73 from the heights of Warkan (Hyrcania?) had my parents sent 
thither 

74 by the hand of their treasurers, unto whom they committed it 
because of their faithfulness). 

112. 75 But I remembered not the brightness of it; for I was yet 
a child and very young when I had left it in the palace of 
my Father, 

76 but suddenly, [when] I saw the garment made like unto me 
as it had been in a mirror. 

77 And I beheld upon it all myself (or saw it wholly in myself), 
and I knew and saw myself through it, 

78 that we were divided asunder, being of one; and again were 
one in one shape. 

79 Yea, the treasurers also which brought me the garment 

80 I beheld, that they were two, yet one shape was upon both, 
one royal sign was set upon both of them. 

81 The money and the wealth had they in their hands, and paid 
me the due price, 

82 and the lovely garment, which was variegated with bright 
colours, 

83 with gold and precious stones and pearls of comely hue 

84 they were fastened above (or in the height), 

85 <and with stones of adamant were all its seams fastened). 

86 And the likeness of the King of kings was all in all of it. 

87 Sapphire stones were fitly set in it above (or, like the sapphire 
stone also were its manifold hues). 

118. 88 And again I saw that throughout it motions of knowledge 
were being sent forth, 

89 and it was ready to utter speech. 

90 And I heard it speak <with them that had brought it): 

91 I am of him that is more valiant than all men, for whose 
sake I was reared up with the Father himself. 

92 And I also perceived his stature (so Gr.; Syr. I perceived 
in myself that my stature grew in accordance with his 
working). 

93 tAnd all its royal motions rested upon me as it grew toward 
the impulse of itt (And with its kingly motions it was 
spreading itself toward me). 


ACTS OF THOMAS 415 


94 And it hastened, reaching out from the hand of <him that 
brought it> unto him that would receive it, 

95 and me also did yearning arouse to start forth and meet it 
and receive it. 

96 And I stretched forth and received it, and adorned myself 
with the beauty of the colours thereof (mostly Syr.; Gr. 
corrupt), 

97 and in my royal robe excelling in beauty I arrayed myself 
wholly. 

98 And when I had put it on, I was lifted up unto the place of 
peace (salutation) and homage, 

99 and I bowed my head and worshipped the brightness of the 
Father which had sent it unto me, 

100 for I had performed his commandments, and he likewise 
that which he had promised, 

101 and at the doors of his palace which was from the beginning 
I mingled among <his nobles), 

102 and he rejoiced over me and received me with him into his 
palace, 

108 and all his servants do praise him with sweet voices. 

104 And he promised me that with him I shall be sent unto the 
gates of the king, 

105 that with my gifts and my pearl we may appear together 
before the king. 


{Immediately on this, in the Syriac, follows a Song of Praise 
of Thomas the apostle consisting of forty-two ascriptions of 
praise and four final clauses (Wright, pp. 245-51). It has no 
bearing on the Acts, and is not in itself so remarkable as to need 
to be inserted here.] 


114 And Charisius went home glad, thinking that his wife 
would be with him, and that she had become such as she was 
before, even before she heard the divine word and believed on 
Jesus. And he went, and found her with her hair dishevelled and 
her clothes rent, and when he saw it he said unto her: My lady 
Mygdonia, why doth this cruel disease keep hold on thee? and 
wherefore hast thou done this? I am thine husband from thy 
virginity, and both the gods and the law grant me to have rule 
over thee; what is this great madness of thine, that thou art 
become a derision in all our nation? but put thou away the 
care that cometh of that sorcerer; and I will remove his face 
from among us, that thou mayest see him no more. 

115 But Mygdonia when she heard that gave herself up unto 
grief, groaning and lamenting: and Charisius said again: Have 
{I then so much wronged the gods that they have afflicted me 
with such a disease? what is my great offence that they have 
cast me into such humiliation? I beseech thee, Mygdonia, 
strangle my soul no more with the pitiful sight of thee and thy 


416 ACTS OF THOMAS 


mean appearance, and afflict not mine heart with care for thee. 
I am Charisius thine husband, whom all the nation honoureth 
and feareth. What mustI do? I knownot whither toturn. What 
am I to think? shall I keep silence and endure? yet who can 
be patient when men take his treasure? and who can endure 
to lose thy sweet ways? and what is there for me? (Syr. thy 
beauties which are ever before me) the fragrance of thee is in my 
nostrils, and thy bright face is fixed in mine eyes. They are 
taking away my soul, and the fair body which I rejoiced to see 
they are destroying, and that sharpest of eyes they are blinding, 
and cutting off my right hand: my joy is turning to grief and 
my life to death, and the light of it is being dyed (?) with darkness. 
Let no man of you my kindred henceforth look on me—from you 
no help hath come to me, nor will I hereafter worship the gods of 
the east that have enwrapped me in such calamities, nor pray to 
them any more nor sacrifice to them, for I am bereaved of my 
spouse. And what else should I ask of them? for all my glory 
is taken away, yet am I a prince and next unto the king in power; 
but Mygdonia hath set me at nought, and taken away all these 
things. (Would that some one would blind one of my eyes, and 
that thine eyes would look upon me as they were wont, Syr., 
which has more clauses, to the same effect.) 

116 And while Charisius spake thus with tears, Mygdonia sat 
silent and looking upon the ground; and again he came unto her 
and said: My lady Mygdonia, most desired of me, remember 
that out of all the women that are in India I chose and took 
thee as the most beautiful, though I might have joined to myself 
in marriage many more beautiful: but yet I lie, Mygdonia, for 
by the gods it would not have been possible to find another like 
thee in the land of India; but woe is me alway, for thou wilt not 
even answer me a word: but if thou wilt, revile me, so that I may 
only be vouchsafed a word from thee. Look at me, for I am more 
comely than that sorcerer: but thou art my wealth and honour: 
and all men know that there is none like me: and thou art my 
race and kindred—and lo, he taketh thee away from me. 

117 And when Charisius had so said, Mygdonia saith unto 
him: He whom I love is better than thee and thy substance: 
for thy substance is of earth and returneth unto the earth; but 
he whom I love is of heaven and will take me with him unto 
heaven. Thy wealth shall pass away, and thy beauty shall 
vanish, and thy robes, and thy many works: and thou shalt be 
alone, naked, with thy transgressions. Call not to my remem- 
brance thy deeds (unto me), for I pray the Lord that I may 
forget thee, so as to remember no more those former pleasures 
and the custom of the body; which shall pass away as a shadow, 
but Jesus only endureth for ever, and the souls which hope in 
him. Jesus himself shall quit me of the shameful deeds which 
I did with thee. And when Charisius heard this, he turned him 


ACTS OF THOMAS 417 


to sleep, vexed (dissolved) in soul, saying to her: Consider it by 
thyself all this night: and if thou wilt be with me such as thou 
wast before, and not see that sorcerer, I will do all according to 
thy mind, and if thou wilt remove thine affection from him, 
I will take him out of the prison and let him go and remove into 
another country, and I will not vex thee, for I know that thou 
makest much of the stranger. And not with thee first did this 
matter come about, for many other women also hath he deceived 
with thee; and they have awaked sober and returned to them- 
selves: do not thou then make nought of my words and cause 
me to be a reproach among the Indians. 

118 And Charisius having thus spoken went to sleep: but 
she took ten denarii (20 zuzé, Syr.), and went secretly to give 
them to the gaolers that she might enter in to the apostle. But 
on the way Judas Thomas came and met her, and she saw him 
and was afraid, for she thought that he was one of the rulers: 
for a great light went before him. And she said to herself as she 
fled: I have lost thee, O my unhappy soul! for thou wilt not again 
see Judas the apostle of <Jesus> the living <God), and not yet 
hast thou received the holy seal. And she fled and ran into 
a narrow place, and there hid herself, saying: I would rather 
choose to be killed (taken) by the poorer, whom it is possible to 
persuade, than to fall into the hand of this mighty ruler, who 
will despise gifts. 


The Tenih Act: wherein Mygdonia receiveth baptism. 


119 And while Mygdonia thought thus with herself, Judas 
came and stood over her, and she saw him and was afraid, and 
fell down and became lifeless with terror. But he stood by her 
and took her by the hand and said unto her: Fear not, Mygdonia: 
Jesus will not leave thee, neither will the Lord unto whom thou 
hast committed thy soul overlook thee. His compassionate rest 
will not forsake thee: he that is kind will not forsake thee, for 
his kindness’ sake, nor he that is good for his goodness’ sake. 
Rise up then from the earth, thou that art become wholly above 
it: look on the light, for the Lord leaveth not them that love 
him to walk in darkness: behold him that travelleth with his 
servants, that he is unto them a defender in perils. And Mygdonia 
arose and looked on him and said: Whither wentest thou, my 
lord? and who is he that brought thee out of prison to behold 
the sun? Judas Thomas saith unto her: My Lord Jesus is 
mightier than all powers and all kings and rulers. ; 

120 And Mygdonia said: Give me the seal of Jesus Christ and 
I shall (let me) receive the gift at thy hands before thou departest 
out of life. And she took him with her and entered into the 
court and awaked her nurse, saying unto her: Narcia (Gr. Marcia), 
my mother and nurse, all thy service and refreshment thou hast 
done for me from my childhood until my present age are vain, 


870 Ee 


418 ACTS OF THOMAS 


and for them I owe thee thanks which are temporal; do for me 
now also a favour, that thou mayest for ever receive a recompense 
from him that giveth great gifts. And Narcia in answer saith: 
What wilt thou, my daughter Mygdonia, and what is to be done 
for thy pleasure? for the honours which thou didst promise me 
before, the stranger hath not suffered thee to accomplish, and 
thou hast made me a reproach among all the nation. And now 
what is this new thing that thou commandest me? And Mygdonia 
saith: Become thou partaker with me in eternal life, that I may 
receive of thee perfect nurture: take bread and bring it me, and 
wine mingled with water, and spare my freedom (take pity on 
me a free-born woman, Syr.). And the nurse said: I will bring 
thee many loaves, and for water flagons of wine, and fulfil 
thy desire. But she saith to the nurse: Flagons I desire not, nor 
the many loaves: but this only, bring wine mingled with water, 
and one loaf, and oil <even if it be in a lamp, Syr.>. 

121 And when Narcia had brought these things, Mygdonia 
stood before the apostle with her head bare; and he took the oil 
and poured it on her head, saying: Thou holy oil given unto us 
for sanctification, secret mystery whereby the cross was shown 
unto us, thou art the straightener of the crooked limbs, thou art 
the humbler (softener) of hard things (works), thou art it that 
showeth the hidden treasures, thou art the sprout of goodness ; 
let thy power coine, let it be established upon thy servant 
Myedonia; and heal thou her by this freedom. And when the 
oil was poured upon her he bade her nurse unclothe her and gird 
a linen cloth about her; and there was there a fountain of water 
upon which the apostle went up, and baptized Mygdonia in the 
name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost. And when 
she was baptized and clad, he brake bread and took a cup of 
water and made her a partaker in the body of Christ and the cup 
of the Son of God, and said: Thou hast received thy seal, get for 
thyself eternal life. And immediately there was heard from above 
a voice saying: Yea, amen. And when Narcia heard that voice, 
she was amazed, and besought the apostle that she also might 
receive the seal; and the apostle gave it her and said: Let the 
care of the Lord be about thee as about the rest. 

122 And having done these things the apostle returned unto 
the prison, and found the doors open and the guards still sleeping. 
And Thomas said: Who is like thee, O God? who withholdest 
not thy loving affection and care from any who is like thee, the 
merciful, who hast delivered thy creatures out of evil. Life that 
hath subdued death, rest that hath ended toil. Glory be to the 
only-begotten of the Father. Glory to the compassionate that 
was sent forth of his heart. And when he had said thus, the 
guards waked and beheld all the doors open, and the prisoners 
<+ asleep, Syr.>, and said in themselves: Did not we fasten the 
doors? and how are they now open, and the prisoners within ? 


ACTS OF THOMAS 419 


123 But at the dawn Charisius went unto Mygdonia <and her 
nurse, Syr.>, and found them praying and saying: O new God 
that by the stranger hast come hither unto us, hidden God of the 
dwellers in India (Syr. who art hidden from); God that hast 
shown thy glory by thine apostle Thomas, God whose report we 
have heard and believed on thee; God, unto whom we are come 
to be saved; God, who for love of man and for pity didst come 
down unto our littleness; God who didst seek us out when we 
knew him (thee) not; God that dwellest in the heights and from 
whom the depths are not hid: turn thou away from us the 
madness of Charisius. And Charisius hearing that said to 
Mygdonia: Rightly callest thou me evil and mad and foul! 
for if I had not borne with thy disobedience, and given thee 
liberty, thou wouldest not have called on God against me and 
made mention of my name before God. But believe me, Mygdonia, 
that in that sorcerer there is no profit, and what he promiseth to 
perform he cannot: but I will perform before thy sight all that 
I promise, that thou mayest believe, and bear with my words, 
and be to me as thou wast beforetime. 

124 And he came near and besought her again, saying: If 
thou wilt be persuaded of me, I shall henceforth have no grief ; 
remember that day when thou didst meet me first; tell the 
truth: was I more beautiful unto thee at that time, or Jesus at 
this? And Mygdonia said: That time required its own, and this 
time also; that was the time of the beginning, but this of the 
end; that was the time of temporal life, this of eternal; that, 
of pleasure that passeth away, but this of pleasure that abideth 
for ever; that, of day and night, this of day without night. 
Thou sawest that marriage ; that was passing, and here, and single, 
but this marriage continueth for ever; that was a partnership 
of corruption, but this of eternal life; those groomsmen (and 
maids) were men and women of time, but these abide unto the 
end. 7;That marriage upon earthy} setteth up fdropping dew of 
the love of ment (Syr. That union was founded upon the earth 
where there is an unceasing press: this is founded upon the 
bridge of fire upon which is sprinkled grace : both corrupt) ; that 
bride-chamber is taken down again, but this remaineth always ; 
that bed was strown with coverlets (that grow old), but this with 
love and faith. Thou art a bridegroom that passest away and 
art dissolved (changed), but Jesus is a true bridegroom, enduring 
for ever immortal; that dowry was of money and robes that 
grow old, but this is of living words which never pass away. 

125 And when Charisius heard these things he went unto the 
king and told him all: and the king commanded Judas to be 
brought, that he might judge him and destroy him. But Charisius 
said: Have patience a little, O king, and first persuade the man, 
making him afraid, that he may persuade Mygdonia to be unto 
me as formerly. And Misdaeus sent and fetched the apostle of 


420 ACTS OF THOMAS 


Christ, and all the prisoners were grieved because the apostle 
departed from them, for they yearned after him, saying: Even 
the comfort which we had have they taken away from us. 

126 And Misdaeus said unto Judas: Wherefore teachest thou 
this new doctrine, which both gods and men hate, and which 
hath nought of profit? And Judas said: What evil do I teach? 
And Misdaeus said: Thou teachest, saying that men <cannot 
live well except they live chastely> with the God whom thou 
preachest. Judas saith: Thou sayest true, O king: thus do 
I teach. For tell me, art thou not wroth with thy soldiers if they 
wait on thee in filthy garments? if then thou, being a king of 
earth and returning unto earth, requirest thy subjects to be 
reverend in their doings, are ye wroth and said ye that I teach 
ill when I say that they who serve my king must be reverend 
and pure and free from all grief and care, of children and un- 
profitable riches and vain trouble? For indeed thou wouldest 
have thy subjects follow thy conversation and thy manners, and 
thou punishest them if they despise thy commandments: how 
much more must they that believe on him serve my God with 
much reverence and cleanness and security, and be quit of all 
pleasures of the body, adultery and prodigality and theft and 
drunkenness and belly-service and foul deeds ? 

127 And Misdaeus hearing these things said: Lo, I let thee go: 
go then and persuade Mygdonia, the wife of Charisius, not to 
desire to depart from him. Judas saith unto him: Delay not 
if thou hast aught to do: for her, if she hath rightly received 
what she hath learned, neither iron nor fire nor aught else 
stronger than these will avail to hurt or to root out him that is 
held in her soul. Misdaeus saith unto Judas: Some poisons do 
dissolve other poisons, and a theriac cureth the bites of the viper; 
and thou if thou wilt canst give a solvent of those diseases, and 
make peace and concord betwixt this couple: for by so doing 
thou wilt spare thyself, for not yet art thou sated with life; and 
know thou that if thou do not persuade her, I will catch thee 
away out of this life which is desirable unto all men. And Judas 
said: This life hath been given as a loan, and this time is one that 
changeth; but that life whereof I teach is incorruptible; and 
beauty and youth that are seen shall in a little cease to be. The 
king saith to him: I have counselled thee for the best, but thou 
knowest thine own affairs. 

128 And as the apostle went forth from before the king, 
Charisius came to him and entreated him and said: I beseech 
thee, O man: I have not sinned against thee or any other at any 
time, nor against the gods; wherefore hast thou stirred up this 
great calamity against me? and for what cause hast thou brought 
such disturbance upon mine house? and what profit hast thou 
of it? but if thou thinkest to gain somewhat, tell me the gain, 
what it is, and TU will procure it for thee without labour. To what 


ACTS OF THOMAS 42) 


end dost thou make me mad, and cast thyself into destruction ? 
for if thou persuade her not, I will both dispatch thee and finally 
take myself out of life. But if, as thou sayest, after our departing 
hence there is there life and death, and also condemnation and 
victory and a place of judgement, then will I also go in thither 
to be judged with thee: and if that God whom thou preachest 
is just and awardeth punishment justly, I know that I shall gain 
my cause against thee; for thou hast injured me, having suffered 
no wrong at my hands: for indeed even here I am able to avenge 
myself on thee and bring upon thee all that thou hast done unto 
me. Therefore be thou persuaded, and come home with me and 
persuade Mygdonia to be with me as she was at first, before she 
beheld thee. And Judas saith to him: Believe me, my child, 
that if men loved God as much as they love one another, they 
would ask of him all things and receive them, and none would 
do them violence (there would be nothing which would not obey 
them, Syr.). 

129 And as Thomas said this, they came unto the house of 
Charisius and found Mygdonia sitting and Narcia standing by 
her, and her hand supporting her cheek; and she was saying: 
Let the remainder of the days of my life, O mother, be cut off 
from me, and all the hours become as one hour, and let me depart 
out of life that I may go the sooner and behold that beautiful one, 
whose report I have heard, even that living one and giver of life 
unto them that believe on him, where is not day and night, nor 
light and darkness, nor good and evil, nor poor and rich, nor 
male and female, nor free and bond, nor proud that subjecteth 
the humble. And as she spake the apostle stood by her, and 
forthwith she rose up and did him reverence. Then Charisius 
said unto him: Seest thou how she feareth and honoureth thee, 
and all that thou shalt bid her she will do willingly ? 

130 And as he so spake, Judas saith unto Mygdonia: My 
daughter Mygdonia, obey that which thy brother Charisius saith. 
And Mygdonia saith: If thou wast not able <to name> the deed 
in word, wilt thou compel me to endure the act? for I have 
heard of thee that this life is of no profit, and this relief is for 
a time, and these possessions are transitory. And again thou 
saidst that whoso renounceth this life shall receive the life eternal, 
and whoso hateth the light of day and night shall behold a light 
that is not overtaken, that whoso despiseth this money shall find 
other and eternal money. But now <thou sayest these things) 
because thou art in fear. Who that hath done somewhat and is 
praised for the work changeth it ? <who buildeth a tower and> 
straightway overthroweth it from the foundation? who diggeth 
a spring of water in a thirsty land and straightway filleth it in? 
who findeth a treasure and useth it not? And Charisius heard 
it and said: I will not imitate you, neither will I hasten to destroy 
you; nor though I may so do, will I put bonds about thee (but 


422 ACTS OF THOMAS 


thee I will bind, Syr.); and I will not suffer thee to speak with 
this sorcerer; and if thou obey me, well, but if not, I know what 
I must do. 

131 And Judas went out of Charisius’ house and departed 
unto the house of Siphor and lodged there with him. And Siphor 
said: I will prepare for Judas a hall (triclinium) wherein he may 
teach (Syr. Siphor said to Judas: Prepare thyself an apartment, 
&c.). And he did so; and Siphor said: I and my wife and 
daughter will dwell henceforth in holiness, and in chastity, and 
in one affection. I beseech thee that we may receive of thee 
the seal, and become worshippers of the true God and numbered 
among his sheep and lambs. And Judas said: I am afraid to 
speak that which I think: yet I know somewhat, and what I know 
it is not possible for me to utter. 

182 And he began to say concerning baptism: This baptism 
is remission of sins (the Greek MSS. U and P have divergent 
texts, both obscure): this bringeth forth again light that is shed 
about us: this bringeth to new birth the new man (this is the 
restorer of understandings, Syr.): this mingleth the spirit (with 
the body), raiseth up in threefoldwise a new man and <maketh 
him) partaker of the remission of sins. Glory be to thee, hidden 
one, that art communicated in baptism. Glory to thee the unseen 
power that is in baptism. Glory to thee, renewal, whereby are 
renewed they that are baptized and with affection take hold 
upon thee. 

And having thus said, he poured oil over their heads and said: 
Glory be to thee the love of compassion (bowels). Glory to thee, 
name of Christ. Glory to thee, power established in Christ. 
And he commanded a vessel to be brought, and baptized them 
in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost. 

133 And when they were baptized and clad, he set bread on 
the table and blessed it, and said: Bread of life, the which who 
eat abide incorruptible: Bread that filleth the hungry souls with 
the blessing thereof: thou art he that vouchsafest to receive 
a gift, that thou mayest become unto us remission of sins, and 
that they who eat thee may become immortal: we invoke upon 
thee the name of the mother, of the unspeakable mystery of the 
hidden powers and authorities (? we name the name of the 
unspeakable mystery, that is hidden from all, &c.): we invoke 
upon thee the name of [thy ?] Jesus. And he said: Let the powers 
of blessing come, and be established in this bread, that all the 
souls which partake of it may be washed from their sins. And he 
brake and gave unto Siphor and his wife and daughter. 


The Eleventh Act: concerning the wife of Misdaeus. 


134 Now Misdaeus the king, when he had let Judas go, dined 
and went home, and told his wife what had befallen Charisius 
their kinsman, saying: See what hath come to pass to that 


ACTS OF THOMAS 423 


unhappy man; and thou thyself knowest, my sister Tertia, that 
a man hath nought better than his own wife on whom he resteth; 
but it chanced that his wife went unto that sorcerer of whom 
thou hast heard that he is come to the land of the Indians, and 
fell into his charms and is parted from her own husband; and 
he knoweth not what he should do. And when I would have 
destroyed the malefactor, he would not have it. But do thou go 
and counsel her to incline unto her husband, and forsake the 
vain words of the sorcerer. 

185 And as soon as she arose Tertia went to the house of 
Charisius her husband’s <kinsman), and found Mygdonia lying 
upon the earth in humiliation; and ashes and sackcloth were 
spread under her, and she was praying that the Lord would forgive 
her her former sins and she might soon depart out of life. And 
Tertia said unto her: Mygdonia, my dear sister and companion, 
what is this fhand} (Syr. this folly)? what is the disease that hath 
overtaken thee? and why doest thou the deeds of madmen? Know 
thyself and come back unto thine own way, come near unto thy 
many kinsfolk, and spare thy true husband Charisius, and do 
not things unbefitting a free-woman. Mygdonia saith unto her: 
O Tertia, thou hast not yet heard the preacher of life: not yet 
hath he touched thine ears, not yet hast thou tasted the medicine 
of life nor art freed from corruptible mourning. Thou standest 
in the life of time, and the everlasting life and salvation thou 
knowest not, and perceivest not the incorruptible fellowship. 
Thou standest clad in robes that grow old and desirest not those 
that are eternal; and art proud of this beauty which vanisheth, 
and hast no thought of the ugliness of thy soul; and art rich in 
a multitude of servants, (and hast not freed thine own soul from 
servitude, Syr.) and pridest thyself in the glory that cometh 
of many, but redeemest not thyself from the condemnation of 
death. 

186 And when Tertia heard this of Mygdonia she said: I pray 
thee, sister, bring me unto that stranger that teacheth these 
great things, that I also may go and hear him, and be taught 
to worship the God whom he preacheth, and become partaker of 
his prayers, and a sharer in all that thou hast told me of. And 
Mygdonia saith to her: He is in the house of Siphor the captain; 
for he is become the occasion of life unto all them that are being 
saved in India. And hearing that, Tertia went quickly to Siphor’s 
house, that she might see the new apostle that was come thither. 
And when she entered in, Judas said unto her: What art thou 
come to see? a man that is a stranger and poor and contemptible 
and needy, having neither riches nor substance; yet one thing 
I possess which neither kings nor rulers can take away, that 
neither perisheth nor ceaseth, which is Jesus the Saviour of all 
mankind, the Son of the living God, who hath given life unto all 
that believe on him and take refuge with him and are known to 


424, ACTS OF THOMAS 


be of the number of his servants (sheep, Syr.). Unto whom saith 
Tertia: May I become a partaker of this life which thou promisest 
that all they shall receive who come together unto the assembly 
of God. And the apostle said: The treasury of the holy king is 
opened wide, and they which worthily partake of the good things 
that are therein do rest, and resting do reign: but first, no man 
cometh unto him that is unclean and vile: for he knoweth our 
inmost hearts and the depths of our thought, and it is not 
possible for any to escape him. Thou, then, if verily thou believest 
in him, shalt be made worthy of his mysteries; and he will 
magnify thee and enrich thee, and make thee to be an heir of his 
kingdom. 

137 And Tertia having heard this returned home rejoicing, 
and found her husband awaiting her, not having dined; and 
when Misdaeus saw her he said: Whence is it that thine entering 
in to-day is more beautiful? and wherefore art thou come 
walking, which beseemeth not free-born women like thee? And 
Tertia saith unto him: I owe thee the greatest of thanks for that 
thou didst send me unto Mygdonia; for I went and heard of 
a new life, and I saw the new apostle of the God that giveth 
life unto them that believe on him and fulfil his commandments; 
I ought therefore myself to recompense thee for this favour and 
admonition with good advice; for thou shalt be a great king in 
heaven if thou obey me and fear the God that is preached by the 
stranger, and keep thyself holy unto the living God. For this 
kingdom passeth away, and thy comfort will be turned into 
affliction: but go thou to that man, and believe him, and thou 
shalt live unto the end. And when Misdaeus heard these things 
of his wife, he smote his face with his hands and rent his clothes 
and said: May the soul of Charisius find no rest, for he hath hurt 
me to the soul; and may he have no hope, for he hatb taken away 
my hope. And he went out greatly vexed. 

188 And he found Charisius his friend in the market-place, 
and said unto him: Why hast thou cast me into hell to be another 
companion to thyself? why hast thou emptied and defrauded 
me to gain nought? why hast thou hurt me and profited thyself 
not at all? why hast thou slain me and thyself not lived? why 
hast thou wronged me and thyself not got justice? why didst 
thou not suffer me to destroy that sorcerer before he corrupted 
my house with his wickedness? And he kept hold upon (was up- 
braiding, Syr.) Charisius. And Charisius saith: Why, what hath 
befallen thee? Misdaeus said: He hath bewitched Tertia. And 
they went both of them unto the house of Siphor the captain, 
and found Judas sitting and teaching. And all they that were 
there rose up before the king, but he arose not. And Misdaeus 
perceived that it was he, and took hold of the seat and overset it, 
and took up the seat with both his hands and smote his head so 
that he wounded it, and delivered him to his soldiers, saying: 


ACTS OF THOMAS 425 


Take him away, and hale him with violence and not gently, that 
his shame may be manifest unto all men. And they haled him 
and took him to the place where Misdaeus judged, and he stood 
there, held of the soldiers of Misdaeus. 


The Twelfth Act: concerning Ouazanes (Iuzanes) the son of 
Misdaeus. 


139 And Ouazanes (Iuzanes, P ; Vizan, Syr.) the son of Misdaeus 
came unto the soldiers and said: Give me him that I may speak 
with him until the king cometh. And they gave him up, and he 
brought him in where the king gave judgement. And Iuzanes 
saith: Knowest thou not that I am the son of Misdaeus the king, 
and I have power to say unto the king what I will, and he will 
suffer thee to live? tell me then, who is thy God, and what power 
dost thou claim and glory in it? for if it be some power or art 
of magic, tell it me and teach me, and I will let thee go. Judas 
saith unto him: Thou art the son of Misdaeus the king who is 
king for a time, but I am the servant of Jesus Christ the eternal 
king; and thou hast power to say to thy father to save whom 
thou wilt in the temporal life wherein men continue not, which 
thou and thy father grant, but I beseech my Lord and intercede 
for men, and he giveth them a new life which is altogether 
enduring. And thou boastest thyself of possessions and servants 
and robes and luxury and unclean chamberings, but I boast 
myself of poverty and philosophy and humility and fasting and 
prayer and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost and of my brethren 
that are worthy of God: and I boast myself of eternal life. And 
thou reliest on (hast taken refuge with) a man like unto thyself, 
and not able to save his own soul from judgement and death, 
but I rely upon the living God, upon the saviour of kings and 
princes, who is the judge of all men. And ye indeed to-day 
perchance are, and to-morrow are no more, but I have taken 
refuge with him that abideth for ever and knoweth all our seasons 
and times. And if thou wilt become the servant of this God, 
thou shalt soon do so; but show that thou wilt be a servant 
worthy of him hereby: first by holiness (purity), which is the 
head of all good things, and then by fellowship with this God whom 
I preach, and philosophy and simplicity and love and faith and 
<good hope> in him, and unity of pure food (simplicity of pure 
life, Syr.). 

140 And the young man was persuaded by the Lord and 
sought occasion how he might let Judas escape: but while he 
thought thereon, the king came; and the soldiers took Judas 
and led him forth. And Iuzanes went forth with him and stood 
beside him. And when the king was set he bade Judas be brought 
in, with his hands bound behind him; and he was brought into 
the midst and stood there. And the king saith: Tell me who thou 
art and by what power thou doest these things. And Judas 


426 ACTS OF THOMAS 


saith to him: I am a man like thee, and by the power of Jesus 
Christ I do these things. And Misdaeus saith: Tell me the truth 
before I destroy thee. And Judas saith: Thou hast no power 
against me, as thou supposest, and thou wilt not hurt me at all. 
And the king was wroth at his words, and commanded to heat 
iron plates and set him upon them barefoot; and as the soldiers 
took off his shoes he said: The wisdom of God is better than the 
wisdom of men. +fThou Lord and Kingt (do thou take counsel 
against them, Syr.) and let thy goodness resist his wrath. And 
they brought the plates which were like fire, and set the apostle 
upon them, and straightway water sprang up abundantly from 
the earth, so that the plates were swallowed up in it, and they 
that held him let him go and withdrew themselves. 

141 And the king seeing the abundance of water said to 
Judas: Ask thy God that he deliver me from this death, that 
I perish not in the flood. And the apostle prayed and said: 
Thou that didst bind this element (nature) and gather it into 
one place and send it forth into divers lands; that didst bring 
disorder into order; that grantest mighty works and great 
wonders by the hands of Judas thy servant; that hast mercy 
on my soul, that I may alway receive thy brightness; that 
givest wages unto them that have laboured; thou saviour of 
my soul, restoring it unto its own nature that it may have no 
fellowship with hurtful things; that hast alway been the occasion 
of life: do thou restrain this element that it lift not up itself 
to destroy; for there are some of them that stand here who 
shall believe on thee and live. And when he had prayed, the 
water was swallowed up by little and little, and the place became 
dry. And when Misdaeus saw it he commanded him to be 
taken to the prison: Until I shall consider how he must be used. 

142 And as Judas was led away to the prison they all followed 
him, and Iuzanes the king’s son walked at his right hand, and 
Siphor at the left. And he entered into the prison and sat 
down, and Iuzanes and Siphor, and he persuaded his wife and 
his daughter to sit down, for they also were come in to hear the 
word of life. For they knew that Misdaeus would slay him because 
of the excess of his anger. And Judas began to say: O liberator 
of my soul from the bondage of the many, because I gave myself 
to be sold «unto one, Syr.> ; behold, I rejoice and exult, knowing 
that the times are fulfilled for me to enter in and receive <thee my 
giver of rest, Syr.>. Lo, Iam to be set free from the cares that are 
on the earth ; lo, I fulfil mine hope and receive truth; lo, I am 
set free from sorrow and put on joy alone; lo, I become 
careless and griefless and dwell in rest; lo, I am set free from 
bondage and am called unto liberty ; lo, I have served times and 
seasons, and I am lifted up above times and seasons ; lo, I receive 
my wages from my recompenser, who giveth without reckoning 
(number) because his wealth sufficeth for the gift ; <lo, I put off 


ACTS OF THOMAS 427 


and on my raiment,> and I shall not put it off again; lo, I sleep 
and awake, and I shall no more go to sleep; lo, I die and live 
again, and I shall no more taste of death; lo, they rejoice and 
expect me, that I may come and be with their kindred and be 
set as a flower in their crown ; lo, I reign in the kingdom whereon 
I set my hope, even from hence ; lo, the rebellious fall before me, 
for I have escaped them; lo, (unto me) the peace hath come, 
whereunto all are gathered. 

143 And as the apostle spake thus, all that were there heark- 
ened, supposing that in that hour he would depart out of life. 
And again he said: Believe on the physician of all <diseases), 
both seen and unseen, and on the saviour of the souls that need 
help from him. This is the free-born <son) of kings, this the 
physician of his creatures; this is he that was reproached of 
his own slaves; this is the Father of the height and the Lord 
of nature and the Judge (? Father of nature and Lord of the 
height and supreme Judge, Syr.): he came of the greatest, the 
only-begotten son of the deep; and he was called the son of 
(became visible through, Syr.) Mary the virgin, and was termed 
the son of Joseph the carpenter: he whose littleness (we beheld) 
with the eyes of our body, but his greatness we received by 
faith, and saw it in his works; whose human body we felt also 
with our hands, and his aspect we saw transfigured (changed) with 
our eyes, but his heavenly semblance on the mount we were not 
able to see: he that made the rulers stumble and did violence 
unto death : he, the truth that lieth not, that at the last paid the 
tribute for himself and his disciples : whom the prince beholding 
feared and the powers that were with him were troubled; and 
the prince bare witness (asked him, Syr.) who he was and from 
whence, and knew not the truth, because he is alien from truth: 
he that having authority over the world, and the pleasures therein, 
and the possessions and the comfort, <rejected> all these things, 
and turneth away his subjects, that they should not use them. 

144, And having fulfilled these sayings, he arose and prayed 
thus: Our Father, which art in heaven: hallowed be thy name: 
Thy kingdom come: Thy will be done, asin heaven so upon earth : 
<Give us the constant bread of the day, Syr.> and forgive us our 
debts as we also have forgiven our debtors. And lead us not 
into temptation; but deliver us from the evil one. 

My Lord and God, hope and confidence and teacher, thou 
hast taught me to pray thus; behold, I pray this prayer and 
fulfil thy commandment: be thou with me unto the end; thou 
art he that from childhood hast sown life in me and kept me 
from corruption; thou art he that hast brought me unto the 
poverty of this world, and exhorted me unto the true riches; thou 
art he that hast made me known unto myself and showed me 
that I am thine; and I have kept myself pure from woman, 
that that which thou requirest be not found in defilement. 


428 ACTS OF THOMAS 


[At the words ‘My Lord and God’ begins the double text, 
represented on the one hand by the MS. U and on the other 
by the Paris MS. P, and three (partly four) others. These insert 
the prayer after ch.167. Their text, I believe, may be the original 
Greek. I follow it here, repeating the first paragraph.] 

(144) My Lord and God, my hope and my confidence and my 
teacher, that hast implanted courage in me, thou didst teach 
me to pray thus; behold, I pray thy prayer and bring thy will 
to fulfilment: be thou with me unto the end. Thou art he 
that from my youth up didst give me patience in temptation 
and <sow in> me life and preserve me from corruption; thou 
art he that didst bring me into the poverty of this world and 
fill me with the true riches; thou art he that didst show me that 
I was thine: wherefore I was never joined unto a wife, that 
the temple worthy of thee might not be found in pollution. 

145 My mouth sufficeth not to praise thee, neither am I able 
to conceive the care and providence (carefulness) which hath 
been about me from thee (which thou hast had for me). For I 
desired to gain riches; but thou by a vision didst show me 
that they are full of loss and injury to them that gain them; 
and I believed thy showing, and continued in the poverty of the 
world until thou, the true riches, wert revealed unto me, who 
didst fill both me and the rest that were worthy of thee with 
thine own riches and set free thine own from care and anxiety. 
I have therefore fulfilled thy commandments, O Lord, and 
accomplished thy will, and become poor and needy and a stranger 
and a bondman and set at nought and a prisoner and hungry 
and thirsty and naked and unshod, and I have toiled for thy 
sake, that my confidence might not perish and my hope that 
is in thee might not be confounded, and my much labour might 
not be in vain and my weariness not be counted for nought: 
let not my prayers and my continual fastings perish, and my 
great zeal toward thee; let not my seed of wheat be changed 
for tares out of thy land; let not the enemy carry it away and 
mingle his own tares therewith ; for thy land verily receiveth not 
his tares, neither indeed can they be laid up in thine houses. 

146 I have planted thy vine in the earth; it hath sent down 
its roots into the depth and its growth is spread out in the height, 
and the fruits of it are stretched forth upon the earth, and they 
that are worthy of thee are made glad by them, whom also 
thou hast gained. The money which thou hast from me I laid 
down upon the table (bank); this, when thou requirest it, restore 
unto me with usury, as thou hast promised. With thy one mina 
have 1 traded and have made ten; thou hast added more to me 
beside that I had, as thou didst covenant. I have forgiven my 
debtor the mina, require thou it not at my hands. I was bidden 
to the supper and I came: and I refused the land and the yoke 
of oxen and the wife, that I might not for their sake be rejected. 


ACTS OF THOMAS 429 


I was bidden to the wedding, and I put on white raiment, that 
I might be worthy of it and not be bound hand and foot and cast 
into the outer darkness. My lamp with its bright light expecteth 
the master coming from the marriage, that it may receive 
him, and I may not (? he may not) see it dimmed because the 
oil is spent. Mine eyes, O Christ, look upon thee, and mine 
heart exulteth with joy because I have fulfilled thy will and 
perfected thy commandments; that I may be likened unto 
that watchful and careful servant who in his eagerness neglecteth 
not to keep vigil (other MSS.: I have not slumbered idly in 
keeping thy commandments: in the first sleep and at midnight 
and at cockcrow, that mine eyes may behold thee, &c.). All 
the night have I laboured to keep mine house from robbers, 
lest it be broken through. 

147 My loins have I girt close with truth and bound my 
shoes on my feet, that I may never see them gaping: mine hands 
have I put unto the yoked plough and have not turned away 
backward, lest my furrows go crooked. The plough-land is 
become white and the harvest is come, that I may receive my 
wages. My garment that groweth old I have worn out, and the 
labour that hath brought me unto rest have I accomplished. 
I have kept the first watch and the second and the third, that 
I may behold thy face and adore thine holy brightness. I have 
rooted out the worst (pulled down my barns, Syr.) and left 
them desolate upon earth, that I may be filled full from thy 
treasures (Gr. MSS. add: all my substance have I sold, that 
I may gain thee the pearl). The moist spring that was in me 
have I dried up, that I may live and rest beside thine inexhaust- 
ible spring (al. and Syr.: rest beside thy living spring). The 
captive whom thou didst commit to me I have slain, that he 
which is set free in me may not fall from his confidence. Him 
that was inward have I made outward and the outward <inward), 
and all thy fullness hath been fulfilled in me. I have not returned 
unto the things that are behind, but -have gone forward unto the 
things that are before, that I become not a reproach. The dead 
man have I quickened, and the living one have I overcome, and 
that which was lacking have I filled up (Syr. Wright, not the 
older one, inserts negatives, ‘not quickened’, &c.), that I may 
receive the crown of victory, and the power of Christ may be 
accomplished in me. I have received reproach upon earth, but 
give thou me the return and the recompense in the heavens. 
(U omits practically all this chapter.) 

148 Let not the powers and the officers perceive me, and let 
them not have any thought concerning me; let not the publicans 
and exactors ply their calling upon me; let not the weak and 
the evil cry out against me that am valiant and humble ; and when 
I am borne upward let them not rise up to stand before me, by 
thy power, O Jesu, which surroundeth me as a crown: for they 


430 ACTS OF THOMAS 


do flee and hide themselves, they cannot look on thee: but (for) 
suddenly do they fall upon them that are subject to them, and 
the portion of the sons of the evil one doth itself cry out and 
convict them; and it is not hid from them, for their nature is 
made known: the children of the evil one are separated off. 
Do thou then grant me, Lord, that I may pass by in quietness and 
joy arid peace, and pass over and stand before the judge; and 
let not the devil (or slanderer) look upon me; let his eyes be 
blinded by thy light which thou hast made to dwell in me; close 
thou up (muzzle) his mouth: for he hath found nought against me. 


[We revert to U.] 


149 And he said again unto them that were about him: 
<Believe, my children, in the God whom I proclaim ; believe in 
Jesus Christ whom I preach; believe in the giver of life and 
helper of his servants, Syr.> believe in the Saviour of them that 
have laboured in his service: for my soul already flourisheth, 
because my time is near to receive him; for he being beautiful 
draweth me on always to speak concerning his beauty, what it is, 
though I be not able and suffice not to speak it worthily: thou 
that art the light (feeder, Syr.) of my poverty and the supplier of 
my defects and nurturer of my need: be thou with me until 
I come and receive thee for evermore. 


The Thirteenth Act: wherein Iuzanes recetveth baptism with the rest. 


150 And Iuzanes the youth besought the apostle, saying: 
I pray thee, O man, apostle of God, suffer me to go, and I will 
persuade the gaoler to permit thee to come home with me, that 
by thee I may receive the seal, and become thy minister and 
a keeper of the commandments of the God whom thou preachest. 
For indeed, formerly I walked in those things which thou teachest, 
until my father compelled me and joined me unto a wife by name 
Mnesara; for I am in my one-and-twentieth year, and have 
now been seven years married, and before I was joined in marriage 
I knew no other woman; wherefore also I was accounted useless 
of my father, nor have I ever had son or daughter of this wife, 
and also my wife herself hath lived with me in chastity all this 
time, and to-day, if she had been in health, and had listened 
to thee, I know well that both I should have been at rest and she 
would have received eternal life; but she is in peril and afflicted 
with much illness; I will therefore persuade the keeper that he 
promise to come with me; for I live by myself: and thou shalt 
also heal that unhappy one. And Judas the apostle of the Most 
High, hearing this, said to Iuzanes: If thou believest, thou shalt 
see the marvels of God, and how he saveth his servants. 

151 And as they spake thus together, Tertia and Mygdonia 
and Narcia stood at the door of the prison, and they gave the 
gaoler 363 staters of silver and entered in to Judas; and found 


ACTS OF THOMAS 431 


Iuzanes and Siphor and his wife and daughter, and all the 
prisoners sitting and hearing the word. And when they stood 
by him he said to them: Who hath suffered you to come unto us ? 
and who opened unto you the sealed doorthat ye came forth? Tertia 
saith unto him: Didst not thou open the door for us and tell us 
to come into the prison that we might take our brethren that 
were there, and then should the Lord show forth his glory in us? 
And when we came near the door, I know not how, thou wast 
parted from us and hid thyself and camest hither before us, 
where also we heard the noise of the door, when thou didst shut 
us out. We gave money therefore to the keepers and came in; 
and lo, we are here praying thee that we may persuade thee and 
let thee escape until the king’s wrath against thee shall cease. 
Unto whom Judas said: Tell us first of all how ye were shut up. 

152 And she saith to him: Thou wast with us, and didst never 
leave us for one hour, and askest thou how we were shut up? 
but if thou desirest to hear, hear. The king Misdaeus sent for 
me and said unto me: Not yet hath that sorcerer prevailed over 
thee, for, as I hear, he bewitcheth men with oil and water and 
bread, and hath not yet bewitched thee; but obey thou me, for 
if not, I will imprison thee and wear thee out, and him I will 
destroy ; for I know that if he hath not yet given thee oil and 
water and bread, he hath not prevailed to get power over thee. 
And I said unto him: Over my body thou hast authority, and 
do thou all that thou wilt; but my soul I will not let perish with 
thee. And hearing that he shut me up in a chamber (beneath his 
dining-hall, Syr.): and Charisius brought Mygdonia and shut her 
up with me: and thou broughtest us out and didst bring us even 
hither; but give thou us the seal quickly, that the hope of 
Misdaeus who counselleth thus may be cut off. 

153 And when the apostle heard this, he said: Glory be to thee, 
O Jesu of many forms, glory to thee that appearest in the guise 
of our poor manhood: glory to thee that encouragest us and 
makest us strong and givest grace and consolest and standest by 
us in all perils, and strengthenest our weakness. And as he thus 
spake, the gaoler came and said: Put out the lamps, lest any 
accuse you unto the king. And then they extinguished the 
lamps, and turned to sleep; but the apostle spake unto the 
Lord: Itis thetime now, O Jesu, for thee to make haste; for, lo, 
the children of darkness sit (make us to sit, Syr.) in their own 
darkness; do thou therefore enlighten us with the light of thy 
nature. And on a sudden the whole prison was light as the day: 
and while all they that were in the prison slept a deep sleep, they 
only that had believed in the Lord continued waking. 

154 Judas therefore saith to Iuzanes: Go thou before and 
make ready the things for our need. Iuzanes therefore saith: 
And who will open me the doors of the prison? for the gaolers 
shut them and are gone to sleep. And Judas saith: Believe in 


432 ACTS OF THOMAS 


Jesus, and thou shalt find the doors open. And when he went 
forth and departed from them, all the rest followed after him. 
And as Iuzanes was gone on before, Mnesara his wife met him, 
coming unto the prison. And she knew him and said: My brother 
Iuzanes, is it thou? and he saith, Yea; and art thou Mnesara? 
and she saith, Yea. TIuzanes said unto her: Whither walkest 
thou, especially at so untimely an hour? and how wast thou 
able to rise up? And she said: This youth laid his hand on me 
and raised me up, and in a dream I saw that I should go where 
the stranger sitteth, and become perfectly whole. Iuzanes saith 
to her: What youth is with thee? And she said: Seest thou 
not him that is on my right hand, leading me by the hand? 

155 And while they spake together thus, Judas, with Siphor 
and his wife and daughter and Tertia and Mygdonia and Narcia, 
came unto Iuzanes’ house. And Mnesara the wife of Iuzanes, 
seeing him did reverence and said: Art thou come that savedst 
us from the sore disease ? thou art he whom I saw in the night 
delivering unto me this youth to bring me to the prison. But 
thy goodness suffered me not to grow weary, but thou thyself 
art come unto me. And so saying she turned about and saw the 
youth no more; and finding him not, she saith to the apostle: 
J am not able to walk alone: for the youth whom thou gavest me 
is not here. And Judas said: Jesus will henceforth lead thee. 
And thereafter she came running unto him. And when they 
entered into the house of Iuzanes the son of Misdaeus the king, 
though it was yet night, a great light shined and was shed about 
them. 

156 And then Judas began to pray and to speak thus: O com- 
panion and defender (ally) and hope of the weak and confidence 
of the poor: refuge and lodging of the weary: voice that came 
forth of the height (sleep, Gr.): comforter dwelling in the midst: 
port and harbour of them that pass through the regions of the 
rulers: physician that healest without payment: who among 
men wast crucified for many: who didst go down into hell with 
great might: the sight of whom the princes of death endured 
not; and thou camest up with great glory, and gathering all 
them that fled unto thee didst prepare a way, and in thy footsteps 
all they journeyed whom thou didst redeem; and thou broughtest 
them into thine own fold and didst join them with thy sheep: 
son of mercy, the son that for love of man wast sent unto us from 
the perfect country (fatherland) that is above; the Lord of all 
possessions (undefiled possessions, Syr.): that servest thy servants 
that they may live: that fillest creation with thine own riches: 
the poor, that wast in need and didst hunger forty days: that 
satisfiest thirsty souls with thine own good things; be thou with 
Iuzanes the son of Misdaeus and with Tertia and Mnesara; and 
gather them into thy fold and mingle them with thy number. 
Be unto them a guide in the land of error: be unto them a physi- 


ACTS OF THOMAS 433 


cian in the land of sickness: be unto them a rest in the land of 
the weary: sanctify them in a polluted land: be their physician 
both of bodies and souls: make them holy temples of thee, and 
let thine holy spirit dwell in them. 

157 Having thus prayed over them, the apostle said unto 
Mygdonia: Unclothe thy sisters. And she took off their clothes 
and girded them with girdles and brought them: but Iuzanes 
had first gone before, and they came after him; and the apostle 
took oil in a cup of silver and spake thus over it: Fruit more 
beautiful than all other fruits, unto which none other whatsoever 
may be compared: altogether merciful: fervent with the force of 
the word: power of the tree which men putting upon them over- 
come their adversaries: crowner of the conquerors: help (symbol) 
and joy of the sick: that didst announce unto men their salvation, 
that showest light to them that are in darkness; whose leaf is 
bitter, but in thy most sweet fruit thou art fair; that art rough 
to the sight but soft to the taste; seeming to be weak, but in the 
greatness of thy strength able to bear the power that beholdeth 
all things. Having thus said [a corrupt word follows]: Jesu: 
let his victorious might come and be established in this oil, like 
as it was established in the tree (wood) that was its kin, even his 
might at that time, whereof they that crucified thee could not 
endure the word: let the gift also come whereby breathing upon 
his (thine) enemies thou didst cause them to go backward and 
fall headlong, and let it rest on this oil, whereupon we invoke 
thine holy name. And having thus said, he poured it first upon 
the head of Iuzanes and then upon the women’s heads, saying: 
In thy name, O Jesu Christ, let it be unto these souls for remission 
of sins and for turning back of the adversary and for salvation 
of their souls. And he commanded Mygdonia to anoint them, 
but he himself anointed Iuzanes. And having anointed them he 
led them down into the water in the name of the Father and the 
Son and the Holy Ghost. 

158 And when they were come up, he took bread and a cup, 
and blessed it and said: Thine holy body which was crucified 
for us do we eat, and thy blood that was shed for us unto salvation 
do we drink; let therefore thy body be unto us salvation and 
thy blood for remission of sins. And for the gall which thou 
didst drink for our sakes let the gall of the devil be removed from 
us: and for the vinegar which thou hast drunk for us, let our 
weakness be made strong: and for the spitting which thou didst 
receive for us, let us receive the dew of thy goodness: and by 
(or tor) the reed wherewith they smote thee for us, let us receive 
the perfect house: and whereas thou receivedst a crown of thorns 
for our sake, let us that have loved thee put on a crown that 
fadeth not away; and for the linen cloth wherein thou wast 
wrapped, let us also be girt about with thy power that is not 
vanquished: and for the new tomb and the burial let us receive 


870 Ff 


434 ACTS OF THOMAS 


renewing of soul and body: and for that thou didst rise up and 
revive, let us revive and live and stand before thee in righteous 
judgement. And he brake and gave the eucharist unto Iuzanes 
and Tertia and Mnesara and the wife and daughter of Siphor, 
and said: Let this eucharist be unto you for salvation and joy 
and health of your souls. And they said: Amen. And a voice 
was heard, saying: Amen: fear ye not, but only believe. 


[THE MARTYRDOM] 


Here we revert to the text of P and its companions. 


159 And after these things Judas departed to be imprisoned. 

And Tertia with Mygdonia and Narcia also went to be im- 
prisoned. And the apostle Thomas said unto them—the multi- 
tude of them that had believed being present: Daughters and 
sisters and fellow-servants which have believed in my Lord 
and God, ministers of my Jesus, hearken to me this day: for 
I do deliver my word unto you, and I shall no more speak with 
you in this flesh nor in this world; for I go up unto my Lord and 
God Jesus Christ, unto him that sold me, unto that Lord that 
humbled himself even unto me the little, and brought me up unto 
eternal greatness, that vouchsafed to me to become his servant 
in truth and steadfastness: unto him do I depart, knowing that 
the time is fulfilled, and the day appointed hath drawn near for 
me to go and receive my recompense from my Lord and God: 
for my recompenser is righteous, who knoweth me, how I ought 
to receive my reward; for he is not grudging nor envious, but 
is rich in his gifts; he is not a lover of craft (or sparing) in that 
he giveth, for he hath confidence in his possessions which cannot 
fail. 

160 I am not Jesus, but I am his servant: I am not Christ, 
but I am his minister: I am not the Son of God, but I pray to 
become worthy of God. Continue ye in the faith of Christ: 
continue in the hope of the Son of God: faint not at affliction, 
neither be divided in mind if ye see me mocked or that I am shut 
up in prison <or die, Syr.>; for I do accomplish his will. For if 
I had willed not to die, I know in Christ that I am able thereto: 
but this which is called death, is not death, but a setting free 
from the body; wherefore I receive gladly this setting free from 
the body, that I may depart and see him that is beautiful and 
full of mercy, him that is to be loved: for I have endured much 
toil in his service, and have laboured for his grace that is come 
upon me, which departeth not from me. Let not Satan, then, 
enter you by stealth and catch away your thoughts: let there be 
in you no place for him: for he is mighty whom ye have received. 
Look for the coming of Christ, for he shall come and receive you, 
and this is he whom ye shall see when he cometh. 

161 When the apostle had ended these sayings, they went into 


ACTS OF THOMAS 435 


the house; and the apostle Thomas said: Saviour that didst 
suffer many things for us, let these doors be as they were and let 
seals be set on them. And he left them and went to be imprisoned: 
and they wept and were in heaviness, for they knew that Misdaeus 
would slay him (not knowing that, M. would release him, P.). 

162 And the apostle found the keepers wrangling and saying: 
Wherein have we sinned against this wizard? for by his art magic 
he hath opened the doors and would have had all the prisoners 
escape: but let us go and report it unto the king, and tell him concern- 
ing his wifeand his son. And as they disputed thus, Thomas held his 
peace. They rose up early, therefore, and went unto the king and 
said unto him: Our lord and king, do thou take away that sorcerer 
and cause him to be shut up elsewhere, for we are not able to keep 
him; for except thy good fortune had kept the prison, all the 
condemned persons would have escaped, for now this second time 
have we found the doors open: and also thy wife, O king, and 
thy son and the rest depart not from him. And the king, hearing 
that, went, and found the seals that were set on the doors whole; 
and he took note of the doors also, and said to the keepers: 
Wherefore lie ye? for the seals are whole. How said ye that 
Tertia and Mygdonia come unto him into the prison? And the 
keepers said: We have told thee the truth. 

163 And Misdaeus went to the prison and took his seat, and 
sent for the apostle Thomas and stripped him (and girded him 
with a girdle) and set him before him and saith unto him: Art 
thou bond or free? Thomas said: I am the bondsman of one 
only, over whom thou hast no authority. And Misdaeus saith 
to him: How didst thou run away and come into this country ? 
And Thomas said: I was sold hither by my master, that I might 
save many, and by thy hands depart out of this world. And 
Misdaeus said: Who is thy lord? and what is his name? and 
of what country ishe? And Thomas said: My Lord is thy master, 
and he is Lord of heaven and earth. And Misdaeus saith: What 
is his name? Thomas saith: Thou canst not hear his true name 
at this time: but the name that was given unto him is Jesus 
Christ. And Misdaeus saith unto him: I have not made haste 
to destroy thee, but have had long patience with thee: but thou 
hast added unto thine evil deeds, and thy sorceries are dispersed 
abroad and heard of throughout all the country: but this I do 
that thy sorceries may depart with thee, and our land be cleansed 
from them. Thomas saith unto him: These sorceries depart 
<not, Syr.> with me when I set forth hence, and know thou this, 
that I <they, Syr.> shall never forsake them that are here. 

164 When the apostle had said these things, Misdaeus con- 
sidered how he should put him to death; for he was afraid because 
of the much people that were subject unto him, for many also of 
the nobles and of them that were in authority believed on him. 
He took him therefore and went forth out of the city; and armed 


436 ACTS OF THOMAS 


soldiers also went with him. And the people supposed that the 
king desired to learn somewhat of him, and they stood still and 
gave heed. And when they had walked one mile, he delivered 
him unto four soldiers and an officer, and commanded them to 
take him into the mountain and there pierce him with spears 
and put an end to him, and return again to the city. And saying 
thus unto the soldiers, he himself also returned unto the city. 

165 But the men ran after Thomas, desiring to deliver him 
from death. And two soldiers went at the right hand of the 
apostle and two on his left, holding spears, and the officer held 
his hand and supported him. And the apostle Thomas said: 
O the hidden mysteries which even until our departure are 
accomplished in us! O riches of his glory, who will not suffer us 
to be swallowed up in this passion of the body! Four are they 
that cast me down, for of four am I made; and one is he that 
draweth me, for of one Iam, and unto him I go. And this I now 
understand, that my Lord and God Jesus Christ, being of one, 
was pierced by one, but I, which am of four, am pierced by four. 

166 And being come up into the mountain unto the place 
where he was to be slain, he said unto them that held him, and 
to the rest: Brethren, hearken unto me now at the last; for 
I am come to my departure out of the body. Let not then the 
eyes of your heart be blinded, nor your ears be made deaf. 
Believe on the God whom I preach, and be not guides unto 
yourselves in the hardness of your heart, but walk in all your 
liberty, and in the glory that is toward men, and the life that is 
toward God. 

167 And he said unto Iuzanes: Thou son (to the son, P) of 
the (earthly) king Misdaeus and minister (to the minister) of our 
Lord Jesus Christ: give unto the servants of Misdaeus their 
price that they may suffer me to go and pray. And Iuzanes 
persuaded the soldiers to let him pray. And the blessed Thomas 
went to pray, and kneeled down, and rose up and stretched forth 
nis hands unto heaven, and spake thus: 

[Here P and the rest give—rightly—the prayer of cc. 144-8. 
U and its companions give the following: He turned to his 
prayer; and it was this: My Lord and my God, and hope and 
redeemer and leader and guide in all countries, be thou with all 
them that serve thee, and guide me this day as I come unto thee. 
Let not any take my soul which I have committed unto thee: 
let not the publicans see me, and let not the exactors accuse me 
falsely (play the sycophant with me). Let not the serpent see 
me, and let not the children of the dragon hiss at me. Behold, 
Lord, I have accomplished thy work and perfected thy command- 
ment. I have become a bondman; therefore to-day do I receive 
freedom. Do thou therefore give me this and perfect me: and 
this I say, not for that I doubt, but that they may hear for whom 
it is needful to hear.] 


ACTS OF THOMAS 437 


168 And when he had thus prayed he said unto the soldiers: 
Come hither and accomplish the commandments of him that 
sent you. And the four came and pierced him with their spears, 
and he fell down and died. 

And all the brethren wept; and they brought beautiful robes 
and much and fair linen, and buried him in a royal sepulchre 
wherein the former (first) kings were laid. 

169 But Siphor and Iuzanes would not go down to the city, 
but continued sitting by him all the day. And the apostle Thomas 
appeared unto them and said: Why sit ye here and keep watch 
over me? I am not here, but I have gone up and received all 
that I was promised. But rise up and go down hence; for after 
a little time ye also shall be gathered unto me. 

But Misdaeus and Charisius took away Mygdonia and Tertia 
and afflicted them sorely: howbeit they consented not unto their 
will. And the apostle appeared unto them and said: Be not 
deceived: Jesus the holy, the living one, shall quickly send help 
unto you. And Misdaeus and Charisius, when they perceived 
that Mygdonia and Tertia obeyed them not, suffered them to 
live according to their own desire. 

And the brethren gathered together and rejoiced in the grace 
of the Holy Ghost: now the apostle Thomas when he departed 
out of the world made Siphor a presbyter and Iuzanes a deacon, 
when he went up into the mountain to die. And the Lord 
wrought with them, and many were added unto the faith. 

170 Now it came to pass after a long time that one of the 
children of Misdaeus the king was smitten by a devil, and no man 
could cure him, for the devil was exceeding fierce. And Misdaeus 
the king took thought and said: I will go and open the sepulchre, 
and take a bone of the apostle of God and hang it upon my son, 
and he shall be healed. But while Misdaeus thought upon this, 
the apostle Thomas appeared to him and said unto him: Thou 
believedst not ona living man, and wilt thou believe on the dead? 
yet fear not, for my Lord Jesus Christ hath compassion on thee 
and pitieth thee of his goodness. 

And he went and opened the sepulchre, but found not the 
apostle there, for one of the brethren had stolen him away and 
taken him unto Mesopotamia; but from that place where the 
bones of the apostle had lain Misdaeus took dust and put it about 
his son’s neck, saying: I believe on thee, Jesu Christ, now that 
he hath left me which troubleth men and opposeth them lest 
they should see thee. And when he had hung it upon his son, 
the lad became whole. 

Misdaeus the king therefore was also gathered among the 
brethren, and bowed his head under the hands of Siphor the 
priest ; and Siphor said unto the brethren: Pray ye for Misdaeus 
the king, that he may obtain mercy of Jesus Christ, and that he 
may no more remember evil against him. They all therefore, 


438 ACTS OF THOMAS 


with one accord rejoicing, made prayer for him ; and the Lord that 
loveth men, the King of kings and Lord of lords, granted Misdaeus 
also to have hope in him; and he was gathered with the multitude 
of them that had believed in Christ, glorifying the Father and the 
Son and the Holy Ghost; whose is power and adoration, now and 
for ever and world without end. Amen. 

[U (and Syr.) ends: The acts of Judas Thomas the apostle are 
completed, which he did in India, fulfilling the commandment 
of him that sent him. Unto whom be glory, world without end. 
Amen.] 


THE SECONDARY ACTS 


The five principal apostolic romances which have been here translated 
had naturally many successors: it was not to be expected that the 
destinies of the other apostles would be left in obscurity when the 
possibilities of edifying fiction on this subject had been demonstrated 
to so great an extent. But a change is noticeable in the complexion 
of the later romances. The earlier ones had all a great interest in 
doctrine: the prayers and exhortations of the apostle are very evi- 
dently the centre of interest to the author. It is not so in the later 
Acts. In them it is the narrative and the accumulation of miracles 
which are the raison d’étre. Religiously, then, these books are not very 
important: as storehouses of legend and foll-lore, and in their influence 
on later literature and art, they have considerable interest. 

It is not easy to devise a scientific classification of the later Acts. 
They are multitudinous, fragmentary, imperfectly known: new recen- 
sions and new texts still emerge not unfrequently. But perhaps a line 
may be drawn between those which exist in Greek or Latin and those 
which we only have in Oriental languages—Coptic, Ethiopic, and Syriac. 
It may be said at once that Egypt was a prolific factory of the later 
Acts: in her monasteries it seems likely that in and after the fifth 
century a whole cycle of apostolic romances was produced. These we 
have partly in Coptic, which was very likely their original language, 
and more completely in Ethiopic and Arabic versions. There are 
two or three Greek texts also which attach themselves by their contents 
to this Egyptian cycle. 

Outside it, and to be dealt with first here, are a few romances which 
exist in Greek and Latin. The Greek are separately current: the 
Latin, in their most accessible form, are embodied in the Apostolic 
History, put together—perhaps in France—perhaps in the sixth, at 
least not later than the seventh century, and associated with the name 
of Abdias, Bishop of Babylon: though properly he has no right to 
figure as its author at all. 


1 In Book VI (Acts of SS. Simon and Jude) it is said that these 
apostles ordained Abdias, a disciple of Jesus, Bishop of Babylon: and 
that Craton their disciple wrote their Acts in ten books which were 
translated into Latin by (Julius) Africanus. But a preface to the 
whole work, purporting to be by Julius Africanus, says that he, 
Africanus, has taken his material from the books written about all 


ACTS OF PHILIP 439 


Now. the first of the separate romances, which is most obviously 
an imitation of the Five, and is pretty certainly somewhat older than 
the others which we shall encounter, is the 


ACTS OF PHILIP 


No such suspicion of unorthodoxy as—rightly or wrongly—attaches 
to four out of the Five Acts, affects the Acts of Philip. If grotesque, it 
is yet a Catholic novel. In form it follows Thomas, for it is divided 
into separate Acts, of which the manuscripts mention fifteen: we have 
Actsi—ix and from xv to the end, including the Martyrdom, which last, 
as usual, was current separately and exists in many recensions. 

One Act—the second—and the Martyrdom were first edited by 
Tischendorf. Batiffol printed the remainder in 1890, and Bonnet, 
using more manuscripts, gives the final edition in his Acta Apost. 
Apocr. ii. 1. Besides the Greek text, there is a single Act extant only 
in Syriac, edited by Wright, which, so far as its general character 
goes, might well have formed part of the Greek Acts: but it is difficult 
to fit it into the framework. 

An analysis, with translations of the more interesting passages, will 
suffice for these Acts, and for the rest of their class. 


I. When he came out of Galilee and raised the dead man. 


1 When he was come out of Galilee, a widow was carrying out 
her only son to burial. Philip asked her about her grief: I have 
spent in vain much money on the gods, Ares, Apollo, Hermes, 
Artemis, Zeus, Athena, the Sun and Moon, and I think they are 
asleep as far as Iam concerned. And I consulted a diviner to no 
purpose. 

2 The apostle said: Thou hast suffered nothing strange, 
mother, for thus doth the devil deceive men. Assuage thy grief 
and I will raise thy son in the name of Jesus. 

8 She said: It seems it were better for me not to marry, and 
to eat nothing but bread and water. Philip: You are right. 
Chastity is especially dear to God. 

4 She said: I believe in Jesus whom thou preachest. He 
raised her son, who sat up and said: Whence is this light? and 
how comes it that an angel came and opened the prison of 
judgement where I was shut up? where I saw such torments 
as the tongue of man cannot describe. 

5 So all were baptized. And the youth followed the apostle. 


II. When he went unto Greece of Athens (!) 


6 When he entered into the city of Athens which is called 
Hellas, 300 philosophers gathered and said: Let us go and see 
what his wisdom is, for they say of the wise men of Asia that 


the apostles by Abdias the disciple of Simon and Jude. Abdias wrote 
in Hebrew: Eutropius his disciple translated him into Greek: Africanus 
put him into Latin, in ten books. 


440 THE SECONDARY ACTS 


their wisdom is great. For they supposed Philip to be a philoso- 
pher: he travelled only in a cloak and an undergarment. So 
they assembled and looked into their books, lest he should get 
the better of them. 

7 They said: If you have anything new to tell us, let us hear 
it, for we need nothing else but only to hear some new thing. 

8 Philip: Then you must cast away the old man. The Lord 
said: Ye cannot put new wine into old bottles. I am glad to 
hear that you desire something new, for my Lord’s teaching is 
new. 

9 The philosophers: Who is thy Lord? Philip: Jesus Christ. 

10 They: This is a new name to us. Give us three days to 
look into it. 

11 They consulted, and said: Perhaps it will be best to send 
for the high priest of the Jews to discuss it with him. 

12 So they wrote: The philosophers of Greece to Ananias the 
great high priest of the Jews at Jerusalem—and stated the case. 

18 On reading the letter Ananias rent his clothes and said: 
Is that deceiver in Athens also? And Mansémat, that is, Satan, 
entered into him. (This is another form of Mastema, the name 
of Satan in Jubilees and elsewhere.) And he consulted with the 
lawyers and Pharisees, and they said: Arm thyself and take 
500 men and go and at all costs destroy Philip. 

14 So he came in the high-priestly garments with great pomp, 
and he and the philosophers went to Philip’s lodging, and he 
came out, and Ananias said: Thou sorcerer and wizard, I know 
thee, that thy master the deceiver at Jerusalem called thee son 
of thunder; did not Judaea suffice you, but must you come here 
to deceive? Philip said: May the veil of unbelief be taken from 
thee, and thou learn who is the deceiver, thou or I. 

15 Ananias’ address: how Jesus destroyed the law and allowed 
all meats—was crucified, the disciples stole his body, and did 
many wonders, and were cast out of Jerusalem, and now go all 
about the world deceiving every one, like this Philip. But I will 
take him to Jerusalem, for the king Archelaus seeketh him to 
kill him. 

16 The people were not moved. Philip said: I will appeal to 
my God. 

17 Ananias ran at him to smite him; his hand withered and 
he was blinded, and so were his 500 men: they cursed him, and 
prayed Philip for help. 

18 Philip’s prayer: O weak nature ...O bitter sea. Come, 
Jesu, the holy light—thou overlookest us not when we cry to 
ING 5 6 

19 Ananias to Philip: Thinkest thou to turn us from the 
traditions of our fathers, and the God of the manna in the wilder- 
ness, and Moses, to follow the Nazarene, Jesus? Philip: I will 
ask my God to manifest himself to thee and to these—perchance 


ACTS OF PHILIP 44) 


thou wilt believe: but if not, a wonder shall befall thee. And he 
prayed God to send his Son. 

20 The heavens opened and Jesus appeared in glory, his face 
seven times brighter than the sun, and his raiment whiter than 
snow. All the idols of Athens fell, and the devils in them fled, 
crying out. Philip said: Hearest thou not the devils, and 
believest thou not him that is here? Ananias: I have no God 
save him that gave the manna in the wilderness. 

21 Jesus went up into heaven, and there was a great earth- 
quake, and the people fled to the apostle, crying for mercy. 

22 Philip: There is no envy in us, and the grace of Christ 
shall restore your sight, but first let the high priest see. A voice 
from heaven: Philip, once son of thunder but now of meekness, 
whatsoever thou askest my Father he will do for thee. The 
people were afraid at the voice. In the name of Christ, Philip 
made Ananias see. He said: How great is the art magic of 
Jesus! this Philip in a moment (or for a little) hath blinded me 
and in a moment restored my sight! I cannot be convinced by 
witchcraft. The 500 asked Philip to give back their sight that 
they might slay the unbelieving Ananias. 

23 Philip: Render not evil for evil. To Ananias: There shall 
be a great sign shown in thee. Ananias: I know that thou art 
a sorcerer and disciple of Jesus; thou canst not bewitch me. 
Philip, to Jesus: Zabarthan, sabathabat, bramanouch, come 
quickly! The earth opened and swallowed Ananias to the knees. 
He cried: This is real magic, that the earth clave when Philip 
threatened it in Hebrew—and there are hooks below pulling at 
my legs to make me believe, but I will not, for I know his witch- 
craft from Jerusalem. 

24 Philip, to the earth: Take him to the middle. And he sank 
further and said: One foot is frozen and the other hot—but I will 
not believe. The people wanted to stone him, but Philip checked 
them: This is for your salvation; if he repent, I will bring him 
up, but if not, he shall be swallowed into the deep. 

25 He spread out his hand in the air over the 500, and their 
eyes were opened and they praised God. Philip, to Ananias: 
Confess now with a pure heart that Jesus is Lord, that thou 
mayest be saved like these. But he laughed at him. 

26 Seeing him obstinate, Philip said to the earth: Open and 
swallow him to the neck. 27 And one of the first men of the 
city came and said: A devil has attacked my son, saying: As 
thou hast let a stranger come to the city, who destroys our idols, 
what can I do but kill thine only son? and he has suffocated 
him. Help me, for I also believe. 

28 Bring me thy son. And he ran, calling to his son, and bade 
the servants bring him: he was 23 years old. Philip seeing him, 
grieved, and said to Ananias: This is through your folly: if 
I raise him will you believe? Ananias: I know you will raise 


442, THE SECONDARY ACTS 


him by your magic, but I will not believe. Philip was wroth and 
said: Catathema (cursed thing), go down into the abyss in the 
sight of all. And he was swallowed up: but the high-priestly 
robe flew away from him, and therefore no man knows where it is 
from that day. 

Philip raised the lad and drove away the devil. 

29 The people cried out, believing in God, and the 500 were 
baptized. And Philip stayed two years at Athens, and founded 
a church and ordained a bishop and a presbyter, and departed 
to Parthia to preach. 


Ill. Done in Parthia by Philip. 


80 When Philip came to Parthia he found in a city the apostle 
Peter with disciples, and said: I pray you strengthen me, that 
I may go and preach like you. 81 And they prayed for him. 

82 And John was there also, and said to Philip: Andrew 
is gone to Achaia and Thrace, and Thomas to India and the 
wicked flesh-eaters, and Matthew to the savage troglodytes. And 
do thou not be slack, for Jesus is with thee. And they let him 
depart. 

33 And he came to the sea in the borders of the Candaci and 
found a ship going to Azotus, and agreed with the sailors for 
four staters, and sailed. A great wind came, and they began to 
cast out the tackle and say farewell to each other and lament. 

34 Philip consoled them: Not even the ship shall be lost. He 
went up on the prow and said: Sea, sea, Jesus Christ by me his 
servant bids thee still thy wrath. There was calm, and the 
sailors thanked him and asked to become servants of Jesus. 
35 And he instructed them to forsake the cares of this life. 
86 And they believed, and Philip landed and baptized them all. 


IV. Of the daughter of Nicocleides, whom he healed at Azotus. 


37 There was great commotion in Azotus because of Philip’s 
miracles, and many came and were healed, and devils were cast 
out and cried out against him. And people said divers things of 
him, some that he was good, and others that he was a wizard, 
and separated husbands and wives and preached chastity. 

88 Evening came onandall dispersed. Philip sought a lodging, 
and went to the warehouses of one Nicocleides, a recorder 
(registrar), friend of the king, where many strangers lodged. 

39 He stood in a corner and prayed for blessing and healing on 
the house. 

40 Charitine, daughter of Nicocleides, heard him and wept all 
night. She had a sore disease in her eye. In the morning she 
went to her father and said: I can no longer bear the taunts of 
my companions about my eye. He said: What can I do? have 
Inot called in Leucius the king’s physician and Elides the queen’s 


ACTS OF PHILIP 443 


eunuch and Solgia her attendant. She: I know it; but there 
is a strange physician come here last night: call him. 

41 He went to the warehouses and found Philip: Art thou the 
physician lately come? Philip: Jesus is my physician. I will 
come with thee. They found the daughter weeping. 42 After 
reassuring words she fell at his feet: I sprinkle my chamber with 
pure water and lay my linen garments under thy feet; help me, 
for I know thou canst. To her father: Let us bring him in, and 
let him see my disease. 

43 Philip comforted and instructed them, and bade her rise 
and put her right hand on her face and say: In the name of 
Jesus Christ let my eye be healed. And it was. 44 And both 
believed and were baptized, and a number of servants. And 
Charitine put on male attire and followed Philip. 


V. Done in the city Nicatera; and of Ireus. 


45 Philip had in mind to go to Nicatera, a city of Greece, and 
many disciples accompanied him, and he taught continually. 
46 And when he arrived there was great stir: What shall we do, 
for his teaching will prevail ... he separates husbands and wives. 
Let us cast him out before he begins to preach and our wives 
are deceived. 

47 There were Jews, too, who spoke against him; but a chief 
of them, Ireus, said: Do not use force; let us test his teaching. 

48 Ireus was wealthy. He was a just man and desired quietly 
to foil their counsel. He went to Philip and greeted him. And 
Philip saw there was no guile in him, and promised him salvation, 
for having stood up for him. 

49 Ireus was surprised at his knowing this. Philip exhorted 
him to faith and constancy. 50 Ireus: Lodge at my house. 
Philip: First cleanse it. JIreus: How? Philip: Do no wrong, 
and leave thy wife. And he went home. 

51 His wife said: I hear you foiled the counsel of the Jews 
about a strange sorcerer. Jreus: Would that we might be worthy 
to have him lodge here. She: I will not have him here, for he 
separates husbands and wives. I will go home to my parents 
and take my dowry and servants; four years I have been your 
wife and never contradicted you. 

52 Ireus mildly: Have patience, and you also will believe. 
She: Rise, eat, drink and be merry, for you cannot deceive me. 
Ireus: How can I eat while the man of God is hungry? Put 
away this folly: he is a man of God, of mildness and grace. 
53 She: Is his God like those of this city, of gold, fixed in the 
temple? Jreus: No, but in heaven, almighty: the gods of this 
city are made by ungodly men. She: Bring him, that I may 
see the god in him. 54 He went to meet Philip, who told him 
what had passed, and Ireus was amazed at his knowledge, but 
asked him not to publish the reproach of his wife. 55 Philip’s 


444 THE SECONDARY ACTS 


companions urged him to accept the refuge provided: and Ireus 
was glad. Philip consented to come, and followed Ireus. 56 The 
rulers and people saw it and determined not to allow it. Ireus 
arriving at his gate cried to the porter to open. Philip entered, 
saying: Peace be to this house. Ireus found that his wife was 
in her chamber and went and asked her to come, and put off her 
gay robes. But she was angry and said: No one of the house 
has ever seen my face, and shall I show it to a stranger ? 

57 So he went out and set fine gilt chairs for Philip and the rest. 
But he said: Take them away. Jreus: Do not grieve me. Philip: 
I grieve no one, but I have no use for gold, which passes away, &c. 
58 Ireus: Can I be saved? for my former sins trouble me. 
Philip: Yes, Jesus is able to save you. And what of your wife 
who just now said to you: Depart from me, &c.? Ireus, surprised, 
went to his wife and said: Come and see a man who has told me 
what passed between you and me. She was scornful, and said: 
What is to become of our children if we have to give up all our 
worldly wealth? 59 Arteméla his daughter was listening, and 
said: If my father and mother are to enter a new life, may I not 
share it? She was very beautiful. Her mother Nerkela told 
her to rise and put off her gold-woven dress. Ireus said to 
Nerkela: Let us go out and see Philip [it seems Nerkela was 
converted, but the text does not show this clearly]. 60 The 
women changed their attire for a sober one, and they all went 
out. And when they saw Philip, he shone with a great light, 
so that they were afraid. 61 But he saw it, and returned to his 
former likeness: and Nerkela asked pardon of him and made 
him welcome. 62,63 And they professed belief and were 
instructed and baptized. 


VI. In Nicatera, a city of Greece. 


64 The Jews and heathens were displeased at Ireus’ conversion, 
65 and sent seven men to his house. A handmaid told him of 
them; he came out smiling and asked their errand. ‘The whole 
city wishes to see you.’ He followed them. 66 And the assembly 
were surprised at his modest garb. One Onesimus asked him to 
explain about the sorcerer Philip. 67 Ireus: Why am I examined 
thus? do not trouble Philip. 68 But they said: Away with 
him. And Ireus went home and met Philip, who said: Are you 
afraid? No, he said. 69 The people now came with staves, 
crying out: Give us the deceiver. '70 Philip came forth and 
they took him to the assembly to scourge him, and said: Bind 
him hand and foot. 71 Ireus ran up the steps and cried: You 
shall not. But they would not hear, and Ireus pulled Philip 
away from them. 72 Philip said: If I choose, I can blind you. 
Aristarchus, son of Plegenes, a chief of the Jews, said: Do not 
be in a hurry to blind us: I know you can; but let us discuss. 
I am powerful, and if I let the people, they will stone you. 


ACTS OF PHILIP 445 


73 And he caught Philip by the beard; he was rather angry, 
because of the people, and said: Your hand and your ears and 
your right eye shall suffer for threatening me and insulting God. 
74 His eye became hollow as if absent, his ears pained him, his 
right hand dangled useless. He cried out for mercy. 75 They 
all said: Heal our chief. 76 Philip told Ireus to go sign him 
with the cross and heal him in Jesus’ name, which was done, and 
he asked pardon and indulgence and leave to discuss the matter. 
And the people said: We will judge of it. 77 Philip smiled and 
bade him speak first. He said: Do you receive the prophets or 
no? Philip: Because of your unbelief there is need of the 
prophets. Aristarchus: It is written: Who shall declare thy 
might, O God? and, No man can know thy glory; and, Thy 
glory hath filled the earth; and, The Lord is judge of quick and 
dead ; and, God is a consuming fire and shall burn up his enemies 
on every side; and, One God hath made all these things. How 
then say you that Mary bore Jesus? ... But you will say that he 
is the power and wisdom of God who was with him when he 
made the world. I do not deny that the first Scripture says: 
Let us make man. '78 Philip smiled and said: Hearken all: 
Isaiah said, Behold my servant (child) whom I have chosen... . 
And of the cross: He was led as a sheep to the slaughter. . 
And again: I gave my back to the scourger. .. . And another: 
Ispread out my hands to a disobedient people. And: I was found 
of them that sought me not. ... And David saith: Thou art my 
son. ... And of his resurrection and Judas: Lord, why are they 
increased that trouble me. ... And again David: I foresaw the 
Lord alway before me. ... But David is dead. Take also of the 
twelve prophets: Say unto the daughter of Sion.... And: Out 
of Egypt have I called my son. 

79 Aristarchus said: This Jesus is called Christ. Isaiah: Thus 
saith the Lord unto Christ my lord... .The Jews said: You are 
arguing for Christ. The people and rulers acclaimed Philip and 
said he should be received. 

80 A bier was brought with a dead man, only son of a rich man: 
and with it ten slaves who were to be burnt with the corpse. 
The people said: Here is a great contest for the Christians. 
If theirs be God he will raise him and we will believe, and burn 
our idols. 81 Philip said to the parents: What will you do if 
I raise him? ‘What you will.’ The slaves made signs to him to 
remember them. There was this evil law of burning slaves, and 
sometimes even men’s wives. 82 Philip said: Give me these 
slaves. ‘ Yes, and any more that you will.’ He said to Aristarchus: 
Come, O Jew, raise him. And he touched his face and spat much 
on him and pulled his hand: in vain, and retired in confusion. 
83 Nereus the father said: Raise my son and I will fight the 
Jews. Philip: If you will not promise not to hurt them, I will 
not raise him. N. As you will. 84 Philip went to the bier and 


446 THE SECONDARY ACTS 


prayed, and breath entered into the lad Theophilus, and he 
opened his eyes and looked on Philip. A second time Philip said: 
Young man, in the name of Jesus Christ who was crucified under 
Pontius Pilate, arise. And he leapt from the bier. All cried: 
One is the God of Philip . . . and the slaves were made free. All 
believed. 86 Philip taught, baptized, destroyed idols, ordained, 
gave canons and rules. 


VII. Of Nerkela (and) Ireus at Nicatera. 


87 Nerkela and Artemela were blessed by Philip. 88 Ireus 
and Nereus consulted about building a church, and agreed to 
build it on Nereus’ land. 89 Only the Jews were discontented, 
and decided to withdraw. 90 Philip came to the new building 
and addressed the people, 91 and made Ireus bishop and 
prayed over him, and announced that he was going away. 
92 All wept, but he consoled them. 93 They loaded camels 
with provisions and accompanied him 20 stadia. He dismissed 
them and would only take five loaves. They all saluted him 
thrice, and fell on their faces and prayed for his blessing, and 
watched him out of sight, and returned to the city. 


VIII. Wherein the kid and the leopard in the wilderness believed. 


94 It came to pass when the Saviour divided the apostles and 
each went forth according to his lot, that it fell to Philip to go to 
the country of the Greeks: and he thought it hard, and wept. 
And Mariamne his sister (it was she that made ready the bread 
and salt at the breaking of bread, but Martha was she that 
ministered to the multitudes and laboured much) seeing it, 
went to Jesus and said: Lord, seest thou not how my brother 
is vexed? 95 And he said: I know, thou chosen among women ; 
but go with him and encourage him, for I know that he is a 
wrathful and rash man, and if we let him go alone he will bring 
many retributions on men. But lo, I will send Bartholomew and 
John to suffer hardships in the same city, because of the much 
wickedness of them that dwell there; for they worship the viper, 
the mother of snakes. And do thou change thy woman’s aspect 
and go with Philip. And to Philip he said: Why art thou fearful ? 
for I am always with thee. 

96 So they all set out for the land of the Ophiani; and when 
they came to the wilderness of dragons, lo, a great leopard 
came out of a wood on the hill, and ran and cast himself 
at their feet and spoke with human voice: I worship you, 
servants of the divine greatness and apostles of the only- 
begotten Son of God; command me to speak perfectly. 97 And 
Philip said: In the name of Jesus Christ, speak. And the leopard 
took perfect speech and said: Hear me Philip, groomsman of the 
divine word. Last night I passed through the flocks of goats 
over against the mount of the she-dragon, the mother of snakes, 


ACTS OF PHILIP 447 


and seized a kid; and when I went into the wood to eat, after 
I had wounded it, it took a human voice and wept like a little 
child, saying to me: O leopard, put off thy fierce heart and the 
beastlike part of thy nature, and put on mildness, for the 
apostles of the divine greatness are about to pass through this 
desert, to accomplish perfectly the promise of the glory of the 
only-begotten Son of God. At these words of the kid I was 
perplexed, and gradually my heart was changed, and my fierceness 
turned to mildness, and I did not eat it. And as I listened to its 
words, I lifted up my eyes and saw you coming, and knew that 
ye were the servants of the good God. So I left the kid and came 
to worship you. And now I beseech thee to give me liberty to 
go with thee everywhere and put off my beastlike nature. 

98 And Philip said: Where is the kid? And he said: It is 
cast down under the oak opposite. Philip said to Bartholomew: 
Let us go and see him that was smitten, healed, and healing the 
smiter. And at Philip’s bidding the leopard guided them to 
where the kid lay. 99 Philip and Bartholomew said: Now know 
we of a truth that there is none that surpasseth thy compassion, 
O Jesu, lover of man; for thou preventest us and dost convince 
us by these creatures to believe more and earnestly fulfil our 
trust. Now therefore, Lord Jesu Christ, come and grant life and 
breath and secure footing (existence?) to these creatures, that 
they may forsake their nature of beast and cattle and come unto 
tameness, and no longer eat flesh, nor the kid the food of cattle; 
but that men’s hearts may be given them, and they may follow 
us wherever we go, and eat what we eat, to thy glory, and speak 
after the manner of men, glorifying thy name. 

100 And in that hour the leopard and kid rose up and lifted 
up their forefeet and said: We glorify and bless thee that hast 
visited and remembered us in this desert, and changed our 
beastlike and wild nature into tameness, and granted us the 
divine word, and put in us a tongue and sense to speak and praise 
thy name, for great is thy glory. 101 And they fell and wor- 
shipped Philip and Bartholomew and Mariamne; and all set out 
together, praising God. 


IX. Of the dragon that was slain. 


102 They journeyed five days, and one morning after the 
midnight prayers a sudden wind arose, great and dark (misty), 
and out of it ran a great smoky (misty) dragon, with a black 
back, and a belly like coals of brass in sparkles of fire, and a body 
over 100 cubits long, and a multitude of snakes and their young 
followed it, and the desert quaked for a long distance. 103 And 
Philip said: Now is the time to remember the Lord’s words: 
Fear nothing, neither persecution, nor the serpents of that land, 
nor the dark dragon. Let us stand fast and his power will fail ; 
and pray and sprinkle the air from the cup and the smoke will 


448 THE SECONDARY ACTS 


scatter. 104 So they took the cup and prayed: Thou that 
sheddest dew on all pyres and bridlest darkness, putting a bit 
into the dragon’s mouth, bringing to nought his anger, turning 
back the wickedness of the enemy and plunging him into his own 
fire, shutting his doors and stopping the exits and buffeting his 
pride: come and be with us in this desert, for we run by thy will 
and at thy bidding. 105 And he said: Now stand and raise 
your hands, with the cup you hold, and sprinkle the air in the 
form of the cross. 106 And there was as a flash of lightning 
which blinded the dragon and its brood; and they were withered 
up; and the rays of the sun entered the holes and broke the eggs. 
But the apostles closed their eyes, unable to face the lightning, 
and remained unhurt. 

It does not seem as if much could have intervened between this 
Act and the Martyrdom, except perhaps the conversion of some people 
in the snake-city. However, the manuscripts give a title thus: 


Out of the Travels of Philip the Apostle: from the fifteenth Act to 
the end, wherein is the Martyrdom. 


107 (Introductory.) In the days of Trajan, after the Martyrdom 
of Simon, son of Clopas, bishop of Jerusalem, successor to James, 
Philip the apostle was preaching through all the cities of Lydia 
and Asia. 108 And he came to the city Ophioryme (Snake- 
street), which is called Hierapolis of Asia, and was received by 
Stachys,! a believer. And with him were Bartholomew, one of 
the Seventy, and his sister Mariamne, and their disciples. And 
they assembled at Stachys’ house. 109 And Mariamne sat and 
listened to Philip discoursing. 110-112 He spoke of the snares of 
the dragon, who has ‘no shape’ in creation, and is recognized and 
shunned by beasts and birds. 113 For the men of the place 
worshipped the snake and had images of it; and called Hierapolis 
Ophioryme. And many were converted. 114 And Nicanora 
the proconsul’s wife believed; she was diseased, especially in 
her eyes, and had been healed. She now came in a silver litter. 
115 And Mariamne said in Hebrew: Alikaman, ikasame, marmari, 
iachaman, mastranan, achaman, which means: O daughter of 
the father, my lady, who wast given as a pledge to the serpent, 
Christ is come to thee (and much more). 116 And Nicanora said: 
I am a Hebrew, speak to me in my fathers’ tongue. I heard of 
your preaching and was healed. 117 And they prayed for her. 
118 But her tyrant husband came and said: How is this? who 
has healed you? 119 And she said: Depart from me, and lead 
a chaste and sober life. 120 And he dragged her by the hair and 
threatened to kill her. And the apostles were arrested, 121 and 
scourged and dragged to the temple, 122 and shut up in it 


1 One manuscript tells that he had been cured of blindness that 
lasted forty years. 


ACTS OF PHILIP 449 


(with the leopard and the kid. These are omitted in the principal 
text, but constantly occur in another recension: rightly, of 
course). 123 The people and priests came and demanded 
vengeance on the sorcerers. 124 The proconsul was afraid of his 
wife, for he had been almost blinded by a wonderful light when 
he looked through the window at her when praying. 125 They 
stripped and searched the apostles for charms, and pierced 
Philip’s ankles and thighs and hung him head downward, and 
Bartholomew they hung naked by the hair. 126 And they 
smiled on each other, as not being tormented. But Mariamne on 
being stripped became like an ark of glass full of light and fire, 
and every one ran away. 127 And Philip and Bartholomew 
talked in Hebrew, and Philip said: Shall we call down fire from 
heaven? 128 And now John arrived, and asked what was 
happening, and the people told him. 129 And he was taken 
to the place. Philip said to Bartholomew in Hebrew: Here is 
John the son of Baréga (or, he that is in Barek), that is (or, where 
is) the living water. And John said: The mystery of him that 
hanged between the heaven and the earth be with you. 

130 Then John addressed the people, warning them against 
the serpent. Inter alia: When all matter was wrought and spread 
out throughout the system of heaven, the works of God entreated 
God that they might see his glory: and when they saw it, their 
desire became gall and bitterness, and the earth became the 
storehouse of that which went astray, and the result and the 
superfluity of the creation was gathered together and became 
like an egg: and the serpent was born. 

181 The people said : We took you for a fellow citizen, but you 
are in league with these men. The priests are going to wring 
out your blood and mix it with wine and give it to the Viper. 
When they came to take John their hands were paralysed. John 
said to Philip: Let us not render evil for evil. Philip said: 
I shall endure it no longer. 132 The three others dissuaded him ; 
but he said: Abalo, arimouni, douthael, tharseleén, nachaoth, 
aeidounaph, teleteloein, which is (after many invocations descrip- 
tive of God): let the deep open and swallow these men: yea, 
Sabaoth. 133 It opened and the whole place was swallowed, 
about 7,000 men, save where the apostles were. And their voices 
came up, crying for mercy and saying: Lo, the cross enlighteneth 
us. And a voice was heard: I will have mercy on you in my 
cross of light. 184 But Stachys and his house, and Nicanora, 
and 50 others, and 100 virgins remained safe. 135 Jesus appeared 
and rebuked Philip. 186 But he defended himself. 137 And 
the Lord said: Since you have been unforgiving and wrathful, 
you shall indeed die in glory and be taken by angels to paradise, 
but shall remain outside it forty days, in fear of the flaming sword, 
and then I will send Michael and he shall let you in. And 
Bartholomew shall go to Lycaonia and be crucified there, and 


870 Gg 


450 THE SECONDARY ACTS 


Mariamne’s body shall be laid up in the river Jordan. And I shall 
bring back those who have been swallowed up. 138 And he drew 
a cross in the air, reaching down into the abyss, and it was filled 
with light, and the cross was like a ladder. And Jesus called the 
people, and they all came up, save the proconsul and the Viper. 
And seeing the apostles they mourned and repented. 139 And 
Philip, still hanging, spoke to them and told them of his offence. 
140 And some ran to take him down: but he refused and spoke 
to them. ... “‘ Be not grieved that I hang thus, for I bear the form 
(type) of the first man, who was brought upon earth head down- 
wards, and again by the tree of the cross made alive from the 
death of his transgression. And now do I fulfil the precept. For 
the Lord said to me: Unless ye make that which is beneath to 
be above, and the left to be right (and the right left), ye shall not 
enter into my kingdom. Be like me in this: for all the world is 
turned the wrong way, and every soul that is in it.” 141 Further 
he spoke to them of the incarnation, 142 and bade them loose 
Bartholomew, and told him and Mariamne of their destiny. 
Build a church in the place where I die, and let the leopard and 
kid be there, and let Nicanora look after them till they die, and 
then bury them at the church gate: and let your peace be in the 
house of Stachys: and he exhorted them to purity. ‘‘ Therefore 
our brother Peter fled from every place where a woman was: 
and further, he had offence given by reason of his own daughter. 
And he prayed the Lord, and she had a palsy of the side that she 
might not be led astray.’”’ 143 Bury me not in linen like the Lord, 
but in papyrus, and pray for me forty days. Where my blood 
is dropping a vine will grow, and ye shall use the wine of it for 
the cup: and partake of it on the third day. 144 And he prayed 
the Lord to receive him, and protect him against all enemies. 
“Let not their dark air cover me, that I may pass the waters of 
fire and all the abyss. Clothe me in thy glorious robe and thy 
seal of light that ever shineth, until I have passed by all the rulers 
of the world and the evil dragon that opposeth us.”’ 145 And he 
died. 146 And they buried him as he directed. And a heavenly 
voice said he had received the crown. 

147 After three days the vine grew up. And they made the 
offering daily for forty days, and built the church and made 
Stachys bishop. And all the city believed. 148 And at the end 
of forty days the Saviour appeared in the form of Philip and told 
Bartholomew and Mariamne that he had entered paradise, and 
bade them go their ways. And Bartholomew went to Lycaonia 
and Mariamne to Jordan, and Stachys and the brethren abode 
where they were. 


The narrative of the Act preserved in Syriac is this. 


Philip, at Jerusalem, had a vision of Jesus, who commanded 
him to go to the city of Carthage, ‘which is in Azotus’, and drive 
out the ruler of Satan, and preach the kingdom. He said: 


ACTS OF PHILIP 451 


I know not Latin or Greek, and the people there do not know 
Aramaic. Jesus said: Did I not create Adam and give him 
speech? Go, and I will be with thee. 

He went to Samaria, thence to Caesarea, and to the harbour, 
and found a ship waiting for a wind. Asked to take Philip to 
Carthage, the captain said: Do not annoy me; we have waited 
twenty days: fetch your baggage and perhaps we shall get a wind, 
for you look like a servant of God. Philip: I have none; tell the 
passengers to come on board. ... Let us pray for a fair wind. 
Turning to the west he commanded the angel of peace who has 
charge of fair winds to send a wind to take him to Carthage in 
a single day. 

On board was a Jew, Ananias, who blasphemed (sotto voce, it 
seems) and said: May Adonai recompense thee, and the Christ 
on whom thou callest, who is become dust and lies in Jerusalem, 
while thou livest and leadest ignorant men astray by his name. 

A wind came and filled the sail. The Jew rose to help to hoist 
the sail, and an angel bound him by the great toes and hung him 
head down on the top of the sail. The ship flew onward and the Jew 
cried out. Philip said: You shall not come down till you confess. 
He confessed his secret blasphemy. Philip: Dost thou now believe ? 
Ananias confessed belief in a speech in which he enumerated 
Christ’s (God’s) mighty acts from creation to the deliverance of 
Susanna. Philip asked that he might be pardoned, and the angel 
brought him down. And the 495 men on the ship feared. 

They looked up and saw the pharos of Carthage, and said : 
Can this be true? O fools, said Ananias, did ye not see what 
befell me for unbelief? If he commands that city in Christ’s 
name, it will take all its inhabitants and go and stop in Egypt. 
The ship came into harbour. Philip dismissed the passengers, 
and stayed on board to confirm the captain. 

On the Sunday he went up to the city to drive out Satan, and 
as he entered the gates, signed himself with the cross. He saw 
a black man on a throne with two serpents about his loins, and 
eyes like coals of fire, and flame coming from his mouth; there 
was a smell of smoke, and black men in troops were on his right 
and left. When Philip crossed himself the ruler fell backward, 
and all his troops. Philip said: Fall, and rise not... . The ruler 
said: Why curse me? I do not abide here, but my troops wander 
over the earth and come to me at the third hour of the day, but 
they do not touch a disciple of Jesus. Woe is me! whither can 
I go? In all the four quarters of the world his gospel is preached. 
I am completely overthrown. 

The whole city heard him, but saw him not. Philip bade him 
go, and he took his throne and his troops and flew away bewailing 
till they came to Babel, and he settled there. The whole city was 
in fear, and Philip bade them leave their idols and turn to God, 
They praised God, and Philip went back to the ship. 


452 THE SECONDARY ACTS 


On the Sabbath the Jews assembled in their synagogue and 
summoned Ananias, and asked if his adventures were true. He 
signed himself with the cross and said: It is true, and God forbid 
I should renounce Jesus the Christ. He then addressed them in 
a long and very abusive speech (modelled more or less on that of 
Stephen), enumerating all their wickedacts. ‘Then arose Joshua, 
the son of Nun, and ye sought to kill him with deadly poison... . 
Isaiah the prophet, and ye sawed him with a saw of boxwood. 
... Ezekiel, and ye dragged him by his feet until his brains were 
dashed out. . . . Habakkuk, and through your sins he went astray 
from his prophetic office.’ His face was like an angel. A priest 
arose and kicked him, and he died, and they buried him in the 
synagogue. 

Next day Philip in the ship prayed and asked that Ananias 
might be delivered from the Jews. God commanded the earth 
and it gave a passage like a water-pipe, and conveyed Ananias 
to the bottom of the sea, and a dolphin bore up the body. Philip 
saw it, and after reassuring the people, bade it take the body 
back till he should go and convict the murderers. 

Next day Philip went to the governor and got him to assemble 
all the Jews, and sit in judgement. Philip, to the Jews: Where 
is Ananias? They: Are we his keeper? Philip: Well are you 
called children of Cain, for, &c. Tell me where he is, and I will 
ask pardon for you. Jews: We have said we do not know. 
Philip: Do not lie. Jews: If the spirit were in you, you would 
know that we do not lie. Philip: If he is found with you, what 
do you deserve? Jews: Death from God and Caesar. Philip: 
Swear to me. They swore they knew nothing. 

He looked and saw a man leading a sick ox to sell. He said 
to it: I command thee, go to the synagogue and call Ananias to rise 
and come and put these men to shame. The ox dragged his 
owner along and ran and called Ananias. He rose and laid hold 
of the ox with his right hand, and they came to Philip and 
prostrated themselves. Philip said: Whence comest thou? 
Ananias said: From the synagogue of these Jews, who murdered 
me for confessing Jesus: do me justice. Philip: The Lord has 
commanded us not to render evil for evil. The ox said: Order 
me and I will kill these men with my horns. Philip: Hurt no 
man, but go and serve thy master, and the Lord will heal thee. 
They went home in peace. 

The governor said: These Jews deserve death. Philip: I 
am nol come to kill but to give life. The Jews’ mouths were 
closed. 

Ananias spoke to the Jews and Philip also: but they did not 
ask pardon; so they were cast out. Three thousand Gentiles and 
fifteen hundred Jews believed; the unbelievers left the city, and 
before sunset an angel slew forty of the Jewish priests for shedding 
innocent blood: and all who saw it confessed and worshipped. 


ACTS OF PHILIP 453 


It is not clear, in the present state of our texts, where this episode 
could be fitted in to the Greek Acts. The Third Act, which has a voyage 
to Azotus, seems a possible place. But a glance at the Greek Acts 
shows that in spite of the appearance of method imparted by a division 
into Acts, there is no coherence at all in them, until we get to the city 
of the snake. 

The first Act cannot have begun so abruptly as it now does. The 
second is equally abrupt in its introduction. The third is linked to it 
by the mention of Parthia, but there is great inconsequence in it, for 
it presupposes that Philip has done nothing as yet. The fourth is 
linked to the third by the scene, Azotus. The fifth, sixth, and seventh, 
at Nicatera, are wholly detached from what has gone before, and with 
the ninth we make a fresh start. 


The next, and most famous of the secondary romances, is the 


ACTS OF ANDREW AND MATTHIAS (MATTHEW) 


which we have in Greek and Syriac and in part in Latin. The Anglo- 
Saxon poem, Andreas, by Cynewulf(?), preserved in the Vercelli MS., 
has given an unwonted celebrity to the story. 

It was long thought that this must be an episode from the old Acts 
of Andrew: but Flamion’s study of that, book has finally made it’ 
clear that there is no place for the tale in those Acts: and that our 
story is an early member of that which we call the Egyptian cycle: 
it is a tale of wonder with no doctrinal purpose. 


1 At that time all the apostles were gathered together and 
divided the countries among themselves, casting lots. And it fell 
to Matthias to go to the land of the anthropophagi. Now the 
men of that city ate no bread nor drank wine, but ate the flesh 
and drank the blood of men; and every stranger who landed 
there they took, and put out his eyes, and gave him a magic 
drink which took away his understanding. 2 So when Matthias 
arrived he was so treated; but the drink had no effect on him, 
and he remained praying for help in the prison. 3 And a light 
came and a voice: Matthias, my beloved, receive sight. And 
hesaw. And the voice continued: I will not forsake thee: abide 
twenty-seven days, and I will send Andrew to deliver thee and 
all the rest. And the Saviour went up into heaven. Matthias 
remained singing praises; when the executioners came to take 
victims, he kept his eyes closed. They came and looked at the 
ticket on his hand and said: Three days more and we will slay 
him. For every victim had a ticket tied on his hand to show the 
date when his thirty days would be fulfilled. 

4 When twenty-seven days had elapsed, the Lord appeared to 
Andrew in the country where he was teaching and said: In three 
days Matthias is to beslain by the man-eaters; go and deliver him. 
‘ How is it possible for me to get thereintime?’ * Early to-morrow, 
go to the shore and you will find a ship.’ And he left him. 


454 THE SECONDARY ACTS 


5 They went, Andrew and his disciples, and found a little boat 
and three men. The pilot was the Lord, and the other two were 
angels. Andrew asked whither they were going. ‘To the land 
of the man-eaters.’ ‘I would go there too.’ ‘Every man avoids 
that place ; why willyougo?’ ‘Ihave anerrand to do; andif you 
can, take us.’ Hesaid: ‘Comeon board.’ 6 Andrewsaid: ‘I must 
tell you we have neither money nor victuals.’ ‘How then do you 
travel?’ ‘Our master forbade us to take money and provisions. 
If you will do us this kindness, tell us: if not, we will look for 
another ship.’ ‘If these are your orders, come on board and 
welcome ; I desire truly to have disciples of Jesus on my ship.’ 
So they embarked. 7 Jesus ordered three loaves to be brought, 
and Andrew summoned his disciples to partake; but they could 
not answer him, for they were disturbed with the sea. So Andrew 
explained to the pilot, and he offered to set them ashore: but 
they refused to leave Andrew. 8 Jesus said: Tell your disciples 
some of the wonders your master did, to encourage them, for 
we are going to set sail: so they did, and Jesus steered. And 
Andrew told the disciples about the stilling of the storm, and 
prayed in himself that they might sleep: and they fell asleep. 
9 Andrew said to Jesus: Tell me your art; sixteen years did 
I sail the sea, and this is the seventeenth, and I never saw such 
steering: the ship is as if on land. Jesus said: I, too, have often 
sailed the sea and been in danger; but because you are a disciple 
of Jesus, the sea knows you and is still. Andrew praised God 
that he had met such a man. 10 Jesus said: Tell me why the 
Jews did not believe on your master. Andrew enumerated the 
miracles: yet, he said, the Jews did not believe. ‘Perhaps he did 
not do these signs before the high priests?’ 11 ‘ Yes, he did, both 
openly and privately, and they would not believe.’ ‘What were 
the signs he didin secret?’ ‘Oman with the spirit of questioning, 
why do you tempt me thus?’ ‘I do not tempt you, but my soul 
rejoices to hear his wonderful works.’ ‘I will tell you, then. 
12 Once when we the twelve went with our Lord to a heathen 
temple that he might show us the ignorance of the devil, the high 
priests saw us and said: Why do you follow this man who says 
he is the Son of God? has God a son? Is not this Joseph and 
Mary’s son, and his brothers are James and Simon? and our 
hearts were weakened. And Jesus perceived it, and took us 
apart into the wilderness and did mighty signs 1 and strengthened 
our faith. And we said to the priests: Come and see; for he has 
convinced us. 

13 ‘And the priests came to the heathen temple, and Jesus 
showed us the form of the heavens, “‘ that we might learn whether 
it were true or no”. Thirty men of the people and four priests 
were with us. On the right and left of the temple Jesus saw two 


1 Have we in the Syriac Obsequies of the Virgin a fragment of the 
story of these signs? 


ACTS OF ANDREW AND MATTHIAS 455 


sphinxes carved, and turned to us and said: Behold the form 
of the heaven: these are like the cherubim and seraphim in 
heaven. And he said to the sphinx on the right: You sem- 
blance of that which is in heaven, made by craftsmen, come 
down and convince these priests whether I be God or man. 
14 It came down and spoke and said: O foolish sons of Israel. 
This is God who made man... . Tell me not that I am a stone 
image: better are the temples than your synagogue. Our priests 
purify themselves seven days from women, and approach not 
the temple: but you come straight from defilement. The 
temples will abolish your synagogues, and become churches of 
the only-begotten Son of God. 15 The priests said: It speaks 
by magic; ye heard it say that this man spake with Abraham. 
How is that possible? . . . Jesus said to the sphinx: Go to the 
cave of Mambre and call Abraham; bid him rise with Isaac and 
Jacob and come to the temples of the Jebusaeans to convict the 
priests. It went and called, and the twelve patriarchs rose and 
came out. ‘*To which of us wast thousent?” ‘‘Notto you, but to 
the three patriarchs: go back and rest.’’ They went back, and 
the three patriarchs came and convicted the priests. Jesus bade 
them return, and sent the sphinx back to its place. But the 
priests did not believe. And many other wonders he did.’ 

16 Jesus seeing that they were near land, leaned his head 
on one of the angels and ceased speaking to Andrew: and 
Andrew went to sleep. Then Jesus bade the angels take the 
men and lay them outside the city of the man-eaters and return: 
and then all departed to heaven. 

17 Andrew awoke and looked about him and realized what 
had happened, and roused his disciples. They told him their 
dream: eagles came and bore them into paradise, and they 
saw the Lord on his throne, and angels, and the three patriarchs, 
and David singing, “and you the twelve apostles and twelve 
angels by you, whom the Lord bade to obey you in everything.”’ 

18 Andrew rejoiced and prayed the Lord to show himself: 
and Jesus appeared in the form of a beautiful young child. 
Andrew asked pardon for his boldness on the ship. Jesus re- 
assured him and told him what trials awaited him in the city, 
and encouraged him to endure them, and departed. 19 They 
entered the city, unseen, and went to the prison. The seven 
guards fell dead at his prayer: at the sign of the cross the doors 
opened. He found Matthias and they greeted each other. 20 
Andrew looked at the victims, who were naked and eating grass, 
and smote his breast and reproached the devil: How long warrest 
thou with men ? thou didst cause Adam to be cast out of paradise: 
thou didst cause his bread that was on the table to be turned 
to stones.1. Again, thou didst enter into the mind of the angels 

1 An allusion to something in the Penitence of Adam: we have not 
the complete story. 


456 THE SECONDARY ACTS 


and cause them to be defiled with women and madest their 
savage sons the giants to devour men on the earth, so that God 
sent the flood. .. . 21 Then they both prayed, and they laid their 
hands on the prisoners and restored first their sight and then their 
sense, and Andrew bade them go out of the city and remain under 
a fig-tree and await him: there were 270 men and 49 women. 
And Andrew commanded a cloud, and it took Matthias and the 
disciples and brethren to the mount where Peter was teaching, 
and there they remained. 

22 Andrew went out and walked in the city, and sat down 
by a brazen pillar with a statue on it, to see what would happen. 
The executioners came and found the prison empty and the 
guards dead, and reported to the rulers. They said: Go and 
fetch the seven dead men for us to eat to-day, and assemble, 
to-morrow, the old men, and we will cast lots for seven a day 
and eat them, till we can fit out ships and send and collect 
people to eat. So they fetched the seven corpses; there was 
a furnace in the midst of the city and a great vat for the blood: 
they put the men on the vat. A voice came: Andrew, look 
at this. Andrew prayed, and the men’s swords fell and their 
hands turned to stone. The rulers cried: There are wizards in 
the city: go and gather the old men, for we are hungry. 23 They 
found 215, and lots were cast for '7. One of these said: Take 
my young son and kill him instead of me. They asked leave 
of the rulers, and it was granted, and the old man said: I have 
a daughter, take her too, and spare me. So the children were 
brought to the vat begging for their lives, but there was no 
pity. Andrew prayed, and again the swords fell from the men’s 
hands; and there was much alarm. 24 Then came the devil 
in the guise of an old man, and said: Woe to you, you will 
all die of hunger ; but search now and look for a stranger named 
Andrew: he is the cause of your trouble. Andrew was looking 
at the devil, but the devil could not see him. And Andrew said: 
O Beliar, my lord will humble thee to the abyss. The devil 
said: I hear your voice and know it; but where you stand I see 
not. Andrew said: Art thou not called Amaél because thou 
art blind? The devil said: Look for the man who spake to me, 
for it is he. And they shut the gates and looked everywhere, 
but could not find him. The Lord appeared and said to Andrew: 
Show thyself to them. 25 He rose and said: I am Andrew 
whom ye seek. And they ran and took him, and debated how 
to kill him: If we cut off his head, it will not pain him enough. 
Let us put a rope round his neck and drag him through the streets 
every day till he dies, and divide his body and eat it. They 
did so, and his flesh was torn and his blood flowed, and they 
cast him into prison with his hands bound behind him. 26 And 
so they did next day, and he wept and cried to the Lord: and 
the devil told the people to smite his mouth that he might not 


ACTS OF ANDREW AND MATTHIAS 457 


speak; and they bound his hands behind him and left him in 
the prison. The devil took seven other devils, whom Andrew 
had driven out from places in the neighbourhood (this seems like 
a reference to the older Acts), and they came to Andrew, and the 
devil said: Now we will kill you like your master whom Herod 
slew. 27 And he said: Now my children, kill him. But they 
saw the seal on his forehead and were afraid, and said: Do you 
kill him, for we cannot. And one of them said: If wecannot kill 
him, let us mock him; and they stood before him and taunted 
him with his helplessness, and he wept. And a voice—the devil’s 
voice disguised—said: Why weep? Andrewsaid: Because of our 
Lord’s word: Have patience with them; otherwise I would have 
shown you! ... But if the Lord grant me a visitation in this 
city, I will chastise you as you deserve. And they fled. 28 Next 
day the people dragged him again, and he cried out to the Lord: 
Where are thy words: A hair of your heads shall not perish? 
lo, my flesh is torn from me. And a voice said in Hebrew: My 
words shall not pass away: look behind thee. And he saw great 
fruit-bearing trees growing up where his flesh and blood had 
fallen. And they took him back to prison, and said: Perhaps he 
will die to-morrow. 29 And the Lord came and took his hand 
and he rose up whole. And in the prison was a pillar, and on it 
a statue. Andrew went to it and spread out his hands seven 
times and said: Fear thou the sign of the cross, and let this 
statue pour forth water as a flood. And say not, I am buta stone, 
for God made us of earth, but ye are clean, and therefore God 
gave his people the law on tables of stone. And the statue 
poured water out of its mouth as from a canal, and it was bitter 
and corroded men’s flesh. 380 In the morning all the people 
began to flee. The water killed their cattle and their children. 
Andrew said: Let Michael wall the city about with fire. A cloud 
of fire came and surrounded it, and they could not escape. 
The water came up to their necks and consumed their flesh. 
They cried and lamented till he saw their spirit was crushed, 
and told the alabaster statue to cease. And Andrew went out 
of the prison, the water parting before him, and the people 
prayed for mercy. 81 The old man who had given up his children 
came and besought. But Andrew said: I wonder at you; you 
and the fourteen executioners shall be swallowed up and see 
the places of torment and of peace. And he went as far as the 
great vat, and prayed, and the earth opened and swallowed the 
water and the old man and the executioners. And all feared 
greatly, but he consoled them. 82 Then he bade them bring 
all who had been killed by the water, but there were too many, 
so he prayed and revived them. Then he drew out the plan of 
a church, and baptized them and gave them the Lord’s precepts. 
And they begged him to stay with them a little; but he refused, 
saying: I must first go to my disciples; and he set forth, and 


458 THE SECONDARY ACTS 


they lamented grievously. 83 And Jesus appeared in the form 
of a beautiful child and reproved him for leaving them, and told 
him to stay seven days; and then he should go with his disciples 
to the country of the barbarians, and then return and bring the 
men out of the abyss. And he returned and they all rejoiced 
greatly. 

Whether originally intended to be so or not, there is a sequel to this 
tale in the 


ACTS OF PETER AND ANDREW 


which we have in Greek and Slavonic and—told of Thaddaeus instead 
of Andrew—in Ethiopic, where it forms part of the Egyptian cycle. 


1 When Andrew left the city of the man-eaters, a cloud of 
light took him up and carried him to the mountain where Peter 
and Matthias and Alexander and Rufus were sitting. And Peter 
said: Have you prospered? Yes, he said, but they did me much 
hurt. Come then, said Peter, and rest awhile from your labours. 
2 And Jesus appeared in the form of a little child and greeted 
them, and told them to go to the city of the barbarians, and 
promised to be with them, and left them. 

8 Sothe four set out. And when they were near the city Andrew 
asked Peter: Do many troubles await ushere? ‘Ido not know, 
but here is an old man sowing. Let us ask him for bread; if he 
gives it us, we shall know that we are not to be troubled, but if 
he says, I have none, troubles await us.’ They greeted him and 
asked accordingly. He said: If you will look after my plough 
and oxen I will fetch you bread.... ‘Arethey your oxen?’ ‘No, 
I have hired them.’ And he went off. 4 Peter took off his 
cloak and garment, and said: It is no time for us to be idle, 
especially as the old man is working for us; and he took the 
plough and began to sow. Andrew protested and took it from 
him and sowed, and blessed the seed as he sowed. And Rufus and 
Alexander and Matthias, going on the right, said: Let the sweet 
dew and the fair wind come and rest on this field. And the 
seed sprang up and the corn ripened. 5 When the farmer 
returned with the bread and saw the ripe corn he worshipped 
them as gods. But they told him who they were, and Peter gave 
him the Commandments. ... He said: I will leave all and 
follow you. ‘Not so, but go to the city, return your oxen to the 
owner, and tell your wife and children and prepare us a lodging.’ 
6 He took a sheaf, hung it on his staff, and went off. The people 
asked where he got the corn, for it was the time of sowing, but 
he hastened home. 7 The chief men of the city heard of it and 
sent for him and made him tell his story. 8 And the devil 
entered them and they said: Alas! these are of the twelve 
Galilaeans who go about separating men from their wives. 


ACTS OF PETER AND ANDREW 459 


What are we to do? 9 One of them said: I can keep them out 
ofthe city? ‘How?’ ‘They hate all women, and specially unchaste 
ones: let us put a naked wanton in the gate, and they will see 
her and flee.’ So they did. 10 The apostles perceived the snare 
by the spirit, and Andrew said: Bid me, and I will chastise her. 
Peter said: Do as you will. Andrew prayed, and Michael was 
sent to catch her up by the hair and suspend her till they had 
passed. 11 And she cried out, cursing the men of the city and 
praying for pardon. 12 And many believed at her word and 
worshipped the apostles, and they did many cures, and all 
praised God. 

138 There was a rich man named Onesiphorus who said: If 
I believe, shall I be able to do wonders? Andrew said: Yes, if 
you forsake your wife and all your possessions. He was angry 
and put his garment about Andrew’s neck and began to beat 
him, saying: You are a wizard, why should I do so? 14 Peter 
saw it and told him to leave off. He said: I see you are wiser 
than he. What do you say? Peter said: I tell you this: it is 
easier for a camel to go through a needle’s eye than for a rich 
man to enter the kingdom of God. Onesiphorus was yet more 
angry, and took his garment off Andrew’s neck and cast it on 
Peter’s and haled him along, saying: You are worse than the 
other. If youshow me this sign, Land the whole city will believe, 
but if not you shall be punished. 15 Peter was troubled and 
stood and prayed: Lord, help us at this hour, for thou hast 
entrapped us by thy words. 16 The Saviour appeared in the 
form of a boy of twelve years, wearing a linen garment ‘smooth 
within and without’, and said: Fear not: let the needle and the 
camel be brought. There was a huckster in the town who had 
been converted by Philip; and he heard of it, and looked for a 
needle with a large eye, but Peter said: Nothing is impossible 
with God; rather bring a needle with a small eye. 17 When it 
was brought, Peter saw a camel coming and stuck the needle in 
the ground and cried: In the name of Jesus Christ crucified 
under Pontius Pilate I command thee, camel, to go through the 
eye of the needle. The eye opened like a gate and the camel 
passed through; and yet again, at Peter’s bidding. 18 Onesiphorus 
said: You are a great sorcerer: but I shall not believe unless 
I may send for a needle and a camel. And he said secretly to 
a servant: Bring a camel and a needle, and find a defiled woman 
and some swine’s flesh and bring them too. And Peter heard 
it in the spirit and said: O slow to believe, bring your camel and 
woman and needle and flesh. 19 When they were brought, 
Peter stuck the needle in the ground, with the flesh; the woman 
was on the camel. He commanded it as before, and the camel 
went through, and back again. 20 Onesiphorus cried out, con- 
vinced, and said: Listen. I have lands and vineyards, and 
27 litrae of gold and 50 of silver, and many slaves: I will give 


460 THE SECONDARY ACTS 


my goods to the poor and free my slaves if I may do a wonder 
like you. Peter said: If you believe, you shall. 21 Yet he was 
afraid he might not be able, because he was not baptized ; but 
a voice came: Let him do what he will. So Onesiphorus stood 
before the needle and camel and commanded it to go through, 
and it went as far as the neck and stopped. And he asked why. 
‘Because you are not yet baptized.’ He was content, and the 
apostles went to his house, and 1,000 souls were baptized that 
night. 22 Next day the woman that was hung in the air said: 
Alas that I am not worthy to believe like the rest! I will give 
all my goods to the poor and my house for a monastery of virgins. 
Peter heard it and went out to her, and at his word she was let 
down unhurt, and gave him for the poor 4 litrae of gold and 
much raiment and her house for a monastery of virgins. 23 And 
the apostles consecrated a church and ordained clergy and 
committed the people to God. 


THE MARTYRDOM OF MATTHEW 


will be treated more shortly. It is evidently pretty late, and it starts 
with a perversion of the Acts of Andrew and Matthias, for it assumes 
that Matthew and not Matthias was Andrew’s colleague among the 
man-eaters; and it would seem that very little had been done in the 
way of converting them. 

The beginning also seems to imply a previous story, a vision of the 
Innocents in Paradise. 

1 The holy Matthew remained alone on the Mount praying, in 
the apostolic robe, barefoot, and Jesus appeared to him in the 
form of one of the children that were singing in Paradise. 
2 A dialogue. 8 Matthew said: That I saw thee in paradise 
singing with the other children that were slain at Bethlehem 
I know; but how thou camest hither so quickly, I marvel. 
But tell me, where is that ungodly Herod? ‘ He dwelleth in hell, 
and there is prepared for him fire unquenchable, unending 
gehenna, boiling mire, the worm that sleepeth not, because he 
killed 3,000 children. 4 Now take my staff and go to Myrna 
the city of the man-eaters, and plant it at the gate of the church 
which you and Andrew founded. It will become a tree, and 
a spring will rise at its foot, and the man-eaters will eat of the tree 
and wash in the spring, and their bodies will be changed and they 
will be ashamed of their nakedness, and use fire to cook their 
food, and learn to know me.’ 5 At the city gate he was met by 
Phulbana the king’s wife, Phulbanos his son and Erba his 
wife, all possessed by devils—and the devils cried out and 
threatened Matthew that they would rouse the king against 
him. He cast them out. 6 The bishop Plato heard and came 
out to meet him with the clergy. And Matthew preached to 
the people, 7 and planted the staff. And the people became 


THE MARTYRDOM OF MATTHEW 461 


humanized. 8 He baptized the queen and the rest. 9 At dawn 
the staff was become a tree. 10 Phulbanus the king was pleased 
with all this at first, but when they refused to quit Matthew 
he resolved to burn him. 11 Matthew had a consoling vision, 
and warned the people of his death. 12 The devil whom he 
had cast out disguised himself as a soldier and went to the king, 
and advised him to seize Matthew. 18 He sent four soldiers, 
who could only hear two men talking (Matthew and Plato), 
and then ten, who were routed by seeing a child with a torch. 
14 The devil described to the king the difficulty of seizing 
Matthew, and all that he could do. The king said: Take him 
yourself. I cannot, for he has destroyed all our race. 15 Who, 
then, are you? said the king. I am the demon Asmodaeus 
who was in your wife. The king adjured him to depart without 
harming any one, and he vanished as smoke. 16 That day the 
king remained quiet, but next day took two soldiers and went 
to the church and sent for Matthew. 17 He came out with 
Plato, but the king could not see him. Matthew opened his 
eyes. 18 The king treacherously led him to the palace. They 
pinned him hand and foot to the earth and covered him with 
papyrus soaked in dolphin oil, and poured brimstone, asphalt, 
and pitch on him, and heaped up tow and wood. 19 And the 
fire turned to dew, and all the people praised God. 20 Much 
charcoal from the royal baths was brought, and the twelve gods 
of gold and silver were set round the fire. 21 Matthew looking 
up to heaven, cried: Adonai Eloi Sabaoth marmari marmounth. 
The fire blazed up, and the king said: Where isnow your magic? 
But all the fire flew out about the idols and melted them—whose 
weight was 1,000 talents of gold. And the king lamented that 
gods of stone and clay were superior. 22 The fire burnt up many 
soldiers, and then took the form of a dragon and chased the king 
to the palace, and curled round so that he could not go in and 
made him come back to Matthew, crying for help. Matthew 
rebuked the fire and prayed, and gave up the ghost. 

23 The king had him borne in state to the palace. The body 
and robes were intact, and sometimes he was seen on the bier, 
sometimes following or preceding it, and laying his hand on 
Plato’s head. And many sick were healed. 

24 When they reached the palace Matthew was seen to rise 
from the bier and ascend to heaven, led by a beautiful child, 
and twelve men in crowns, and we saw the child crown him. 
The king had a coffin made of iron and sealed it with lead, and 
privately put it on a ship at midnight and sank it in the sea. 

25 All night the brethren watched at the palace gate, and at 
dawn a voice came: Plato, take the gospel and the psalter and 
go tothe east of the palace and sing Alleluia, and read the gospel, 
and offer of the bread and the vine, pressing three clusters into 
the cup. and communicate with me, as the Lord Jesus showed 


462 THE SECONDARY ACTS 


us the offering that is above, on the third day after he rose. 
So it was done, and the chanter went up on a great stone and sang : 
Precious in the sight of the Lord. .. . I slept and rose up again. 
... And they answered: Shall not the sleeper awake? ... Now 
will I arise, saith the Lord. Alleluia. They read the gospel and 
made the offering. 

26 It was about the sixth hour, and Plato looked out to sea 
seven stadia away, and lo, Matthew standing on the sea between 
two men in bright apparel, and the beautiful child before them. 
And they said Amen, Alleluia. And the sea was to look upon 
like a crystal stone, and before the Child a cross came up out of 
the deep, and at the lower end of it the coffin of Matthew: and 
in a moment it was set on the land where they were. 

27 The king beheld all from a window, and came down and 
fell at their feet and confessed his sin and his belief. He would 
give them the palace for a sanctuary, and the coffin should be 
laid on his golden couch in the great hall. Plato baptized and 
communicated him. 28 The apostle appeared and said: Thy 
name shall no more be Bulphamnus but Matthew; thy son not 
Bulphandrus but also Matthew; thy wife Ziphagia, Sophia; and 
his wife Orba, Synesis. He ordained the king a priest, being 37. 
his son a deacon, being 17: his wife a priestess (presbytis) and 
his son’s wife a deaconess, being 17. [29 (in one recension only) : 
The king destroyed his idols, and issued a decree establishing the 
new faith.] 30 Matthew bade them offer the offering daily for 
forty-nine days and repeat it yearly, and told Plato he should join 
him in three years, and be succeeded by the king, and he by his 
son. Then with two angels he departed to heaven. 81 And 
a voice came, promising peace and safety to the city. 

His day is the 14th of Gorpiaeus (al. 16 November; Lat. 
11 October). 

The most effective part of these Acts is the vision after Matthew’s 
death: the interest in liturgy is quite prominent here. 


We will now take a review of the Latin Acts as contained in the 


APOSTOLIC HISTORY OF ABDIAS 


of which something has already been said. 

It is in ten books. Book I treats of St. Peter. Chapters i-v are 
drawn from the Gospels and Acts; vi—xiv extracted from the Clemen- 
tine literature; xv, the ordination of Clement; xvi, Paul arrives, and 
from this to the end (xx) is the contest with Simon and the Martyrdom 
from the Pseudo-Hegesippus de excidio Hierosolymae, lib. iii. 

Book II, of Paul: i-vi from the canonical Acts; vii, viii from the 
Martyrdom. 

Book III, of Andrew, is Gregory’s book of miracles, and the Passion. 

Book IV, of James the Great, gives us new matter, only found here, 
though doubtless there was a Greek original. 


THE APOSTOLIC HISTORY OF ABDIAS 463 


i. Describes James’s preaching. ii. In the course of it he was 
opposed by Hermogenes and Philetus. Philetus was converted by 
James, and told Hermogenes he should leave him. Hermogenes 
in anger bound him by magical incantations and said: We will 
see if James can free you. Philetus found means to send a servant 
to James, who sent back his kerchief, and by it Philetus was 
freed and came to James. 

ili. Hermogenes in anger sent devils to fetch both James and 
Philetus to him: but when they got there they began to howl 
in the air and complain that an angel had bound them with 
fiery chains. James sent them to bring Hermogenes bound. 
They tied his arms with ropes and brought him, mocking him. 
You are a foolish man, said James, but they shall not hurt you. 
The devils clamoured for leave to avenge themselves on him. 
Why do you not seize Philetus ? said James. We dare not touch 
so much as an ant in your chamber, they said. James bade 
Philetus loose Hermogenes, and he stood confounded. Go free, 
said James, for we do not render evil for evil. I fear the demons, 
he said. And James gave him his staff to protect him. 

iv. Armed with this, he went home and filled baskets with 
magical books and began to burn them. Not so, said James, 
lest the smoke vex the unwary ; cast them into the sea. He did 
so, and returned and begged for pardon. James sent him to undo 
his former work on those he had deceived, and spend in charity 
what he had gained by his art. He obeyed, and so grew in faith 
that he even performed miracles. 

v. The Jews bribed two centurions, Lysias and Theocritus, to 
seize James. And while he was being taken away, there was a 
dispute between him and the Pharisees. He spoke to them first of 
Abraham, (vi.) and went on to cite prophecies. Isaiah: Behold 
a virgin... Jeremiah: Behold, thy redeemer shall come, O Jeru- 
salem, and this shall be the sign of him: he shall open the eyes of 
the blind, restore hearing to the deaf, and raise the dead with his 
voice. Ezekiel: Thy king shall come, O Zion, he shall come 
humbly, and restore thee. Daniel: As the son of man, so shall 
he come and receive princedoms and powers. David: The Lord 
said unto my Lord ... Again: He shall call me, thou art my 
Father... I will make him my first-born. Of the fruit of thy 
body ... Isaiah again: Like a sheep to the slaughter. David: 
They pierced my hands... They gave me gall... My flesh shall 
rest... Iwill arise and be with thee... For the comfortless 
trouble’ssake ... Heisgoneuponhigh... Godisgoneup. He 
rode onthe cherubim ... The Lord shall come, and shall not keep 
silence,... vii. Isaiah: The dead shall rise. David: God spake 
once... They rewarded me evil for good... He that did eat my 
bread ... The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan. viii. The 
people cried out: Wehavesinned. Abiathar the high priest stirred 
up a tumult, and a scribe cast a rope about James’s neck and 


464 THE SECONDARY ACTS 


dragged him before Herod, who sentenced him to be beheaded. 
On the way he healed a paralytic. 

ix. The scribe, named Josias, was convinced, and prayed for 
pardon. And Abiathar procured that he should be beheaded 
with James. Water was brought, James baptized him, they 
exchanged the kiss of peace, and were beheaded. (The tale of 
James forgiving his accuser is as old as Clement of Alexandria, 
who quotes it.) 

Book V, of St. John. i. From the Gospels and Acts. ii. The caldron 
of oil at Ephesus, exile to Patmos, and recall. iii. The story of the 
robber (Clement of Alexandria the ultimate source). iv—xiii. Drusiana. 
xiv—xviii. Atticus and Eugenius (see above). xix. Destruction of temple 
of Artemis. xx, xxi. The poison (see above). Assumption of John. 

Book VI, of St. James the Less. i-vi. from the Gospels and Acts 
and from Hegesippus as quoted by Eusebius (Rufinus). 


vii sqq. SS. Simon and Jude, going to Persia, found there 
two magicians, Zaroés and Arfaxat, whom Matthew had driven 
out of Ethiopia (see the next book). ‘Their doctrines were 
that the God of the Old Testament was the god of darkness, 
Moses and the Prophets deceivers, the soul the work of the good 
God, the body the work of the god of darkness, so that soul and 
body are contrary to each other: that the sun and moon are 
gods, and also water: that the incarnation of Christ was in 
appearance only (in fact, Manichaean doctrine). 

viii. On entering the country they met Varardach, the 
general of King Xerxes, with an army preparing to repel an 
invasion of India. He had many priests and diviners with him: 
their gods explained that they could give no answers because of 
the presence of Simon and Jude. Varardach sent for them and 
they offered to expound their teaching: he said he would hear 
them after the campaign. Jude urged him to hear now. He 
asked them to foretell his success or failure. 

ix. Simon said: We will allow your gods to answer your 
diviners. So they prayed, and the prophets said: There will be 
a great battle, and many will fall on either side. The apostles 
laughed, though Varardach was impressed; and they said: 
The truth is that to-morrow the Indians will send and offer you 
peace and become tributaries to Persia. After some dispute with 
the priests it was agreed (x.) that both parties should be kept 
in custody till the morrow; (xi.) when the apostles’ prediction 
was fulfilled. But they interceded for the priests, whom Varar- 
dach would have killed. At least, said he, you will receive their 
goods. Their pay was reckoned up: 120 talents in all, besides 
the chief priest’s, who had 4 pounds of gold a month: and much 
raiment, &c. (The apostles’ refusal to take this has dropped out, 
it seems.) xii. On his return, Varardach reported all this to the 
king; but Zaroés and Arfaxat made light of it, and proposed 
a test before the apostles came. The lawyers of the land were 


THE APOSTOLIC HISTORY OF ABDIAS 465 


to be summoned to dispute with them. And first they made 
them unable to speak, then restored their speech but took away 
their power of motion, and then made them unable to see. The 
lawyers retired in confusion. xiv. Varardach told the apostles, 
and they asked him to send for the lawyers, and proposed 
a second trial. If the lawyers would believe on their God, they 
would sign them with the cross and enable them to overcome the 
wizards. The lawyers were at first inclined to despise them for 
their mean appearance; but, convinced by Simon’s words, 
believed. xv. The apostles prayed over them: O God of Israel, 
who didst do away with the magic illusions of Jannes and Mambres 
and give them over to confusion and sores and cause them to 
perish: let thine hand be also on these magicians Zaroés and 
Arfaxat, &c. The contest took place and the magicians were 
powerless. One of the lawyers, Zebeus, explained to the king 
how they were the instruments of the evil angel ; and defied them 
to do as they had done the day before. xvi. They were enraged 
and called in a host of snakes. The apostles were hastily sum- 
moned, and made the snakes all turn on the magicians and bite 
them: they howled like wolves. Kill them outright, said the 
king ; but the apostles refused, and instead made the serpents 
suck out all their venom, which hurt still more. xvii. And for 
three days, in the hospital, the wizards continued screaming. 
When they were on the point of death, the apostles healed them, 
saying : Our God does not ask for forced service ; if you will not 
believe, you may go free. They wandered about Persia, slandering 
the apostles and telling the people to kill them when they came. 

xviii. The apostles stayed in Babylon, healing the sick, and 
ordaining clergy. A deacon was accused of incontinence by the 
daughter of a satrap who had been seduced by another. The 
parents clamoured against the deacon Euphrosinus. The apostles 
sent for the infant who had been born that day, and on their 
bidding it spoke and cleared Euphrosinus: but the apostles 
refused to question it about the guilty man. 

xix. Two fierce tigers had escaped from their cages and were 
devouring everybody they met. The apostles, appealed to, made 
the beasts follow them home, where they stayed three days. 
Then the apostles called the people together, and announced that 
they were going to leave them to visit the rest of Persia. On the 
urgent prayer of the people they stayed fifteen months longer, 
baptized 60,000 people, (xx) ordained Abdias bishop, and set out, 
accompanied by many disciples. For thirteen years they travelled, 
and Craton their disciple recorded their acts in ten books, which 
Africanus the historian translated into Latin, and from which 
we have here made extracts. 

Zaroés and Arfaxat always went before the apostles and 
warned people against them, but were as regularly confuted. 

At Suanir there were seventy priests who received a pound of gold 


870 Hh 


466 THE SECONDARY ACTS 


apiece from the king at each of the feasts of the sun (at the 
beginning of each of the four seasons). The magicians warned 
these men that two Hebrews were coming, who would deprive 
them of all their gains: they should be compelled to sacrifice 
immediately on their arrival. 

xxi. After travelling through all the twelve provinces, the 
apostles came to Suanir and lodged with a chief citizen, Sennes. 
The priests and mob flocked thither, crying out: Bring out the 
enemies of our gods. So they were taken to the temple of the 
sun; and as they entered the devils began to cry out that they 
were being burned. In the east, in the temple, was a four-horse 
chariot of the sun in silver, and on the other side a four-oxed 
chariot of the moon, also silver. xxii. The priests would now 
compel the apostles to sacrifice. Jude said to Simon: I see the 
Lord calling us. Simon: I see him also among the angels; more- 
over, an angel has said to me: Go out hence and the temple shall 
fall, but Isaid: No, for some here may be converted. As they spoke 
(in Hebrew) an angel came and said: Choose either the death of 
all here or the palm of martyrdom. They chose the palm. As 
the priests pressed on them, they demanded silence. After a few 
words Simon commanded the devil to leave the chariot of the sun 
and break it, and Jude spoke likewise of the moon. Two hideous 
black men appeared and fled howling. The priests and people 
attacked the apostles and slew them. xxiii. This was on the 
first of July. Sennes suffered with them. Lightning struck the 
temple and split it into three pieces and burnt Zaroés and Arfaxat 
to coal. After three months Xerxes sent and confiscated the 
priests’ goods and translated the bodies to his city, and built 
a marble basilica, octagonal, and 8 times 80 feet in circumference 
and 120 feet high, plated with gold inside, and the sarcophagus of 
silver in the middle. It took three years to build. 

Book VII, of St. Matthew. i. He came to Naddaver in 
Kthiopia, where King Aeglippus reigned. ‘There were two 
magicians, Zaroés and Arfaxat, who could make men immovable, 
blind, or deaf as they pleased, and also charmed serpents, like 
the Marsi. ii. Matthew counteracted all these acts, sent the 
snakes to sleep, and cured their bites with the cross. A eunuch 
named Candacis, whom Philip had baptized, took the apostle 
in, and he did many cures. iii. Candacis asked him how he, 
a Hebrew, could speak other tongues. Matthew told him the 
story of Babel and of Pentecost. iv. One came and announced 
that the magicians were coming with two crested dragons 
breathing fire and brimstone. Matthew crossed himself and rose 
to meet them. ‘Speak from the window,’ said Candacis. ‘ You 
can be at the window; I will go out.’ When the dragons ap- 
proached, both fell asleep at Matthew’s feet, and he challenged 
the magiciansto rouse them. They could not. Then he adjured 
them to go quietly and hurt no man, and so they did. v. The 


THE APOSTOLIC HISTORY OF ABDIAS 467 


apostle then spoke, describing Paradise at length, and (vi) the 
Fall (the description of Paradise is rather interesting). vii. It 
was now announced that Euphranor the king’s son was dead. 
The magicians, who could not raise him, said he had been taken 
up among the gods, and an image and temple ought to be built. 
Candacis said: Keep these men till Matthew comes. He came: 
the queen Euphenissa fell at his feet. He consoled her and 
raised EKuphranor. viii. The people came to sacrifice to him as 
a god. He persuaded them to build a church: 11,000 men did 
it in thirty days: it was called the Resurrection. Matthew presided 
there twenty-three years, ordained clergy and founded churches ; 
baptized the king, queen, prince, and princess Ephigenia, who 
vowed chastity. Zaroésand Arfaxat fled the country. It would be 
long to tell of all Matthew’s cures and miracles: I will proceed 
to his martyrdom. ix. Aeglippus was succeeded by his brother 
Hyrtacus, who wished to marry Ephigenia, now presiding over 
more than 200 sacred virgins. He offered Matthew half his kingdom 
to persuade her. Matthew said: Assemble all the virgins to- 
morrow, and you shall hear what good things I will speak of 
marriage. x. His address on the divine institution and merits of 
matrimony. xi. Loudly applauded by Hyrtacus and his followers ; 
he then pointed out that it would be sacrilege to marry Ephigenia. 
Hyrtacus went away inarage. xii. But Matthew exhorted them 
not to fear man. xiii. Ephigenia prayed him to consecrate her 
and the other virgins. And he veiled them (with a long prayer). 
xiv. And as he stood at the altar praying, a soldier sent by 
Hyrtacus pierced him in the back and he died. The people 
threatened to burn the palace, but the clergy restrained them. 
xv. Ephigenia gave all her wealth to the church. Hyrtacus sent 
the nobles’ wives to her, then tried to send demons to carry her 
off, then surrounded her house with fire. But an angel, and 
Matthew, appeared and encouraged her. Anda great wind rose 
and drove all the fire on the palace, and only Hyrtacus and his 
son escaped. The son was seized by a devil, and rushed to 
Matthew’s tomb and confessed his father’s crimes. Hyrtacus 
was attacked with elephantiasis, and stabbed himself. Beor, the 
brother of Ephigenia, a Christian, succeeded and reigned twenty- 
five years, dying at 88, and appointing successors in his lifetime, 
and he had peace with the Romans and Persians, and all Ethiopia 
was filled with churches, unto this day. 


This and the last book are linked together by the figures of Zaroés 
and Arfaxat, and strictly Matthew should, we see, precede Simon and 
Jude. The discourses in Matthew are much longer than in the other; 
and a certain consciousness of the existence of the Abyssinian church 
is shown. 


Book VIII, of St. Bartholomew. This, as Bonnet has shown, is the 
original of the Greek Passion, edited by Tischendorf, of which there is 


468 THE SECONDARY ACTS 


but one manuscript, dated 1279. The Latin MSS. go back to the eighth 
or ninth century. 

India is divided into three parts: Bartholomew came thither 
to a temple of Astaroth, who ceased to answer his worshippers. 
So they went to another city; and inquired of Beireth (Berith), 
who said Bartholomew was the cause. What is he like? they 
asked. ‘He has black curly hair, white skin, large eyes, straight 
nose, his hair covers his ears, his beard long and grizzled, middle 
height: he wears a white colobiwm with a purple stripe, and a white 
cloak with four purple ‘gems’ at the corners: for twenty-six years 
he has worn these and they never grow old: his shoes have lasted 
twenty-six years: he prays 100 times a day and 100 times a night: 
his voice is like a trumpet: angels wait on him: he is always cheerful 
and knows all languages.’ For two days they could not find him, 
but then he cast a devil out of aman. King Polymius heard of it 
and sent for him to heal his lunatic daughter who bit every one. 
She was loosed—the apostle having reassured her keepers—and 
cured. The king sent camels laden with riches, but the apostle 
could not be found. Next day, however, he came to the king 
and expounded the Christian faith, and offered to show him the 
devil who inhabited his idol. There was a dialogue, in which the 
demon explained his doings. Bartholomew made the people try to 
pull the statue down, but they could not. The ropes were removed 
and he bade the demon leave the statue, which was instantly 
broken. After a prayer of the apostle, an angel appeared and 
signed the four corners of the temple with the cross; and then 
showed them the devil : black, sharp-faced, with long beard, hair 
to the feet, fiery eyes, breathing flame, spiky wings like a hedgehog, 
bound with fiery chains; and then the angel sent him away 
howling. The king and the rest were baptized. But the heathen 
priests went and complained to his brother Astriges (Astyages), 
who had Bartholomew brought bound, and questioned him. It 
was told him that his idol Vualdath had fallen and was broken 
to pieces, and in anger he had Bartholomew beaten with clubs 
and beheaded (the Greek puts in ‘flayed ’,in accordance with the 
late tradition). And the people buried him honourably, and built 
a basilica over him. After twenty days Astriges was seized by a 
devil, and he and all the priests died. And there was great fear, 
and all believed: the king (Polymius) became bishop and presided 
twenty years. 

Book IX, of Thomas. i. ...I remember to have read a book 
in which his journey to India and acts there are set forth; but 
as it is by many not received because of its wordiness, I will omit 
what is superfluous and record what is plainly true, agreeable to 
the reader, and can edify the church. ii-iv. The sale to Abbanes 
and the marriage feast. v, vi. The palace. vii. Cure of possessed 
woman. The youth who killed the woman. viii, ix. Siphor’s 
wife and daughter. ix—xi. Mygdonia and Charisius. xii. Tertia 


THE APOSTOLIC HISTORY OF ABDIAS 469 


(Treptia) and Zuzanes (who goes with his mother to Mygdonia 
and is converted with her). xiii. Thomas before Misdaeus. 
xiv. The iron plates. Thomas is put into the bath-furnace for 
a night: it cannot be heated: he is brought to the temple of the 
sun, with its gold four-horsed chariot. xv. Virgins enter, singing 
and playing. Thomas speaks with the demon in the image. The 
image is melted. Thomas and the rest are imprisoned. (These 
chapters are an interpolation.) xvi—xxv, epitomize the old Acts. 
The great prayer of Thomas immediately precedes his death. 

Book X of St. Philip, is quite short. i. He goes to Scythia twenty 
years after the Ascension. ii. Before a statue of Mars: a great 
dragon comes out from beneath the statue and kills the priest’s son 
and two tribunes, and makes many ill with its venomous breath. 
Philip banishes the dragon and raises and heals the dead and 
sick. iii. He teaches them for a year: they break the image, 
and many thousands are baptized. After ordaining bishop and 
clergy he returns to Asia, to Hierapolis, where he extinguishes 
the malignant heresy of the Ebionites, who said that the Son of 
God was not born as a man, but took his humanity from the 
Virgin. iv. And he had two daughters who converted many. 
Seven days before his death he calls the clergy together, exhorts 
them, and dies, aged 87, and is buried at Hierapolis, and his two 
daughters after a few years are laid at his right and left. Where 
many miracles are done by his intercession. 

This is wholly divergent from the Greek accounts. Yet some 
Western texts, notably those current in Ireland, are aware of the 
story of his crucifixion at Hierapolis, and blend it awkwardly 
with the Latin legend. 


NOTICES OF MINOR ACTS 


Besides the Acts we have dealt with, there are others which demand 
a brief notice. 

The Acts of John by Prochorus the deacon is a Greek romance of 
considerable length: it has been edited in full by Zahn (Acta Joannis). 
By far the greater part of it is taken up with miracles wrought by 
John on Patmos. It is not supposed to be earlier than the fifth century 
at most. Some of the manuscripts have been found to contain large 
excerpts from the Leucian Acts: the great episodes of Lycomedes, 
the temple of Artemis, and Drusiana—in fact almost all that we have 
of the Acts, except the discourse on our Lord’s life and passion, and the 
death of John—have been thus preserved. Prochorus’s own stories 
are not very interesting. 

Wright has edited a Syriac history of John, attributed to Eusebius, 
‘who found it in a Greek book’. The scene is mainly at Ephesus. 
John takes service at a bath(as he does also in Prochorus), and there 
is a tale of the death and raising of a young man, Menelaus, which has 
attracted the attention of a recent anonymous writer on the resurrec- 
tion—I do not quite know why. There is also a general baptism and 


470 NOTICES OF MINOR ACTS 


a destruction of idols, in consequence of which Nero banishes John, 
and under stress of a rising recalls him. Finally, at the request of Peter 
and Paul, John writes his Gospel in one hour. He died at the age of 120. 
This text exists also in Arabic. 

There are also Greek Acts of Barnabas, edited last by Bonnet, of 
which the interest is strictly local; they describe his travels and death 
in Cyprus—where they were doubtless written (not earlier than the 
Sfth century). With them must be classed the lives of other Cypriote 
saints of the apostolic age, Heraclides of Tamasus and Auxibius of Soli. 

Acts of James the Great in Greek (ed. Ebersolt, Paris, 1902) are 
without interest. 

Acts of Thomas in Greek, edited by me from a British Museum MS. 
(in Apocr. Anecd. ii), are a version (probably) of the Acts in the Egyp- 
tian cycle, which we have in Ethiopic. 

More important, because more widely diffused, are the various late 
Acts and Passions of Peter and Paul. These occupy a large space in 
Lipsius’s edition, where the following texts are printed : 

1. The Passion of Peter, attributed to Linus, Peter’s successor in 
the see of Rome, addressed to the churches of East and West: in Latin. 
It follows the course of the original Martyrdom, adding some details, 
e.g. the names of Processus and Martinian, Peter’s gaolers, and a 
vision, when Peter is crucified, of ‘angels standing with crowns of the 
flowers of roses and lilies,and upon the top of the upright cross Peter 
standing and receiving a book from Christ, and reading from it the 
words which he was speaking’. 

2. The Passion of Paul, by Linus, in Latin. This, again, is the 
original Martyrdom with a few additions. On the way to execution 
Paul meets Plautilla,a noble matron, and borrows the kerchief from 
her head to bind his eyes: she is to wait for him and he will give it 
back. Returning, the soldiers met Plautilla rejoicing; and when they 
taunted her, she told them that Paul, with a celestial company, had 
come to her, and returned the blood-stained kerchief, which she showed 
them. There is a passage about Seneca, too: see below, p. 480. 

In both, the speeches are variously altered and amplified. 

The remaining texts all represent Peter and Paul as joining in the 
contest with Simon, and being martyred at the same time: the older 
legends making a year intervene between their deaths. We have first: 

8. The Passion of Peter and Paul under the name of Marcellus. 
The Latin text is the better known: there is one manuscript of a Greek 
form of it. The opening words are Cum venisset Paulus Romam. 

As in all these texts, there is a good deal about Simon’s magic arts. 
When confronted with the apostles before Nero, he makes large dogs 
appear and attack the apostles: but Peter has foreseen this, and has 
some barley bread, which he has blessed, concealed in his sleeve, and, 
producing it, makes the dogs vanish. 

Pilate’s letter to Claudius (see p. 146) is produced and read before 
Nero. 

When Simon flies in the air, Peter adjures the demons who are 
carrying him to let him fall; and his body is broken into four pieces. 
The death of Nero is mentioned, and an attempt of some devout men 
from the East to carry off the bodies of the apostles. 

4. The Greek Acts of Peter and Paul. This text begins with Paul’s 


NOTICES OF MINOR ACTS 471 


journey from the island of Gaudomelete to Rome. Dioscorus the 
shipmaster, who was bald like Paul, was arrested in mistake for him 
at Puteoli and beheaded, and his head sent to Caesar (for the Jews 
had induced the emperor to forbid Paul’s landing in Italy). There 
are other local legends in this portion of the book. But after the 
arrival at Rome the story takes the same course as Pseudo-Marcellus. 

5. A Latin Passion of Peter and Paul, largely borrowed from Pseudo- 
Hegesippus, has this peculiarity, that the apostles lodge in Rome 
with a believer who is a relation of Pontius Pilate. This person is 
called in by Nero to testify whether Simon is, as he asserts, Christ: 
and denies it, and further suggests that Peter and Paul should be 
called in to give their witness also. The dispute follows. The apostles 
are sentenced to death by Clement, not Agrippa, prefect of the city. 
Hardly anything is said of the Martyrdom. 


The Greek Acts of Thaddaeus centre round the Edessene legend of 
the mission of King Abgarus to Christ, the miraculous portrait of him 
procured by Ananias, Abgarus’s messenger, and the preaching of 
Thaddaeus at Edessa. The Syriac doctrine of Addai tells the same 
story. These are strictly local legends. 

Acts and Passions of disciples of the apostles are sometimes interest- 
ing: such are those of Nereus and Achilleus which tell the story of 
Petronilla, Peter’s daughter; and of Xanthippe and Polyxena which 
borrow matter and language from the Acts of Paul, Peter, Andrew, and 
Thomas. Those of Zenais and Philonilla—disciples of St. Paul—may 
prove to be interesting, and those of Hermione. The Acts of Titus 
by Zenas have already been shown to throw light on the Acts of Paul. 
The Acts of Mark, Luke, Timothy, Longinus, Cornelius, Aquila, 
Ananias are not of much interest, either as history or legend. 

The Oriental Acts—mainly Coptic, Arabic, and Ethiopic—form a 
large mass of matter which it is not practicable to analyse. They 
may be read conveniently in the English versions of S. C. Malan, 
Conflicts of the Holy Apostles; Budge, Contendings of the Apostles; 
A. S. Lewis, Mythological Acts of the Apostles. The two first are from 
Ethiopic, the third from Arabic. They usually consist, in the case of 
each apostle, of his Preaching and his Martyrdom, related in separate 
chapters. Ofthe Martyrdoms, some (Peter, Paul, John, Thomas, James 
the Less) are the familiar stories: James ultimately from Hegesippus, 
the rest versions of the old Acts. The Ethiopic has a version of the 
first six episodes of the Acts of Thomas, and (in Budge) a long life of 
St. Paul which does not seem to have many points of contact with 
the old Acts: besides some stories which are loose and fabulous versions 
of the Clementine romance. The Acts of John are partly from 
Prochorus. The tales of the Preachings of the apostles vary greatly in 
interest. Those which make some impression are Andrew and Philemon 
in Scythia, where a dove is sent as a messenger by Philemon to 
Andrew; Andrew and Bartholomew, where a whale transports the 
party in their sleep, a ship with our Lord as captain (cf. Andrew and 
Matthias) conveys them, and a dog-headed man of hidcous aspect 
is made to become their ally; Bartholomew in the Oasis practising 
vine-dressing; Matthew telling of his visit to the Land of Promise 
where the Lost Tribes dwell; Thaddaeus, identical with Peter and 
Andrew, but shorter. Andrew and Matthias figure here also. 


472 NOTICES OF MINOR ACTS 


One Arabic text is a wild story of Peter and Paul and an emperor of 
Rome called Bar’amus, which does not attach itself to any other 
legend of those apostles. It is as grotesque as the Slavonic Acts of 
Peter, of which a word has yet to be said. There is also a Preaching of 
Peter in which he heals a leprous girl. 

Both Ethiopic and Arabic collections may be regarded as versions 
made from Coptic; but the Coptic texts themselves are for the most 
part very fragmentary. We have some of the older martyrdoms fairly 
complete, and some representative pieces of the other stories. But we 
have also pieces of stories which are not, so far, known to exist save in 
Coptic: for example, part of a Martyrdom of Simon Zelotes, and 
two tales about Andrew which are so curious as to deserve description. 


THE ACTS OF ANDREW AND PAUL 


is the name commonly given to the first. The beginning is gone. 
We find the captain of a ship which has brought Andrew and 
Paul to some city. Andrew has gone towards the city; Paul has 
plunged into the sea to visit the underworld, and leaves a message 
for Andrew to bring him up again. The shipman’s mother—dim 
of sight—comes to meet her son, and he, having Paul’s cloak to 
bring to Andrew, accidentally touches her eyes with it, and she 
sees clearly. Andrew takes the cloak and goes to the city with 
the multitude: a man meets him and begs him to visit and cure 
his only son, twelve years old, who is dying. But the Jews 
oppose his entrance; he tells the father to return home: his boy 
will die, but he must not bury him till the morrow. The father 
goes home and finds him dead. 

Andrew returns to the ship and makes the shipman point out 
the place where Paul dived into the sea. He takes a cup of fresh 
water, prays, and pours it into the sea, bidding the salt water 
retreat and the dry land appear. The abyss cleaves, and Paul 
leaps up, bearing a fragment of wood in his hand. 

He has visited Amente and seen Judas and heard his story. 
Judas had repented and given back the money, and seen Jesus 
and pleaded for forgiveness. Jesus sent him to the desert to 
repent, bidding him fear no one but God. The prince of de- 
struction came to him and threatened to swallow him up, and 
Judas was afraid and worshipped him. Then in despair he 
thought to go and ask Jesus again for pardon: but he had been 
taken away to the praetorium. So he resolved to hang himself 
and meet Jesus in Amente. Jesus came and took all the souls 
but his. The powers of Amente came and wept before Satan, 
who said: After all, we are stronger than Jesus; he has had to 
leave a soul with us. Jesus ordered Michael to take away Judas’s 
soul also, that Satan’s boast might be proved vain, and told 
Judas how he had destroyed his own hopes by worshipping Satan 
and killing himself. Judas was sent back till the day of judge- 


ACTS OF ANDREW AND PAUL 473 


ment. Paul tells also how he saw the streets of Amente desolate, 
and brought away a fragment of the broken gates in his hand. 
There were still some souls in punishment—the murderers, 
sorcerers, and those who cast little children into the water. 

The apostles land, and with Apollonius the shipman go up to 
the city. The Jews refuse to let them in. They see ‘a bird which 
is called True’ digging in a wall. ‘This is really a scarabaeus, 
dixacpov in Greek, which word has been mistaken for Sikatoy. 
Andrew says, ‘Thou bird Sikais, go into the city to where the 
dead boy is, and tell them that we are at the gate and cannot 
enter; let them open to us.’ The scarab gives the message and 
the people threaten to stone the Jews. At this point the governor 
comes out; the matter is explained to him by the people and by 
the Jews, who add, ‘if they are the disciples of the living God, why 
does he not open the gate forthem?’ The governor is impressed 
by this and calls on the apostles to open for themselves. They 
consult, and Paul, suddenly inspired, strikes the gates with the 
fragment of wood from Amente, and they are swallowed up in 
the earth. 

Here two leaves are lost. We gather that the Jews had prac- 
tised some fraud about a dead, or supposedly dead, man, and had 
tied up his face with grave clothes, ‘so that he could not breathe ’. 
One guesses that the apostles bade the dead rise, but he was so 
tightly bound that nothing happened. 

We find a dispute going on: the apostles say that the only thing 
is to order the dead to be loosed. The Jews seek to flee, but they 
are held by the soldiers till the grave clothes are loosed. The 
apostles pray : the dead rises and falls at the apostles’ feet, saying, 
‘Forgive me for my folly,’ and tells ‘ everything that had hap- 
pened’. Andrew says to the Jews, ‘ Who is now the deceiver of 
the people ? We or you?’ It appears from this that the dead 
man in question has been an accomplice of the Jews in their trick, 
and is not the dead child whom the apostles were to raise, and 
doubtless did raise when they first entered the city. ‘This is 
confirmed by the next words of the Jews (fragmentary) : they fall 
at the apostles’ feet and say . . . ‘ (we) killed him in folly, thinking 
that he would not rise’. They ask for baptism. And the act 
concludes with a general conversion—apparently of 27,000 Jews. 

The other story, yet more fragmentary, tells of a woman who 
bore a child in the desert, killed it, cut it in pieces, and gave it to 
a dog to eat, to conceal her crime. At this moment Andrew and 
his companions came up. The woman fled, and the dog came to 
Andrew and spoke, and called him to come and see what had 
been done. Andrew consulted with Philemon (who figures as 
his companion in the Ethiopic Acts)and prayed. In his prayer 
he alludes to a miracle wrought by Christ on Mount Gebal, ‘when, 
a great multitude being gathered, thou didst command that all 
the scattered stones and grains of sand should be gathered 


474 NOTICES OF MINOR ACTS 


together, and we marvelled’. Evidently upon this the disiecta 
membra of the child are joined together, and, from words of 
Andrew which follow, it seems that it was made to weep and 
laugh. But we have no more of the story. 

So much for the Oriental Acts of the fabulous cycle. With them 
I class a text which has only survived in Slavonic—certain Acts of 
Peter translated by Franko (Zeitschr. f. Nil. Wiss., 1902). It is 
imperfect at the beginning. 


A Child (Jesus) comes to Peter and bids him go to the sea 
where a ship waits to take him to Rome. The captain of the ship 
(Michael) feigns reluctance to take Peter on board, because he is 
a disciple of the crucified. There is a storm which Peter stills; 
he then baptizes Michael, and Michael sells him the Child. 
When they arrived at Rome, Peter told the Child to catch some 
fish. ‘Make me some hooks,’he said. And in an hour he caught 
12,000 fish, which followed him about on dry land. 

A Roman noble, Aravistus, bought the Child from Peter for 
50 pieces of gold; and took him to a teacher, whom he speedily 
put to silence (a motif from the Infancy Gospels). In the night 
the house was wakened by angels singing the thrice-holy hymn 
over the Child. All in the house were baptized by him. 

Nero arrested Peter, and the Child went and rebuked him; his 
counsellor Cato smote the Child behind the ear, and was withered 
up (Infancy Gospel again). The city shook, and the dead rose, 
but the Child bade them go back till Michael should raise them. 

Peter was crucified, head downwards. The Child was with 
him, and at the last revealed himself: the nails fell from Peter’s 
head, breast, hands, and knees, and after praying for forgiveness 
for his murderers, he gave up the ghost. 


Such are the main points of a rhapsody which serves to show how 
little the late story-teller cared about not merely history but older 
legend. 

Not even now have all the texts been enumerated which could be 
classed as Apocryphal Acts: but the reader has before him a general 
view of the extent and character of the literature which I hope may be 
reckoned adequate. Put very broadly, the development is from 
rather dim historical reminiscences used as a framework for doctrinal 
teaching, to thaumaturgy plus doctrine, to pure thaumaturgy without 
any doctrine of significance. 

John embodies some traditional memories of the residence of John 
at Ephesus. Paul, perhaps, in the Thecla-story uses an existing tale, 
true or fabulous. Peter has the crucifixion at Rome, the memory of 
Simon Magus, and little else. Andrew is a succession of miracles, and 
so is Thomas: but in all these the discourses of the apostles are the 
real raison d’étre of the books. Not so with Philip, Andrew and 
Matthias, and the oriental cycle. In these the teaching is of a conven- 
tional kind, and becomes more and more perfunctory as we go on, 
while the miracles grow more and more sensational, until we perhaps 
reach the climax in the conversion and baptizing of an archangel. 


ACTS OF ANDREW AND PAUL 475 


The extent to which these Acts have been influenced by the sophistic 
romances of the pagan world has been much discussed, and probably 
exaggerated. The Canonical Acts at first served as the model of the 
genre: of that there can be no doubt. It is with Andrew that I begin 
to perceive the possibility that the author writes with an eye on his 
pagan colleagues in the art of fiction, just as Flamion has shown that 
he has also an eye on the philosophy that was popular in his day. 
Xanthippe and Polyxena seem to me more nearly related to the novels 
than any of the apostolic romances proper; the Clementine romance 
is another example of the borrowing of motifs from secular fiction. 
But on the whole it seems safer to say that these fables were intended 
rather to rival than to imitate the pagan novels—to supply Christians 
with a substitute and an antidote. 


EPISTLES 


Tus form did not find much favour with the makers of apocrypha. 
True, without going into the more destructive theories which would 
deny St. Paul all but four of the Epistles—or, all the Epistles which 
go under his name—many critics regard the Pastoral Epistles as, 
in their present form, not genuine writings of his, and a yet larger 
consensus is against the authenticity of 2 Peter. But, apart from 
possibilities of this kind, it does appear that the Epistle was on the 
whole too serious an effort for the forger, more liable to detection, 
perhaps, as a fraud, and not so likely to gain the desired popularity 
as a narrative or an Apocalypse. Certain it is that our apocryphal 
Epistles are few and not impressive. By far the most considerable is 
that Epistle of the Apostles which has only become known in recent 
years ; and the greater part of this is not an Epistle but a dialogue. 

One famous apocryphal Epistle will not be produced here, viz. the 
Letter of Christ concerning Sunday, extant in almost every European 
language and in many Oriental versions. It was fabled to have fallen 
on the altar at Jerusalem, Rome, Constantinople—where not ?—and 
is a long, very dull denunciation of what we call Sabbath-breaking, 
with threats of disaster to the transgressors. 

Another, not famous, must also be omitted, viz. the Epistle of 
Titus, of which something has been said apropos of the fragments of 
the Acts of John, Peter, and Andrew which it contains. Apart from 
these quotations and others of the same kind, it is incredibly dull. 
I believe it to be a Manichaean writing, or possibly Paulician. It has 
not yet been printed in full. 


LETTERS OF CHRIST AND ABGARUS 


Our earliest Greek text of these—which are found in many forms— 
is that given by Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History (i. 18), extracted, 
as he says, by him from the archives of Edessa relating to Abgarus, 
and translated from Syriac word for word : 

A copy of a letter written by Abgarus the toparch to Jesus, and 
sent to him by means of Ananias the runner, to Jerusalem. 

Abgarus Uchama the toparch to Jesus the good Saviour that 
hath appeared in the parts (place) of Jerusalem, greeting. I have 
heard concerning thee and thy cures, that they are done of thee 
without drugs or herbs: for, as the report goes, thou makest 
blind men to see again, lame to walk, and cleansest lepers, and 
castest out unclean spirits and devils, and those that are afflicted 
with long sickness thou healest, and raisest the dead. And having 


LETTERS OF CHRIST AND ABGARUS 477 


heard all this of thee, I had determined one of two things, either 
that thou art God come down from heaven, and so doest these 
things, or art a Son of God that doest these things. Therefore 
now have I written and entreated thee to trouble thyself to come 
to me and heal the affliction which I have. For indeed I have 
heard that the Jews even murmur against thee and wish to do 
thee hurt. And I have a very little city but (and) comely 
(reverend), which is sufficient for us both. 


The answer, written by Jesus, sent by Ananias the runner to 
Abgarus the toparch. 

Blessed art thou that hast believed in me, not having seen me. 
For it is written concerning me that they that have seen me shall 
not believe in me, and that they that have not seen me shall 
believe and live. But concerning that which thou hast written 
to me, to come unto thee; it must needs be that I fulfil all things 
for the which I was sent here, and after fulfilling them should 
then be taken up unto him that sent me. And when I am taken 
up, I will send thee one of my disciples, to heal thine affliction 
and give life to thee and them that are with thee. 

Later texts add a promise that where this letter is, no enemy shall 
prevail; and so we find the letter copied and used as an amulet. It 
was regarded naturally as the palladium of Edessa, but was also thought 
to act as a protection to individuals. 

The letters form an integral part of the story of the mission of 
Thaddaeus and conversion of Edessa, and part of that legend is that 
Jesus gave the messenger of Abgarus a handkerchief miraculously 
imprinted with the picture of his face. Into all this we cannot enter. 


LETTER OF LENTULUS 
(E. von Dobschiitz, Christus-bilder 318**) 


This can hardly be earlier than the thirteenth century: probably it 
was written in Italy. The texts differ a good deal, especially in the 
introductory lines. The oldest does not present the document as a 
letter at all; but begins: 

It is read in the annal-books of the Romans that our Lord 
Jesus Christ, who was called by the Gentiles the prophet of truth, 
was of stature... 

Others, however, make a letter of it, with a prefatory note to this 
effect : 

A certain Lentulus, a Roman, being an official for the Romans 
in the province of Judaea in the time of Tiberius Caesar, upon 
seeing Christ, and noting his wonderful works, his preaching, his 
endless miracles, and other amazing things about him, wrote thus 
to the Roman senate: “* 

There hath appeared in these times, and still is, a man of great 


478 LETTER OF LENTULUS 


power named Jesus Christ, who is called by the Gentiles (peoples) 
the prophet of truth, whom his disciples call the Son of God: 
raising the dead and healing diseases, a man in stature middling 
tall, and comely, having a reverend countenance, which they 
that look upon may love and fear; having hair of the hue of an 
unripe hazel-nut and smooth almost down to his ears, but from 
the ears in curling locks somewhat darker and more shining, 
waving over (from) his shoulders; having a parting at the middle 
of the head according to the fashion of the Nazareans; a brow 
smooth and very calm, with a face without wrinkle or any blemish, 
which a moderate colour (red) makes beautiful; with the nose 
and mouth no fault at all can be found; having a full beard of 
the colour of his hair, not long, but a little forked at the chin; 
having an expression simple and mature, the eyes grey, glancing (?) 
(various) and clear; in rebuke terrible, in admonition kind and 
lovable, cheerful yet keeping gravity; sometimes he hath wept, 
but never laughed; in stature of body tall and straight, with 
hands and arms fair to look upon; in talk grave, reserved and 
modest [so that he was rightly called by the prophet] fairer than 
the children of men. 


This follows the traditional portraits closely, and was no doubt 
written in presence of one. The Greeks, it may be added, had similar 
minute descriptions of the apostles and the Virgin—just as they had 
of the heroes of Troy. 

I shall excuse myself from transcribing the letters of the Virgin to 
Ignatius and to the people of Messina and proceed to the forged 
Pauline Epistles. The most important of these we have already seen, 
viz. the ‘Third Epistle to the Corinthians’, in the Acts of Paul. 

The Muratorian fragment mentions two of these: ‘There is current 
also one to the Laodiceans, and another to the Alexandrians forged 
(plural) in favour of Marcion’s heresy.’ The statement is obscure, 
and has given rise to all sorts of guesses. We have an Epistle to the 
Laodiceans, but it is entirely colourless in doctrine. That to the 
Alexandrians is gone. We also know that Marcion cited the Epistle to 
the Ephesians as ‘to the Laodiceans’, but this does not help; the 
Muratorian writer knows Ephesians. Very possibly the word forged 
applies only to the second letter, and should be in the singular number. 
If so, the fragment may refer to our Epistle to the Laodiceans, which 
is quite old. 


EPISTLE TO THE LAODICEANS 


It exists only in Latin: the oldest copy is in the Fulda MS. written 
for Victor of Capua in 546. It is mentioned by various writers from 
the fourth century onwards, notably by Gregory the Great, to whose 
influence may ultimately be due the frequent occurrence of it in Bibles 
written in England; for it is commoner in English MSS. than in others. 
As will be seen, it is wholly uninteresting, and was merely written to 
justify oo explain St. Paul’s mention of the letter from Laodicea io 
Col. iv. 16. 


EPISTLE TO THE LAODICEANS 479 


1 Paul, an apostle not of men nor by man, but by Jesus Christ, 
unto the brethren that are at Laodicea. 

2 Grace be unto you and peace from God the Father and the 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

3 I give thanks unto Christ in all my prayers, that ye continue 
in him and persevere in his works, looking for the promise at the 
day of judgement. 

4 Neither do the vain talkings of some overset you, which 
creep in, that they may turn you away from the truth of the 
Gospel which is preached by me. 

5 And now shall God cause that they that are of me shall 
continue ministering unto the increase of the truth of the Gospel, 
and accomplishing goodness, and the work of salvation, even 
eternal life. 

6 And now are my bonds seen of all men, which I suffer in 
Christ, wherein I rejoice and am glad. 

7 And unto me this is for everlasting salvation; which also 
is brought about by your prayers, and the ministry of the Holy 
Ghost, whether by life or by death. 

8 For verily to me life is in Christ, and to die is joy. 

9 And unto him (or And also) shall he work his mercy in you, 
that ye may have the same love, and be of one mind. 

10 Therefore, dearly beloved, as ye have heard in my presence, 
so hold fast and work in the fear of God, and it shall be unto you 
for life eternal. 

11 For it is God that worketh in you. 

12 And do ye without afterthought whatsoever ye do. 

13 And for the rest, dearly beloved, rejoice in Christ, and 
beware of them that are filthy in lucre. 

14, Let all your petitions be made openly before God, and be 
ye steadfast in the mind of Christ. 

15 And what things are sound and true and sober and just 
and to be loved, do ye. 

16 And what ye have heard and received, keep fast in your 
heart. 

17 And peace shall be unto you. 

18 The saints salute you. 

19 The grace of the Lord Jesus be with your spirit. 

20 And cause this epistle to be read unto them of Colossae, and 
the epistle of the Colossians to be read unto you. 

It is not easy to imagine a more feebly constructed cento of Pauline 

hrases. 
: Zahn believed himself to have found a fragment of the Epistle to 
the Alexandrians in the shape of a lesson—a liturgical Epistle—in the 
(eighth century) Sacramentary and Lectionary of Bobbio (Paris Bib. 
Nat., Lat. 18246). It is headed ‘Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the 
Colossians’, but it is not from that letter or any other. 


Brethren, we that are under the power of the Lord ought to 


480 EPISTLE TO THE LAODICEANS 


keep the commandment of God. They that keep the Lord’s 
precepts have eternal life, and they that deny his commandments 
get to themselves ruin and thereto the second death. Now the 
precept of the Lord is this: Thou shalt not swear falsely, thou 
shalt not steal, thou shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt 
not bear false witness, thou shalt not take gifts against the 
truth, neither for power. Whoso hath power and denieth the 
truth, shall be denied the kingdom of God and be trodden 
down into hell, whence he cometh not forth again. How are 
we frail and deceitful, workers of sin! We do not repent daily, 
but daily do we commit sin upon sin. That ye may know this, 
dearly beloved brethren, that our works <are judged, hearken 
to that which) is written in this book: ‘it shall be for a memorial 
against us in the day of judgement.’ There shall be neither 
witnesses nor companions; neither shall judgement be given by 
gifts; for there is nothing better than faith, truth, chastity, 
fasting, and almsgiving which putteth out all sins. And that 
which thou wouldest not have done to thyself, do not unto 
another. Agree thou for the kingdom of God and thou shalt 
receive the crown which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. 


This, again, isa very incoherent little piece; it is rather like some 
curious fragmentary homilies printed by Dom de Bruyne from 
Carlsruhe (Reichenau) MSS. which I am sure are of Irish composition. 
I do not think it can be called an apocryphon at all; there are other 
pieces scattered about in manuscripts called ‘preachings’ of Paul, or 
the like, which are just centos of texts and precepts. 


THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAUL AND SENECA 


existed in the fourth century, for Jerome mentions it, says it was 
‘read by many’, and is led by it to insert Seneca in his catalogue of 
Christian authors ; Augustine also, quoting the genuine Seneca, says, 
‘of whom some letters to the apostle Paul are current (read)’. The 
Pseudo-Linus inserts a paragraph in his Passion of Paul (see p. 470) 
telling how Seneca frequently conversed and corresponded with Paul, 
admired him much, and read some of his writings to Nero. 

Manuscripts as old as the ninth century exist, and of the twelfth- 
fifteenth centuries there are many. The composition is of the poorest 
kind: only its celebrity induces me to translate it once again. 


1. SENECA TO PAUL, greeting 


I believe, Paul, that you have been informed of the talk which 
I had yesterday with my Lucilius about the apocrypha (or 
possibly the secret mysteries) and other things; for certain 
sharers in your teaching were with me. For we had retired to 
the gardens of Sallust, where, because of us, those whom I speak 
of, going in another direction, saw and joined us. Certainly 
we wished for your presence, and I would have you know it. 


THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAUL AND SENECA 481 


We were much refreshed by the reading of your book, by which 
I mean some of the many letters which you have addressed to 
some city or capital of a province, and which inculcate the moral 
life with admirable precepts. These thoughts, I take it, are 
not uttered by you but through you, but surely sometimes both 
by you and through you: for such is the greatness of them and 
they are instinct (warm) with such nobility, that I think whole 
generations (ages) of men could hardly suffice for the instilling 
and perfecting of them. I desire your good health, brother. 


2. PAUL TO SENECA, greeting 

I received your letter yesterday with delight, and should have 
been able to answer it at once, had I had by me the youth I 
meant to send to you. For you know when, and by whom, and 
at what moment, and to whom things ought to be given and 
entrusted. I beg, therefore, that you will not think yourself 
neglected, when I am respecting the dignity of your person. 
Now in that you somewhere write that you are pleased with 
my letter (or, write that you are pleased with part of my letter) 
I think myself happy in the good opinion of such a man: for 
you would not say it, you, a critic, a sophist, the teacher of a great 
prince, and indeed of all—unless you spoke truth. I trust you 
may long be in health. 


8. SENECA TO PAUL, greeting 

I have arranged some writings in a volume, and given them 
their proper divisions: I am also resolved to read them to Caesar, 
if only fortune be kind, that he may bring a new (an interested) 
ear to the hearing. Perhaps you, too, will be there. If not, 
I will at another time fix you a day, that we may look over the 
work together: indeed, I could not produce this writing to him, 
without first conferring with you, if only that could be done 
without risk: that you may know that you are not being neglected. 
Farewell, dearest Paul. 


4. PAUL TO ANNAEUS SENECA, greeting 
Whenever I hear your letters read, I think of you as present, 
and imagine nothing else but that you are always with us. As 
soon, then, as you begin to come, we shall see each other at close 
quarters. I desire your good health. 


5. SENECA TO PAUL, greeting 
We are much pained by your retirement. What is it? what 
causes keep you away? If it be the anger of the lady (Poppaea) 
because you have left the old rite and sect, and have converted 
others, there will be a possibility of pleading with her, that 
she may consider it as done on due reflection and not lightly. 
870 rt 


482 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAUL AND SENECA 


6. PAUL TO SENECA AND LUCILIUS, greeting 


Of the subject on which you have written I must not speak 
with pen and ink, of which the former marks out and draws 
somewhat, and the latter shows it clearly, especially as I know 
that among you—that is, in your homes and in you—there are 
those who understand me. Honour is to be paid to all, and 
so much the more because men catch at opportunities of being 
offended. If we are patient with them, we shall certainly over- 
come them at every point, provided they be men who can be 
sorry for their actions. Farewell. 


7. ANNAEUS SENECA TO PAUL AND THEOPHILUS, 
greeting 

I profess myself well content with the reading of your letters 
which you sent to the Galatians, Corinthians, and Achaeans; 
and may we so live together as you show yourself to be inspired 
with the divine frenzy (horror). For it is the holy spirit which 
is in you and high above you which expresses these exalted and 
adorable thoughts. I would therefore have you careful of other 
points, that the polish of the style may not be wanting to the 
majesty of the thought. And, brother, not to conceal anything 
from you, and have it onmy conscience, I confess to you that the 
Augustus was moved by your views. When I read to him the 
beginning of the power (virtue) that is in you (perhaps he means 
your exordium about virtue) his words were these: that he 
could wonder that a man not regularly educated could think 
thus. I replied that the gods often speak by the mouths of 
the simple (innocent), not of those who try deceitfully to show 
what they can do by their learning. And when I cited him the 
example of Vatienus the rustic, to whom two men appeared in 
the territory of Reate, who afterwards were recognized as Castor 
and Pollux, he appeared fully convinced. Farewell. 


8. PAUL TO SENECA, greeting 


Though I am aware that Caesar, even if he sometimes lapses, 
is a lover of our wonders, you will suffer yourself to be, not 
wounded but admonished. For I think that you took a very 
serious step in bringing to his notice a matter alien to his religion 
and training. For since he is a worshipper of the gods of the 
nations, I do not see why you thought you would wish him to 
know this matter, unless I am to think that you did it out of 
excessive attachment to me. I beg you not to do so in future. 
For you must be careful not to offend the empress in your 
love for me: yet her anger will not hurt us if it lasts, nor do 
good if it does not [this is nonsense]. As a queen, she will not 
be angry: as a woman, she will be offended. Farewell. 


THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAUL AND SENECA 483 


9. SENECA TO PAUL, greeting 


I know that you are not so much disturbed on your own 
account by my letter to you on the showing of your letters to 
Caesar, as by the nature of things, which so calls away the 
minds of men from all right learning and conduct—so that Iam 
not surprised, for I have learnt this for certain by many examples. 
Let us then act differently, and if in the past anything has been 
done carelessly, you will pardon it. I have sent you a book on 
elegance of expression (store of words). Farewell, dearest Paul. 


10. TO SENECA, PAUL, greeting 


Whenever I write to you and do not place my name after 
yours (see the heading) I do a serious thing and one unbefitting 
my persuasion (sect). For I ought, as I have often declared, 
to be all things to all men, and to observe in your person that 
which the Roman law has granted to the honour of the senate, 
and choose the last place in writing (tezt, reading) a letter, not 
striving to do as I please in a confused and disgraceful way. 
Farewell, most devoted of masters. Given on the 5th of the 
kalends of July; Nero the fourth time, and Messala, consuls 
(A. D. 58). 


11. SENECA TO PAUL, greeting 


Hail, my dearest Paul. If you, so great a man, so beloved in 
all ways, be—I say not joined—but intimately associated with 
me and my name, it will indeed be well with your Seneca. Since, 
then, you are the summit and topmost peak of all people, would 
you not have me glad that I am so near you as to be counted 
a second self of yours? Do not, then, think that you are unworthy 
to be named first on the heading of letters, lest you make me think 
you are testing me rather than playing with me—especially as 
you know yourself to be a Roman citizen. For the rank that is 
mine, I would it were yours, and yours I would were mine. 
Farewell, dearest Paul. Given on the 10th of the kalends of 
April; Apronianus and Capito consuls (59). 


12. SENECA TO PAUL, greeting 


Hail, my dearest Paul. Think you that I am not in sadness 
and grief, that your innocent people are so often condemned to 
suffer? And next, that the whole people thinks you so callous 
and so prone to crime, that you are supposed to be the authors 
of every misfortune in the city? Yet let us bear it patiently 
and content ourselves with what fortune brings, until supreme 
happiness puts an end to ourtroubles. Former ages had to bear 
the Macedonian, Philip’s son, and, after Darius, Dionysius, and 
our own times endured Gaius Caesar: to all of whom their will 
was law. ‘The source of the many fires which Rome suffers is 


484 THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PAUL AND SENECA 


plain. But if humble men could speak out what the reason is, 
and if it were possible to speak without risk in this dark time, 
all would be plain to all. Christians and Jews are commonly 
executed as contrivers of the fire. Whoever the criminal is, 
whose pleasure is that of a butcher, and who veils himself with 
a lie, he is reserved for his due season: and as the best of men is 
sacrificed, the one for the many, so he, vowed to death for all, will 
be burned with fire. A hundred and thirty-two houses and four 
blocks have been burnt in six days; the seventh brought a 
pause. I pray you may be well, brother. Given the 5th of 
the kalends of April; Frugi and Bassus consuls (64). 


18. SENECA TO PAUL, greeting 


Much in every part of your works is enclosed in allegory 
and enigma, and therefore the great force that is given you 
of matter and talent (?) should be beautified, I do not say with 
elegance of words, but with a certain care. Nor should you 
fear what I remember you have often said; that many who 
affect such things vitiate the thought and emasculate the strength 
of the matter. But I wish you would yield to me and humour 
the genius of Latin, and give beauty to your noble words, that 
the great gift that has been granted you may be worthily treated 
by you. Farewell. 

Given on the day before the nones of June; Leo and Sabinus 
consuls (non-existent). 


14. PAUL TO SENECA, greeting 


To your meditations have been revealed those things which 
the Godhead has granted to few. With confidence, therefore, 
I sow in a field already fertile a most prolific seed, not such matter 
as is liable to corruption, but the abiding word, an emanation 
from God who grows and abides for ever. This your wisdom 
has attained and you will see that it is unfailing—so as to judge 
that the laws of heathens and Israelites are to be shunned. You 
may become a new author, by showing forth with the graces 
of rhetoric the unblameable wisdom of Jesus Christ, which you, 
having wellnigh attained it, will instil into the temporal monarch, 
his servants, and his intimate friends; yet the persuading of 
them will be a rough and difficult task, for many of them will 
hardly incline to your admonitions. Yet the word of God, if 
it be instilled into them, will be a vital gain, producing a new 
man, incorrupt, and an everlasting soul that shall hasten from 
hence to God. Farewell, Seneca, most dear to me. 

Given on the kalends of August; Leo and Sabinus consuls. 


485 


EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 


The authorities for the text are : (a) a Coptic MS. of the fourth or fifth 
century at Cairo, mutilated; (b) a complete version in Ethiopic; 
(c) a leaf of a fifth-century MS. in Latin, palimpsest, at Vienna. The 
only edition which makes use of all the authorities is C. Schmidt’s, 
1919. The Ethiopic was previously edited by Guerrier in Patrologia 
orientalis under the title of Testament of our Lord in Galilee. A notice 
of this text by Guerrier in the Revue de l’Orient Chrétien (1907) enabled 
me to identify it with the Coptic text, of which Schmidt had given a 
preliminary account to the Berlin Academy. As to the date and 
character of the book, Schmidt’s verdict is that it was writtenin Asia 
Minor about a. p. 160 by an orthodox Catholic. The orthodoxy has 
been questioned (see a review by G. Bardy in Revue Biblique, 1921). 
No ancient writer mentions it, and very few traces of its use can be 
found: the (third ?)-century poet Commodian seems to use it in one 
place (see § 11). 

There has so far been no English rendering of the text; my version 
depends on Schmidt and Guerrier. 

In the Ethiopic version another writing, a prophecy of our Lord 
concerning the signs of the end, is prefixed to the Epistle. Parts of 
this recur in the Syriac Testament of the Lord and part is repeated in. 
the Epistle itself. It is noteworthy that this prophecy ends with 
a passage which is identical with one quoted by Clement of Alexandria 
from a source he does not name—only calling it ‘the Scripture’. 


Testament 11 in Guerrier. 

And the righteous, that have 
walked in the way of righteous- 
ness, shall inherit the glory of God; 
and the power shall be given to 
them which no eye hath seen and 
no ear heard; and they shall re- 
joice in my kingdom 


Clem. Alex. Protrept. ciii. 

But the saints of the Lord shalk 
inherit the glory of God, and his. 
power. 

Tell me what glory, O blessed one. 

That which eye hath not seen 
nor ear heard, neither bath it 
come up upon the heart of man; 


and they shall rejoice at the king- 
dom of their Lord for ever. Amen. 


A similar passage is in the Apostolic Constitutions, vii. 22. On the 
possible derivation from the Apocalypse of Elias see my Lost Apocrypha 


of O. T., p. 54. 
The first four leaves of the Coptic MS. are lost, so we depend on the 


Ethiopic for the opening of the text. 


1 The book which Jesus Christ revealed unto his disciples: 
and how that Jesus Christ revealed the book for the company 
(college) of the apostles, the disciples of Jesus Christ, even the 
book which is for all men. Simon and Cerinthus, the false 
apostles, concerning whom it is written that no man shall cleave 
unto them, for there is in them deceit wherewith they bring men 
to destruction. (The book hath been written) that ye may be 
steadfast and not flinch nor be troubled, and depart not from 
the word of the Gospel which ye have heard. Like as we heard 


486 EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 


it, we keep it in remembrance and have written it for the whole 
world. We commend you our sons and our daughters in joy <to 
the grace of God(?)> in the name of God the Father the Lord of 
the world, and of Jesus Christ. Let grace be multiplied upon you. 

2 We, John, Thomas, Peter, Andrew, James, Philip, Bartholo- 
mew, Matthew, Nathanael, Judas Zelotes, and Cephas, write unto 
the churches of the east and the west, of the north and the south, 
declaring and imparting unto you that which concerneth our 
Lord Jesus Christ: we do write according as we have seen and 
heard and touched him, after that he was risen from the dead: 
and how that he revealed unto us things mighty and wonderful 
and true. 

8 This know we: that our Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ is 
God the Son of God, who was sent of God! the Lord of the whole 
world, the maker and creator of it, who is named by all names, 
and high above all powers, Lord of lords, King of kings, Ruler of 
rulers, the heavenly one, that sitteth above the cherubim and 
seraphim at the right hand of the throne of the Father: who 
by his word made the heavens, and formed the earth and that 
which is in it, and set bounds to the sea that it should not pass: 
the deeps also and fountains, that they should spring forth and 
flow over the earth: the day and the night, the sun and the moon, 
did he establish, and the stars in the heaven: that did separate 
the light from the darkness: that called forth hell, and in the 
twinkling of an eye ordained the rain of the winter, the snow 
(cloud), the hail, and the ice, and the days in their several seasons: 
that maketh the earth to quake and again establisheth it: that 
created man in his own image, after his likeness, and by the 
fathers of old and the prophets is it declared (or, and spake in 
parables with the fathers of old and the prophets in verity), of 
whom the apostles preached, and whom the disciples did touch. 
In God, the Lord, the Son of God, do we believe, that he is the 
word become flesh: that of Mary the holy virgin he took a body, 
begotten of the Holy Ghost, not of the will (lust) of the flesh, 
but by the will of God: that he was wrapped in swaddling clothes 
in Bethlehem and made manifest, and grew up and came to ripe 
age, when also we beheld it. 

4 This did our Lord Jesus Christ, who was sent by Joseph and 
Mary his mother to be taught. [And] when he that taught him 
said unto him: Say Alpha: then answered he and said: Tell 
thou me first what is Beta (probably : Tell thou me first what is 
<Alpha and then will I tell thee what is) Beta. Cf. the Marcosian 
story quoted by Irenaeus (see above, Gospel of Thomas, p. 15). 
The story is in our texts of the Gospel of Thomas, and runs through 
all the Infancy Gospels). This thing which then came to pass is 
true and of verity. 


1 Of the clauses that follow, some it seems should refer to the Father, 
others certainly to the Son: there is confusion in the text. 


EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 487 


5 Thereafter was there a marriage in Cana of Galilee; and 
they bade him with his mother and his brethren, and he changed 
water into wine. He raised the dead, he caused the lame to walk: 
him whose hand was withered he caused to stretch it out, and 
the woman which had suffered an issue of blood twelve years 
touched the hem of his garment and was healed in the same hour. 
And when we marvelled at the miracle which was done, he said: 
Who touched me? Then said we: Lord, the press of men hath 
touched thee. But he answered and said unto us: I perceive 
that a virtue is gone out of me. Straightway that woman came 
before him, and answered and said unto him: Lord, I touched 
thee. And he answered and said unto her: Go, thy faith hath 
made thee whole. Thereafter he made the deaf to hear and the 
blind to see; out of them that were possessed he cast out the 
unclean spirits, and cleansed the lepers. The spirit which dwelt 
in a man, whereof the name was Legion, cried out against Jesus, 
saying: Before the time of our destruction is come, thou art 
come to drive us out. But the Lord Jesus rebuked him, saying: 
Go out of this man and do him no hurt. And he entered into the 
swine and drowned them in the water and they were choked. 

Thereafter he did walk upon the sea, and the winds blew, and 
he cried out against them (rebuked them), and the waves of the 
sea were made calm. And when we his disciples had no money, 
we asked him: What shall we do because of the tax-gatherer ? 
And he answered and told us: Let one of you cast an hook into 
the deep, and take out a fish, and he shall find therein a penny: 
that give unto the tax-gatherer for me and you. And thereafter 
when we had no bread, but only five loaves and two fishes, he 
commanded the people to sit them down, and the number of 
them was five thousand, besides children and women. We did 
set pieces of bread before them, and they ate and were filled, 
and there remained over, and we filled twelve baskets fuil of the 
fragments, asking one another and saying: What mean these 
five loaves? ‘They are the symbol of our faith in the Lord of the 
Christians (in the great christendom), even in the Father, the Lord 
Almighty, and in Jesus Christ our redeemer, in the Holy Ghost 
the comforter, in the holy church, and in the remission of sins. 

6 These things did our Lord and Saviour reveal unto us and 
teach us. And we do even as he, that ye may become partakers 
in the grace of our Lord and in our ministry and our giving of 
thanks (glory), and think upon life eternal. Be ye steadfast and 
waver not in the knowledge and confidence of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and he will have mercy on you and save you everlastingly, 
world without end. 


Here begins the Coptic tect. 


7” Cerinthus and Simon are come to go to and fro in the world, 
but they are enemies of our Lord Jesus Christ, for they do pervert 


488 EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 


the word and the true thing, even (faith in) Jesus Christ. Keep 
yourselves therefore far from them, for death is in them, and great 
pollution and corruption, even in these on whom shall come 
judgement and the end and everlasting destruction. 

8 Therefore have we not shrunk from writing unto you con- 
cerning the testimony of Christ our Saviour, of what he did, when 
we followed with him, how he enlightened our understanding .. . 

9 Concerning whom we testify that the Lord is he who was 
crucified by Pontius Pilate and Archelaus between the two 
thieves (and with them he was taken down from the tree of the 
cross, Eth.), and was buried in a place which is called the place of 
a skull (Kranion). And thither went three women, Mary, she that 
was kin to Martha, and Mary Magdalene (Sarrha, Martha, and 
Mary, £th.), and took ointments to pour upon the body, weeping 
and mourning over that which was come to pass. And when they 
drew near to the sepulchre, they looked in and found not the body 
(Eth. they found the stone rolled away and opened the entrance). 

10 And as they mourned and wept, the Lord showed himself 
unto them and said to them: For whom weep ye? weep no more, 
I am he whom ye seek. But let one of you go to your brethren 
and say: Come ye, the Master is risen from the dead. Martha 
(Mary, Eth.) came and told us. We said unto her: What have 
we to do with thee, woman? He that is dead and buried, is it 
possible that he should live? And we believed her not that the 
Saviour was risen from the dead. Then she returned unto the 
Lord and said unto him: None of them hath believed me, that 
thou livest. He said: Let another of you go unto them and tell 
them again. Mary (Sarrha, Hth.) came and told us again, and 
we believed her not; and she returned unto the Lord and she also 
told him. 

11 Then said the Lord unto Mary and her sisters: Let us go 
unto them. And he came and found us within (sitting veiled 
or fishing, Eth.), and called us out; but we thought that it was 
a phantom and believed not that it was the Lord. Then said he 
unto us: Come, fear ye not. I am your master, even he, O Peter, 
whom thou didst deny thrice; and dost thou now deny again? 
And we came unto him, doubting in our hearts whether it were 
he. Then said he unto us: Wherefore doubt ye still, and are 
unbelieving? I am he that spake unto you of my flesh and my 
death and my resurrection. But that ye may know that I am 
he, do thou, Peter, put thy finger into the print of the nails in 
mine hands, and thou also, Thomas, put thy finger into the 
wound of the spear in my side; but thou, Andrew, look on my 
feet and see whether they press the earth; for it is written in the 
propels 1 A phantom of a devil maketh no footprint on the 
earth. 

+ Not identified. The Christian poet Commodian appears to quote 
this passage : Vestigium umbra non facit. 


EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 489 


12 And we touched him, that we might learn! of a truth 
whether he were risen in the flesh; and we fell on our faces (and 
worshipped him) confessing our sin, that we had been unbelieving. 
Then said our Lord and Saviour unto us: Rise up, and I will 
reveal unto you that which is above the heaven and in the heaven, 
and your rest which is in the kingdom of heaven. For my Father 
hath given me power (sent me, Eth.) to take you up thither, and 
them also that believe on me. 

13 Now that which he revealed unto us is this, which he spake: 
It came to pass when I was about (minded) to come hither from 
the Father of all things, and passed through the heavens, then 
did I put on the wisdom of the Father, and I put on the power 
of his might. I was in heaven, and I passed by the archangels 
and the angels in their likeness, like as if I were one of them, 
among the princedoms and powers. I passed through them 
because I possessed the wisdom of him that had sent me. Now 
the chief captain of the angels, [is] Michael, and Gabriel and Uriel 
and Raphael followed me unto the fifth firmament (heaven), for 
they thought in their heart that I was one of them; such power 
was given me of my Father. And on that day did I adorn the 
archangels with a wonderful voice (so Copt.: Eth., Lat., I made 
them quake—amazed them), so that they should go unto the altar 
of the Father and serve and fulfil the ministry until I should 
return unto him. And so wrought I the likeness by my wisdom; 
for I became all things in all, that I might praise the dispensation 
of the Father and fulfil the glory of him that sent me (the verbs 
might well be transposed) and return unto him. (Here the Latin 
omits a considerable portion of text without notice, to near the 
beginning of c. 17.) 

14 For ye know that the angel Gabriel brought the message 
unto Mary. And we answered: Yea, Lord. He answered and 
said unto us: Remember ye not, then, that I said unto you 
a little while ago: I became an angel among the angels, and 
I became all things in all? We said unto him: Yea, Lord. Then 
answered he and said unto us: On that day whereon I took the 
form of the angel Gabriel, I appeared unto Mary and spake with 
her. Her heart accepted me, and she believed (She believed and 
laughed, Hih.), and I formed myself and entered into her body. 
I became flesh, for I alone was a minister unto myself in that 
which concerned Mary (I was mine own messenger, Eth.) in the 
appearance of the shape of an angel. For so must I needs (or, was 
I wont to) do. Thereafter did I return to my Father (Copt. 
After my return to the Father, and run on). 

15 But do ye commemorate my death. Now when the Passover 
(Easter, pascha) cometh, one of you shall be cast into prison for 
my name’s sake; and he will be in grief and sorrow, because ye 
keep the Easter while he is in prison and separated from you, for 


1 Here begins the Latin fragment. 


490 EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 


he will be sorrowful because he keepeth not Easter with you. 
And I will send my power in the form of mine angel Gabriel, and 
the doors of the prison shall open. And he shall come forth 
and come unto you and keep the night-watch with you until the 
cock crow. And when ye have accomplished the memorial which 
is made of me, and the Agape (love-feast), he shall again be cast 
into prison for a testimony, until he shall come out thence and 
preach that which I have delivered unto you. 

And we said unto him: Lord, is it then needful that we should 
again take the cup and drink? (Lord, didst not thou thyself 
fulfil the drinking of the Passover? is it then needful that we 
should accomplish it again? Eth.) He said unto us: Yea, it is 
needful, until the day when I come again, with them that have 
been put to death for my sake (come with my wounds, Eth.). 

16 Then said we to him: Lord, that which thou hast revealed 
unto us (revealest, Hth.) is great. Wilt thou come in the power of 
any creature or in an appearance of any kind? (In what power 
or form wilt thou come? Hth.) He answered and said unto us: 
Verily I say unto you, I shall come like the sun when it is risen, 
and my brightness will be seven times the brightness thereof!! The 
wings of the clouds shall bear me in brightness, and the sign of 
the cross shall go before me, and I shall come upon earth to judge 
the quick and the dead. 

17 We said unto him: Lord, after how many years shall this 
come to pass? He said unto us:* When the hundredth part 
and the twentieth part is fulfilled, between the Pentecost and the 
feast of unleavened bread, then shall the coming of my Father 
be (so Copt.: When an hundred and fifty years are past, in the 
days of the feast of Passover and Pentecost, &c., Eth.: ... 
(imperfect word) year is fulfilled, between the unleavened bread 
and Pentecost shall be the coming of my Father, Lat.).? 

We said unto him: Now sayest thou unto us: I will come; 
and how sayest thou: He that sent me is he that shall come? 
Then said he to us: I am wholly in the Father and my Father is 
in me.* Then said we to him: Wilt thou indeed forsake us until 
thy coming? Where can we ® find a master? But he answered 
and said unto us: Know ye not, then, that like as until now 
I have been here, so also was I there, with him that sent me? 
And we said to him: Lord, is it then possible that thou shouldest 
be both here and there? But he answered us: I am wholly in 


1 Probably from the Apocalypse of Peter. 

4 Here the Latin fragment resumes. 

* Before the word ‘year’ in Lat. are the letters inta which may be 
the end of a numeral such as quinquaginta (fifty). It seems likely that 
in the archetype of the Latin one or more leaves were wanting. 

* Here Coptic omits several clauses by homoeoteleuton. Ethiopic 
and Latin are followed. 

5 Here Latin ends. 


EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 491 


the Father and the Father in me,! because of (in regard of) the 
likeness of the form and the power and the fullness and the light 
and the full measure and the voice. I am the word, I am become 
unto him a thing, that is to say (word gone) of the thought, 
fulfilled in the type (likeness); I have come into the Ogdoad 
(eighth number), which is the Lord’s day.? (In place of these 
sentences Eth. has: I am of his resemblance and form, of his 
power and completeness, and of his light. I am his complete 
(fulfilled, entire) Word. 

18 But it came to pass after he was crucified, and dead and 
arisen again, when the work was fulfilled which was accomplished 
in the flesh, and he was crucified and the ascension come to pass 
at the end of the days, then said he thus, &c. It is an interpolation, 
in place of words which the translator did not understand, or found 
heretical.) But the whole fulfilment of the fulfilment shall ye see 
after the redemption which hath come to pass by me, and ye 
shall see me, how I go up unto my Father which is in heaven. 
But behold, now, I give unto you a new commandment: Love 
one another and [a leaf lost in Copt.| obey one another, that 
peace may rule alway among you. Love your enemies, and what 
ye would not that man do unto you, that do unto no man. 

19 And this preach ye also and teach them that believe on me, 
and preach the kingdom of heaven of my Father, and how my 
Father hath given me the power, that ye may bring near the 
children of my heavenly Father. Preach ye, and they shall 
obtain faith, that ye may be they for whom it is ordained that 
they shall bring his children unto heaven. 

And we said unto him: Lord, unto thee it is possible to 
accomplish that whereof thou tellest us; but how shall we be 
able to do it? Hesaid to us: Verily I say unto you, preach and 
proclaim as I command you, for I will be with you, for it is my 
good pleasure to be with you, that ye may be heirs with me in 
the kingdom of heaven, even the kingdom of him that sent me. 
Verily I say unto you, ye shall be my brethren and my friends, 
for my Father hath found pleasure in you: and so also shall they 
be that believe on me by your means. Verily I say unto you, 
such and so great joy hath my Father prepared for you that the 
angels and the powers desired and do desire to see it and look 
upon it; but it is not given unto them to behold the glory of my 
Father. We said unto him: Lord, what is this whereof thou 
speakest to us? 

Copt. begins again: words are missing. 
He answered us: Ye shall behold a light, more excellent than 


that which shineth...(shineth more brightly than the light, and is 
more perfect than perfection. And the Son shall become perfect 


1 Coptic resumes. 
* The Lord’s day considered as the eighth day of the week. 


492 EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 


through the Father who is Light, for the Father is perfect which 
bringeth to pass death and resurrection, and ye shall see a per- 
fection more perfect than the perfect. And I am wholly at the 
right hand of the Father, even in him that maketh perfect. So 
Eth.: Copt. has gaps). 

And we said unto him: Lord, in all things art thou become 
salvation and life unto us, for that thou makest known such a 
hope unto us. And he said to us: Be of good courage and rest 
in me. Verily I say unto you, your rest shall be above (?), in the 
place where is neither eating nor drinking, nor care (Copt. joy) nor 
sorrow, nor passing away of them that are therein: for ye shall 
have no part in (the things of earth, Eth.) but ye shall be received 
in the everlastingness of my Father. Like as I am in him, so shall 
ye also be in me. 

Again we said unto him: In what form? in the fashion of 
angels, or in flesh? And he answered and said unto us: Lo, I have 
put on your flesh, wherein I was born and crucified, and am risen 
again through my Father which is in heaven, that the prophecy of 
David the prophet might be fulfilled, in regard of that which was 
declared concerning me and my death and resurrection, saying: 

Lord, they are increased that fight with me, and many are they 
that are risen up against me. 

Many there be that say to my soul: There is no help for him 
in his God. 

But thou, O Lord, art my defender: thou art my worship, and 
the lifter up of my head. 

I did call upon the Lord with my voice and he heard me (out 
of the high place of his temple, Zth.). 

I laid me down and slept, and rose up again: for thou, O Lord, 
art my defender. 

I will not be afraid for ten thousands of the people, that have 
set themselves against me round about. 

Up, Lord, and help me, O my God: for thou hast smitten down 
all them that without cause are mine enemies: thou hast broken 
the teeth of the ungodly. 

Salvation belongeth unto the Lord, and his good pleasure is 
upon his people (Ps. iii. 1-8). 

If, therefore, all the words which were spoken by the prophets 
have been fulfilled in me (for I myself was in them), how much more 
shall that which I say unto you come to pass-indeed, that he which 
sent me may be glorified by you and by them that believe on me? 

20 And when he had said this unto us, we said to him: In all 
things hast thou had mercy on us and saved us, and hast revealed 
all things unto us; but yet would we ask of thee somewhat if thou 
give us leave. And he said unto us: I know that ye pay heed, 
and that your heart is well-pleased when ye hear me: now 
concerning that which ye desire, I will speak good words unto you. 
21 For verily I say unto you: Like as my Father hath raised me 


EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 493 


from the dead, so shall ye also rise (in the flesh, Eth.) and be taken 
up into the highest heaven, unto the place whereof I have told 
you from the beginning, unto the place which he who sent me 
hath prepared for you. And so will I accomplish all dispensations 
(all grace, Eth.), even I who am unbegotten and yet begotten of 
mankind, who am without flesh and yet have borne flesh <and 
have grown up like unto you that were born in fiesh, Eth.>: for 
to that end am I come, that (gap in Copt.: Eth. continues) ye 
might rise from the dead in your flesh, in the second birth, even 
a vesture that shall not decay, together with all them that hope 
and believe in him that sent me: for so is the will of my Father, 
that I should give unto you, and unto them whom it pleaseth me, 
the hope of the kingdom. 

Then said we unto him: Great is that which thou sufferest us 
to hope, and tellest us. And he answered and said: Believe ye 
that everything that I tell you shall come to pass? We answered 
and said: Yea, Lord. (Copt. resumes for a few lines : then another 
gap. I follow Eth.) He said untous: Verily I say unto you, that 
I have obtained the whole power of my Father, that I may bring 
back into light them that dwell in darkness, them that are in 
corruption into incorruption, them that are in death into life, 
and that I may loose them that are in fetters. For that which is 
impossible with men, is possible with the Father. I am the hope 
of them that despair, the helper of them that have no saviour, 
the wealth of the poor, the health of the sick, and the resurrection 
of the dead. 

22 When he had thus said, we said unto him: Lord, isit true 
that the flesh shall be judged together with the soul and the 
spirit, and that the one part shall rest in heaven and the other 
part be punished everlastingly yet living? And he said unto us: 
(Copt. resumes) How long will ye inquire and doubt ? 

23 Again we said unto him: Lord, there is necessity upon us 
to inquire of thee—because thou hast commanded us to preach— 
that we ourselves may learn assuredly of thee and be profitable 
preachers, and that they which are instructed by us may believe 
in thee. Therefore must we needs inquire of thee. 

24 He answered us and said: Verily I say unto you, the 
resurrection of the flesh shall come to pass with the soul therein 
and the spirit. And we said unto him: Lord, is it then possible 
that that which is dissolved and brought to nought should 
become whole? and we ask thee not as unbelieving, neither as 
if it were impossible unto thee; but verily we believe that that 
which thou sayest shall come to pass. And he was wroth with 
us and said: O ye of little faith, how long will ye ask questions ? 
But what ye will, tell it me, and I myself will tell you without 
grudging: only keep ye my commandments and do that which 
I bid you, and turn not away your face from any man, that I turn 
not my face away from you, but without shrinking and fear and 


494 EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 


without respect of persons, minister ye in the way that is direct 
and narrow and strait. So shall my Father himself rejoice 
over you. 

25 Again we said unto him: Lord, already are we ashamed 
that we question thee oft-times and burden thee. And he an- 
swered and said unto us: I know that in faith and with your 
whole heart ye do question me; therefore do I rejoice over you, 
for verily I say unto you: I rejoice, and my Father that is in me, 
because ye question me; and your importunity (shamelessness) 
is unto me rejoicing and unto you it giveth life. And when he 
had so said unto us, we were glad that we had questioned him, 
and we said to him: Lord, in all things thou makest us alive and 
hast mercy on us. Wilt thou now deélare unto us that which we 
shall ask thee? Then said he unto us: Is it the flesh that passeth 
away, or is it the spirit? We said unto him: The flesh is it that 
passeth away. Then said he unto us: That which hath fallen 
shall rise again, and that which was lost shall be found, and that 
which was weak shall recover, that in these things that are so 
created the glory of my Father may be revealed. As he hath 
done unto me, so will I do unto all that believe in me. 

26 Verily I say unto you: the flesh shall arise, and the soul, 
alive, that their defence may come to pass on that day in regard 
of that that they have done, whether it be good or evil: that there 
may be a choosing-out of the faithful who have kept the com- 
mandments of my Father that sent me; and so shall the judge- 
ment be accomplished with strictness. For my Father said unto 
me: My Son, in the day of judgement thou shalt have no respect 
for the rich, neither pity for the poor, but according to the sins 
of every man shalt thou deliver him unto everlasting torment. 
But unto my beloved that have done the commandments of my 
Father that sent me will I give the rest of life in the kingdom of 
my Father which is in heaven, and they shall behold that which 
he hath given me. And he hath given me authority to do that 
which I will, and to give that which I have promised and deter- 
mined to give and grant unto them. 

27 For to that end went I down unto the place of Lazarus, 
and preached unto the righteous and the prophets, that they 
might come out of the rest which is below and come up into that 
which is above; and I poured out upon them with my right hand 
the water (?) (baptism, Eth.) of life and forgiveness and salvation 
from all evil, as I have done unto you and unto them that believe 
on me. But if any man believe on me and do not my command- 
ments, although he have confessed my name, he hath no profit 
therefrom but runneth a vain race: for such will find themselves 
in perdition and destruction, because they have despised my 
commandments. 

28 But so much the more have I redeemed you, the children 
of light, from all evil and from the authority of the rulers (archons), 


EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 495 


and every one that believeth on me by your means. For that 
which I have promised unto you will I give unto them also, that 
they may come out of the prison-house and the fetters of the 
tulers. We answered and said: Lord, thou hast given unto us 
the rest of life and hast given us <joy ?> by wonders, unto the con- 
firmation of faith: wilt thou now preach the same unto us, 
seeing that thou hast preached it unto the <righteous> and the 
prophets? Then said he unto us: Verily I say unto you, all that 
have believed on me and that believe in him that sent me will 
I take up into the heaven, unto the place which my Father hath 
prepared for the elect, and I will give you the kingdom, the chosen 
kingdom, in rest, and everlasting life. 

29 But all they that have offended against my commandments 
and have taught other doctrine, (perverting) the Scripture and 
adding thereto, striving after their own glory, and that teach with 
other words them that believe on me in uprightness, if they make 
them fall thereby, shall receive everlasting punishment. We said 
unto him: Lord, shall there then be teaching by others, diverse 
from that which thou hast spoken unto us? He said unto us: It 
must needs be, that the evil and the good may be made manifest ; 
and the judgement shall be manifest upon them that do these 
things, and according to their works shall they be judged and 
shall be delivered unto death.. 

Again we said unto him: Lord, blessed are we in that we see 
thee and hear thee declaring such things, for our eyes have 
beheld these great wonders that thou hast done. He answered 
and said unto us: Yea, rather blessed are they that have not seen 
and yet have believed, for they shall be called children of the 
kingdom, and they shall be perfect among the perfect, and I will 
be unto them life in the kingdom of my Father. 

Again we said unto him: Lord, how shall men be able to believe 
that thou wilt depart and leave us; for thou sayest unto us: 
There shall come a day and an hour when I shall ascend unto my 
Father ? 

30 But he said unto us: Go ye and preach unto the twelve 
tribes, and preach also unto the heathen, and to all the land of 
Israel from the east to the west and from the south unto the 
north, and many shall believe on <me) the Son of God. But we 
said unto him: Lord, who will believe us, or hearken unto us, 
or (how shall we be able, Eth.) to teach the powers and signs and 
wonders which thou hast done? Then answered he and said to 
us: Go ye and preach the mercifulness of my Father, and that 
which he hath done through me will I myself do through you, 
for I am in you, and I will give you my peace, and I will give 
you a power of my spirit, that ye may prophesy to them unto 
life eternal. And unto the others also will I give my power, that 
they may teach the residue of the peoples. 


(Sia leaves lost in Copt.: Eth. continues.) 


496 EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 


81 And behold a man shall meet you, whose name is Saul, 
which being interpreted is Paul: he is a Jew, circumcised accord- 
ing to the law, and he shall receive my voice from heaven with 
fear and terror and trembling. And his eyes shall be blinded, 
and by your hands by the sign of the cross shall they be protected 
(healed: other Eth. MSS. with spittle by your hands shall his eyes, 
&c.). Do ye unto him all that I have done unto you. Deliver it 
(? the word of God) unto the other. And at the same time that 
man shall open his eyes and praise the Lord, even my Father 
which is in heaven. He shall obtain power among the people and 
shall preach and instruct ; and many that hear him shall obtain 
glory and be redeemed. But thereafter shall men be wroth with 
him and deliver him into the hands of his enemies, and he shall 
bear witness before kings that are mortal, and his end shall be that 
he shall turn unto me, whereas he persecuted me at the first. 
He shall preach and teach and abide with the elect, as a chosen 
vessel and a wall that shall not be overthrown, yea, the last of 
the last shall become a preacher unto the Gentiles, made perfect 
by the will of my Father. Like as ye have learned from the 
Scripture that your fathers the prophets spake of me, and in me 
it is indeed fulfilled. 

And he said unto us: Be ye also therefore guides unto them; 
and all things that I said unto you, and that ye write concerning 
me (tell ye them), that I am the word of the Father and that the 
Father isin me. Such also shall ye be unto that man, as becometh 
you. Instruct him and bring to his mind that which is spoken of 
me in the Scripture and is fulfilled, and thereafter shall he become 
the salvation of the Gentiles. 

82 And we asked him: Lord, is there for us and for them the 
self-same expectation of the inheritance? He answered and said 
unto us: Are then the fingers of the hand like unto each other, 
or the ears of corn in the field, or do all fruit-trees bear the same 
fruit? Doth not every one bear fruit according to its nature? 
And we said unto him: Lord, wilt thou again speak unto us in 
parables? Then said he unto us: Lament not. Verily I say unto 
you, ye are my brethren, and my companions in the kingdom 
of heaven unto my Father, for so is his good pleasure. Verily 
I say unto you, unto them also whom ye teach and who believe 
on me will I give that expectation. 

33 And we asked him again: When shall we meet with that 
man, and when wilt thou depart unto thy Father and our God 
and Lord? He answered and said unto us: That man will come 
out of the land of Cilicia unto Damascus of Syria, to root up the 
church which ye must found there. It is I that speak through 
you; and he shall come quickly: and he shall become strong in 
the faith, that the word of the prophet may be fulfilled, which 
saith: Behold, out of Syria will I begin to call together a new 
Jerusalem, and Sion will I subdue unto me, and it shall be taken, 


EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 487 


and the place which is childless shall be called the son and 
daughter of my Father, and my bride. For so hath it pleased 
him that sent me. But that man will I turn back, that he 
accomplish not his evil desire, and the praise of my Father shall 
be perfected in him, and after that I am gone home and abide 
with my Father, I will speak unto him from heaven, and all 
things shall be accomplished which I have told you before con- 
cerning him. 

34 And we said unto him again: Lord, so many great things 
hast thou told us and revealed unto us as never yet were spoken, 
and in all hast thou given us rest and been gracious unto us. 
After thy resurrection thou didst reveal unto us all things that 
we might be saved indeed; but thou saidst unto us only: There 
shall be wonders and strange appearances in heaven and on earth 
before the end of the world come. Tell us now, how shall we 
perceive it? And he answered us: I will teach it you; and not 
that which shall befall you only, but them also whom ye shall 
teach and who shall believe, as well as them who shall hear that 
man and believe on me. In those years and days shall it come 
to pass. 

And we said again unto him: Lord, what shall come to pass? 
And he said unto us:1 Then shall they that believe and they 
that believe not hear (see, Hih.) a trumpet in the heaven, a vision 
of great stars which shall be seen in the day, wonderful sights in 
heaven reaching down to the earth; stars which fall upon the 
earth like fire, and a great and mighty hail of fire (a star shining 
from the east unto this place, like unto fire, Hth. 2). The sun and 
the moon fighting one with the other, a continual rolling and 
noise of thunders and lightnings, thunder and earthquake; cities 
falling and men perishing in their overthrow, a continual dearth 
for lack of rain, a terrible pestilence and great mortality, mighty 
and untimely, so that they that die lack burial: and the bearing 
forth of brethren and sisters and kinsfolk shall be upon one bier. 
The kinsman shall show no favour to his kinsman, nor any man 
to his neighbour. And they that were overthrown shall rise up 
and behold them that overthrew them, that they lack burial, for 
the pestilence shall be full of hatred and pain and envy: and men 
shall take from one and give to another. And thereafter shall it 
wax yet worse than before. (Bewail ye them that have not 
hearkened unto my commandments, Eth. 2.) 

85 Then shall my Father be wroth at the wickedness of men, 
for many are their transgressions, and the abomination of their 
uncleanness weigheth heavy upon them in the corruption of 
their life. 

And we asked him: What of them that trust in thee? He 
answered and said unto us: Ye are yet slow of heart ; and how 
long? Verily I say unto you, as the prophet David spake of me 

1 Here begins the parallel text in the prophecy (Testament in Galilee) 
which is prefixed, in the Ethiopic version, to the Epistle: see above. 


870 Kk 


498 EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 


and of my people, so shall it be (?) for them also that believe on me. 
But they that are deceivers in the world and enemies of righteous- 
ness, upon them shall come the fulfilment of the prophecy of David, 
who said : Their feet are swift to shed blood, their tongue uttereth 
slander, adders’ poison is under their lips. I behold thee 
companying with thieves, and partaking with adulterers, thou 
continuest speaking against thy brother and puttest stumbling- 
blocks before thine own mother’s son. What thinkest thou, 
that I shall be like unto thee? Behold now how the prophet of 
God hath spoken of all, that all things may be fulfilled which he 
said aforetime. 

36 And again we said unto him: Lord, will not then the 
nations say: Where is their God? And he answered and 
said unto us: Thereby shall the elect be known, that they, 
being plagued with such afflictions, come forth. We said: Will 
then their departure out of the world be by a pestilence which 
giveth them pain? He answered us: Nay, but if they suffer 
such affliction, it will be a proving of them, whether they have 
faith and remember these my sayings, and fulfil my command- 
ments. These shall arise, and short will be their expectation, 
that he may be glorified that sent me, and I with him. For he 
hath sent me unto you to tell you these things; and that ye may 
impart them unto Israel and the Gentiles and they may hear, 
and they also be redeemed and believe on me and escape the 
woe of the destruction. But whoso escapeth from the destruction 
of death, him will they take and hold him fast in the prison-house 
in torments like the torments of a thief. 

And we said unto him: Lord, will they that believe be treated 
like the unbelievers, and wilt thou punish them that have 
escaped from the pestilence? And he said unto us: If they that 
believe in my name deal like the sinners, then have they done 
as though they had not believed. And we said again to him: 
Lord, have they on whom this lot hath fallen no life? He 
answered and said unto us: Whoso hath accomplished the praise 
of my Father, he shall abide in the resting-place of my Father. 

87 Then said we unto him: Lord, teach us what shall come to 
pass thereafter? And he answered us: In those years and days 
shall war be kindled upon war ;1 the four ends of the earth shall 
be in commotion and fight against each other. Thereafter shall 
be quakings of clouds (or, clouds of locusts), darkness, and dearth, 
and persecutions of them that believe on me and against the 
elect. Thereupon shall come doubt and strife and transgressions 
against one another. And there shall be many that believe on 
my name and yet follow after evil and spread vain doctrine. 
And men shall follow after them and their riches, and be subject 
unto their pride, and lust for drink, and bribery, and there shall 
be respect of persons among them. 


1 Fragments of a leaf in Coptic exist for this passage. 


EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 499 


88 But they that desire to behold the face of God and respect 
not the persons of the rich sinners, and are not ashamed before 
the people that lead them astray, but rebuke (?) them, they 
shall be crowned by the Father. And they also shall be saved 
that rebuke their neighbours, for they are sons of wisdom and 
of faith. But if they become not children of wisdom, whoso 
hateth his brother and persecuteth him and showeth him no 
favour, him will God despise and reject. 


(Copt. resumes.) 


But they that walk in truth and in the knowledge of the faith, 
and have love towards me—for they have endured insult—they 
shall be praised for that they walk in poverty and endure them 
that hate them and put them to shame. Men have stripped them 
naked, for they despised them because they continued in hunger 
and thirst, but after they have endured patiently, they shall 
have the blessedness of heaven, and they shall be with me for 
ever. But woe unto them that walk in pride and boasting, for 
their end is perdition. 

39 And we said unto him: Lord, is this thy purpose, that thou 
leavest us, to come upon them? (Will all this come to pass, 
Eth.) He answered and said unto us: After what manner shall 
the judgement be? whether righteous or unrighteous? (In 
Copt. and Eth. the general sense is the same: but the answer of 
Jesus in the form of a question is odd, and there is probably 
@ corruption.) 

We said unto him: Lord, in that day they will say unto thee: 
Thou hast not distinguished between (probably: will they not 
say unto thee: Thou hast distinguished between) righteousness. 
and unrighteousness, between the light and the darkness, and 
evil and good? Then said he: I will answer them and say: 
Unto Adam was power given to choose one of the two: he chose 
the light and laid his hand thereon, but the darkness he left 
behind him and cast away from him. Therefore have all men 
power to believe in the light which is life, and which is the Father 
that hath sent me. And every one that believeth and doeth 
the works of the light shall live in them; but if there be any that 
confesseth that he belongeth unto the light, and doeth the works 
of darkness, such an one hath no defence to utter, neither can he 
lift up his face to look upon the Son of God, which Son am I. 
For I will say unto him: As thou soughtest, so hast thou found, 
and as thou askedst, so hast thou received. Wherefore con- 
demnest thou me, O man? Wherefore hast thou departed from 
me and denied me? And wherefore hast thou confessed me and 
yet denied me? hath not every man power to live and to die? 
Whoso then hath kept my commandments shall be a son of the 
light, that is, of the Father that is in me. But because of them 
that corrupt my words am I come down from heaven. I am the 


500 EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 


word: I became flesh, and I wearied myself (or, suffered) and 
taught, saying: The heavy laden shall be saved, and they that 
are gone astray shall go astray for ever. They shall be chastised 
and tormented in their flesh and in their soul. 

40 And we said unto him: O Lord, verily we are sorrowful 
for their sake. And he said unto us: Ye do rightly, for the 
righteous are sorry for the sinners, and pray for them, making 
prayer unto my Father. Again we said unto him: Lord, is there 
none that maketh intercession unto thee (so Eith.)? And he 
said unto us: Yea, and I will hearken unto the prayer of the 
righteous which they make for them. 

When he had so said unto us, we said to him: Lord, in all 
things hast thou taught us and had mercy on us and saved us, 
that we might preach unto them that are worthy to be saved, 
and that we might obtain a recompense withthee. (Shall we be 
partakers of a recompense from thee? Eth.) 41 He answered 
and said unto us: Go and preach, and ye shall be labourers, and 
fathers, and ministers. We said unto him: Thou art he (or, 
Art thou he) that shalt preach by us. (Lord, thou art our father. 
Eth.) Then answered he us, saying: Be not (or, Are not ye) 
all fathers or all masters. (Are then all fathers, or all servants, 
or all masters? Hth.) We said unto him: Lord, thou art he 
that saidst unto us: Call no man your father upon earth, for one 
is your Father, which is in heaven, and your master. Wherefore 
sayest thou now unto us: Ye shall be fathers of many children, 
and servants and masters? He answered and said unto us: 
According as ye have said (Ye have rightly said, Eth.). For 
verily I say unto you: whosoever shall hear you and believe 
on me, shall receive of you the light of the seal through me, and 
baptism through me: ye shall be fathers and servants and 
masters. 

42 But we said unto him: Lord, how may it be that every one 
of us should be these three? He said unto us: Verily I say 
unto you: Ye shall be called fathers, because with praiseworthy 
heart and in love ye have revealed unto them the things of the 
kingdom of heaven. And ye shall be called servants, because 
they shall receive the baptism of life and the remission of their 
sins at my hand through you. And ye shall be called masters, 
because ye have given them the word without grudging, and 
have admonished them, and when ye admonished them, they 
turned themselves (were converted). Ye were not afraid of their 
riches, nor ashamed before their face, but ye kept the command- 
ments of my Father and fulfilled them. And ye shall have a 
great reward with my Father which is in heaven, and they shall 
have forgiveness of sins and everlasting life, and be partakers in 
the kingdom of heaven. 

And we said unto him: Lord, even if every one of us had ten 
thousand tongues to speak withal, we could not thank thee, for 


EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 50} 


that thou promisest such things unto us. Then answered he us, 
saying: Only do ye that which I say unto you, even as I myself 
also have done it. 43 And ye shall be like the wise virgins which 
watched and slept not, but went forth unto the lord into the 
bridechamber : but the foolish virgins were not able to watch, but 
slumbered. And we said unto him: Lord, who are the wise and 
who are the foolish? He said unto us: Five wise and five foolish; 
for these are they of whom the prophet hath spoken: Sons of 
God are they. Hear now their names. 

But we wept and were troubled for them that slumbered. 
He said unto us: The five wise are Faith and Love and Grace 
and Peace and Hope. Now they of the faithful which possess. 
this (these) shall be guides unto them that have believed on me 
and on him that sent me. For I am the Lord and I am the 
bridegroom whom they have received, and they have entered 
in to the house of the bridegroom and are laid down with me in 
the bridal chamber rejoicing. But the five foolish, when they 
had slept and had awaked, came unto the door of the bridal 
chamber and knocked, for the doors were shut. Then did they 
weep and lament that no man opened unto them. 

We said unto him: Lord, and their wise sisters that were 
within in the bridegroom’s house, did they continue without 
opening unto them, and did they not sorrow for their sakes nor 
entreat the bridegroom to open unto them? He answered us, 
saying: They were not yet able to obtain favour for them. We 
said unto him: Lord, on what day shall they enter in for their 
sisters’ sake? Then said he unto us: He that is shut out, is 
shut out. And we said unto him: Lord, is this word (deter- 
mined ?). Who then are the foolish? He said unto us: Hear 
their names. They are Knowledge, Understanding (Perception), 
Obedience, Patience, and Compassion. These are they that 
slumbered in them that have believed and confessed me but 
have not fulfilled my commandments. 44 On account of them 
that have slumbered, they shall remain outside the kingdom and 
the fold of the shepherd and his sheep. But whoso shall abide 
outside the sheepfold, him will the wolves devour, and he shall 
be (condemned?) and die in much affliction: in him shall be 
no rest nor endurance, and (th.) although he be hardly punished, 
and rent in pieces and devoured in long and evil torment, yet 
shall he not be able to obtain death quickly. 

45 And we said unto him: Lord, well hast thou revealed all 
this unto us. Then answered he us, saying: Understand ye not 
(or, Ye understand not) these words? We said unto him: Yea, 
Lord. By five shall men enter into thy kingdom <and by five 
shall men remain without): notwithstanding, they that watched 
were with thee the Lord and bridegroom, even though they 
rejoiced not because of them that slumbered (yet will they have 
no pleasure, because of, Eth.). He said unto us: They will 


502 EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 


indeed rejoice that they have entered in with the bridegroom, 
the Lord; and they are sorrowful because of them that slum- 
bered, for they are their sisters. For all ten are daughters of 
God, even the Father. Then said we unto him: Lord, is it then 
for thee to show them favour on account of their sisters? (It 
becometh thy majesty to show them favour, Eth.) He said unto 
us: <It is not mine,> but his that sent me, and I am consenting 
with him (It is not yours, &c., Eth.). 

46 But be ye upright and preach rightly and teach, and be 
not abashed by any man and fear not any man, and especially 
the rich, for they do not my commandments, but boast them- 
selves (swell) in their riches. And we said unto him: Lord, tell 
us if it be the rich only. He answered, saying unto us: If any 
man who is not rich and possesseth a small livelihood giveth 
unto the poor and needy, men will call him a benefactor. 

47 But if any man fall under the load <because> of sin that he 
hath committed, then shall his neighbour correct him because 
of the good that he hath done unto his neighbour. And if his 
neighbour correct him and he return, he shall be saved, and he 
that corrected him shall receive a reward and live for ever. 
For a needy man, if he see him that hath done him good sin, 
and correct him not, shall be judged with severe judgement. 
Now if a blind man lead a blind, they both fall into a ditch: 
and whoso respecteth persons for their sake, shall be as the 
two <blind>, as the prophet hath said: Woe unto them that 
respect persons and justify the ungodly for reward, even they 
whose God is their belly. Behold that judgement shall be their 
portion. For verily I say unto you: On that day will I neither 
have respect unto the rich nor pity for the poor. 

48 If thou behold a sinner, admonish him betwixt him and 
thee: (if he hear thee, thou hast gained thy brother, Hih.) and 
if he hear thee not, then take to thee another, as many as three, 
and instruct thy brother: again, if he hear thee not, let him be 
unto thee 

(Copt. defective from this point.) 
as an heathen man or a publican. 

49 If thou hear aught against thy brother, give it no credence; 
slander not, and delight not in hearing slander. For thus it is 
written: Suffer not thine ear to receive aught against thy brother: 
but if thou seest aught, correct him, rebuke him, and convert him. 

And we said unto him: Lord, thou hast in all things taught us 
and warned us. But, Lord, concerning the believers, even them 
to whom it belongeth to believe in the preaching of thy name: 
is it determined that among them also there shall be doubt and 
division, jealousy, confusion, hatred, and envy? For thou 
sayest: They shall find fault with one another and respect the 
person of them that sin, and hate them that rebuke them. And 
he answered and said unto us: How then shall the judgement 


EPISTLE OF THE APOSTLES 503 


come about, that the corn should be gathered into the garner 
and the chaff thereof cast into the fire? 

50 They that hate such things, and love me and rebuke them 
that fulfil not my commandments, shall be hated and persecuted 
and despised and mocked. Men will of purpose speak of them 
that which is not true, and will band themselves together against 
them that love me. But these will rebuke them, that they may 
be saved. But them that will rebuke and chasten and warn 
them, them will they (the others) hate, and thrust them aside, 
and despise them, and hold themselves far from them that wish 
them good. But they that endure such things shall be like unto 
the martyrs with the Father, because they have striven for 
righteousness, and have not striven for corruption. 

And we asked him: Lord, shall such things be among us? 
And he answered us: Fear not; it shall not be in many, but in 
a few. We said unto him: Yet tell us, in what manner it shall 
come to pass. And he said unto us: There shall come forth 
another doctrine, and a confusion, and because they shall strive 
after their own advancement, they shall bring forth an unprofit- 
able doctrine. And therein shall be a deadly corruption (of 
uncleanness), and they shall teach it, and shall turn away them 
that believe on me from my commandments and cut them off 
from eternal life. But woe unto them that falsify this my word 
and commandment, and draw away them that hearken to 
them from the life of the doctrine and separate themselves from 
the commandment of life: for together with them they shall 
come into everlasting judgement. 

51 And when he had said this, and had finished his discourse 
with us, he said unto us again: Behold, on the third day and at 
the third hour shall he come which hath sent me, that I may 
depart with him. And as he so spake, there was thunder and 
lightning and an earthquake, and the heavens parted asunder, 
and there appeared a light (bright) cloud which bore him up. 
And there came voices of many angels, rejoicing and singing 
praises and saying: Gather us, O Priest, unto the light of the 
majesty. And when they drew nigh unto the firmament, we 
heard his voice saying unto us: Depart hence in peace. 


APOCALYPSES 


Or these it is my intention to include in this collection only such as 
bear the names of New Testament personages. There are several 
important books which are fathered upon patriarchs and prophets 
of the Old Testament, and some of these were composed by Christians, 
while others have received touches and insertions to adapt them for 
use by Christians. Most of these I have named in the Introduction. 

Of Apocalypses attributed to New Testament personages there are 
not a very great many. That of Peter (early second century) leads the 
van in date and importance: that of Paul (fourth century) perhaps 
comes next in influence. That of Thomas has only come to light in 
recent years. A later stratum is represented by the Apocalypses of 
John (printed by Tischendorf) and the Virgin. The former is a series 
of questions and answers—the Byzantines were fond of this form of 
writing—about the end of the world, which contain nothing very 
interesting. A description of antichrist is perhaps the most notable 
feature: on this I have put together some matter in my Lost Apocrypha 
of the O. T., to which I may refer the reader. That of the Virgin 
follows Paul closely. 

The Revelation of Stephen, condemned in the Gelasian Decree along 
with Paul and Thomas, is something of a puzzle. A short section shall 
be devoted to it. 

We hear of an Apocalypse of James the brother of the Lord, and one 
quotation from it occurs.! 

The Syriac text printed by Rendel Harris, The Gospel of the Twelve 
Apostles, with the Revelation of each one of them, is in its present form late. 
It does not come up to its imposing title, for it only contains the 
utterances of Peter, John, and James. 

Egypt has its contribution to offer. In Dr. Budge’s volumes of 
Coptic texts will be found: 

A Revelation of James the Less, telling how the Lord revealed the 
glory of John Baptist in the other world, where he figures as the ferry- 
man of the blessed souls (Coptic Apocrypha, 1913, p. 348). 

A book of ‘Mysteries of St. John’, questions of John the Evangelist 
addressed to the Cherubim: he is told about all manner of natural 


2 Von Dobschiitz in Byzantinische Zeitschrift, 1903, p. 556, cites it 
from Coislin MS. 296 (Paris). It is to the effect that at the prayer of 
the apostles, the Lord ‘added two sixtieths’ to the time of his coming. 
The date indicated for the Second Coming is a.m. 6500. It is symbo- 
lized by the attitude of the priest’s fingers when he blesses. The form 
of the citation is ‘as James the brother of the Lord said in his Apoca- 
lypse’. The passage is not found in the Revelation of James contained 
in the late Gospel of the Twelve Apostles edited by Rendel Harris. 


APOCALYPSES 505 


things, the rise of the Nile, the dew, &c., and also somewhat about 
Hezekiah and Solomon (l.c., p. 241). 

A revelation made by our Lord to the apostles about Abbaton the 
angel of death (Coptic Martyrdoms). 

There is also a sort of Apocalypse of Philip extant only in Irish, 
which is apparently derived from a Latin original. It is called the 
Evernew Tongue. The tongue of the apostle Philip—which had been 
cut out seven times by his persecutors, ineffectually—discourses to an 
assembly of kings and prelates at Jerusalem, and tells them wonderful 
secrets of nature. See the Journal of Theol. Studies, 1918 (xx. 9), 
where I give an account of it. 

In the same article I write on an apocalypse of which we do not 
know the name. Portions of it exist in Latin and in Irish—the latter 
embodied in the Vision of Adamnan. The Rev. St. J. Seymour also 
dealt with it more recently (I. c., xxii. 16). 

It tells of the sufferings of souls in the several heavens, and of their 
presentation to the Lord and acceptance or rejection. A distinctive 
mark of it is that the names of the heavens, and of the angelic guardian 
of each, are given. 

Of the three Christian Apocalypses which will be presented here, 
two, Peter and Paul, are visions of the next world, the other, Thomas, 
is a prophecy of the end of this. 


APOCALYPSE OF PETER 


We have not a pure and complete text of this book, which ranked 
next in popularity and probably also in date to the Canonical Apocalypse 
of St. John. 

We have, first, certain quotations made by writers of the first four 
centuries. 

Next, a fragment in Greek, called the Akhmim fragment, found 
with the Passion-fragment of the Gospel of Peter in a manuscript 
known as the Gizeh MS. (discovered in a tomb) now at Cairo. This is 
undoubtedly drawn from the Apocalypse of Peter: but my present 
belief is that, like the Passion-fragment (see p. 90), it is part of the 
Gospel of Peter, which was a slightly later book than the Apocalypse 
and quoted it almost in extenso. There is also in the Bodleian Library 
a mutilated leaf of a very tiny Greek MS. of the fifth century which 
supplies a few lines of what I take to be the original Greek text. 

Thirdly, an Ethiopic version contained in one of the numerous forms 
of the Books of Clement, a writing current in Arabic and Ethiopic, 
purporting to contain revelations—of the history of the world from the 
Creation, of the last times, and of guidance for the churches—dictated 
by Peter to Clement. The version of the Apocalypse contained in 
this has some extraneous matter at the beginning and the end; but, as 
I have tried to show in a series of articles in the Journal of Theological 
Studies (1910-11) and the Church Quarterly Review (1915), it affords 
the best general idea of the contents of the whole book which we have. 
The second book of the Sibylline Oracles contains (in Greek hexa- 
meters) a paraphrase of a great part of the Apocalypse: and its influence 
can be traced in many early writings—the Acts of Thomas (55-57), 
the Martyrdom of Perpetua, the so-called Second Epistle of Clement, 


506 APOCALYPSE OF PETER 


and, as I think, the Shepherd of Hermas: as well as in the Apocalypse 
of Paul, and many later visions. 

The length of the book is given in the Stichometry of Nicephorus as 
800 lines and in that of the Codex Claromontanus (D of the Epistles) 
as 270: the latter is a Latin list of the Biblical books ; already cited 
for the Acts of Paul. 

There is no mention of it in the Gelasian Decree, which is curious. 
At one time it was popular in Rome, for the Muratorian Canon mentions 
it (late in the second century?) along with the Apocalypse of John, 
though it adds, that ‘some will not have it readin the church’. The 
fifth-century church historian Sozomen (vii. 19) says that to his know- 
ledge it was still read annually in some churches in Palestine on Good 
Friday. 

A frauslation of the ancient quotations shall be given first. 


A 


1. From Clement of Alexandria’s so-called Prophetical Extracts, 
a series of detached sentences excerpted from some larger work, 
generally supposed to be his Hypotyposes or Outlines : 

a. (41.1) The Scripture saith that the children which have 
been exposed (by their parents) are delivered to a care-taking 
angel by whom they are educated, and made to grow up; and 
they shall be, it saith, as the faithful of an hundred years old 
are here (in this life). 6. (41.2) Wherefore also Peter in the 
Apocalypse saith: And a flash (lightning) of fire leaping from 
those children and smiting the eyes of the women. 

2. Ibid. (48. 1) The providence of God doth not light upon them 
only that are in the flesh. For example, Peter in the Apocalypse 
saith that the children born out of due time (abortively) that 
would have been of the better part (i.e. would have been saved if 
they had lived)—these are delivered to a care-taking angel, 
that they may partake of knowledge and obtain the better 
abode, having suffered what they would have suffered had 
they been in the body. But the others (i.e. those who would 
not have been saved, had they lived) shall only obtain salvation, 
as beings that have been injured and had mercy shown to them, 
and shall continue without torment, receiving that as a reward. 

But the milk of the mothers, flowing from their breasts and 
congealing, saith Peter in the Apocalypse, shall engender small 
beasts (snakes) devouring the flesh, and these running upon 
them devour them: teaching that the torments come to pass 
because of the sins (correspond to the sins). 

3. From the Symposium (ii. 6) of Methodius of Olympus 
(third century). He does not name his source: Whence also 
we have received in inspired writings that children born untimely 
—even if they be the offspring of adultery—are delivered to 
care-taking angels. For if they had come into being contrary to 
the will and ordinance of that blessed nature of God, how could 
they have been delivered to angels to be nourished up in all repose 


APOCALYPSE OF PETER 507 


and tranquillity? And how could they have confidently sum- 
moned their parents before the judgement seat of Christ to accuse 
them ? saying: Thou, O Lord, didst not begrudge us this light 
that is common to all, but these exposed us to death, contemning 
thy commandment. 

The word rendered care-taking in these passages is a very rare one— 
TnHEAodxXos, témelouchos: so rare that it was mistaken by later readers 
for the proper name of an angel, and we find an angel Temeluchus in 
Paul, John, and elsewhere. A similar case is that of the word raprapotxos, 
Tartaruchus, keeper of hell, which is applied to angels in our Apoca- 
lypse, and is also taken in the Ethiopic version, in Paul, and in other 
writings, to be a proper name. 

4. From the Apocritica of Macarius Magnes (fourth century) 
of whom we know little. His book consists of extracts from 
a heathen opponent’s attack on Christianity (Porphyry and 
Hierocles are named as possible authors of it) and his own 
answers. The heathen writer says (iv. 6, 7): 

And by way of superfluity let this also be cited which is said 
in the Apocalypse of Peter. He introduces the heaven, to be 
judged along with the earth, thus: The earth, he says, shall 
present all men to God to be judged in the day of judgement, 
being itself also to be judged along with the heaven that encom- 
passeth it. 

5. Ibid. And this again he says, which is a statement full 
ofimpiety: And every power of heaven shall be melted, and the 
heaven shall be rolled up like a book, and all the stars shall 
fall like leaves from the vine, and as the leaves from the fig-tree. 

This very nearly coincides with Isa. xxxiv. 4, and does not occur in 
our other texts of the Apocalypse. 

6. In an old Latin homily on the Ten Virgins found and pub- 
lished by Dom Wilmart (Bulletin d’anc. litt. et @archéol. chrét.) 
is this sentence: 

The closed door is the river of fire by which the ungodly shall 
be kept out of the kingdom of God, as is written in Daniel and 
in Peter, in his Apocalypse. . . . That company of the foolish 
also shall arise and find the door shut, that is, the fiery river 
set against them. 

The equivalent of all the above quotations is found in the Ethiopic 
text, with one exception, no. 5. The Akhmim text only contains 
something like no. 1b: one indication out of many that it is a 
shortened and, I would say, secondary text. 


B 
THE AKHMIM FRAGMENT 


which I should prefer to call Fragment II of the Gospel of 
Peter. It begins abruptly in a discourse of our Lord. 
1 Many of them shall be false prophets, and shall teach ways 


508 APOCALYPSE OF PETER 


and diverse doctrines of perdition. 2 And they shall become 
sons of of perdition. 8 And then shall God come unto my faith- 
ful ones that hunger and thirst and are afflicted and prove their 
souls in this life, and shall judge the sons of iniquity. 

4 And the Lord added and said: Let us go unto the mountain 
(and) pray. 5 And going with him, we the twelve disciples 
besought him that he would show us one of our righteous 
brethren that had departed out of the world, that we might 
see what manner of men they are in their form, and take courage, 
and encourage also the men that should hear us. 

6 And as we prayed, suddenly there appeared two men stand- 
ing before the Lord (perhaps add, to the east) upon whom we 
were not able to look. 7 For there issued from their countenance 
a ray as of the sun, and their raiment was shining so as the eye 
of man never saw the like: for no mouth is able to declare nor 
heart to conceive the glory wherewith they were clad and the 
beauty of their countenance. 8 Whom when we saw we were 
astonied, for their bodies were whiter than any snow and redder 
than any rose. 9 And the redness of them was mingled with 
the whiteness, and, in a word, I am not able to declare their 
beauty. 10 For their hair was curling and flourishing (flowery), 
and fell comely about their countenance and their shoulders 
like a garland woven of nard and various flowers, or like a rain- 
bow in the air: such was their comeliness. 

11 We, then, seeing the beauty of them were astonied at them, 
for they appeared suddenly. 12 And I drew near to the Lord 
and said: Who are these? 18 He saith to me: These are your 
(our) righteous brethren whose appearance ye did desire to see. 
14 And I said unto him: And where are all the righteous? 
or of what sort is the world wherein they are, and possess this 
glory? 15 And the Lord showed me a very great region outside 
this world exceeding bright with light, and the air of that place 
illuminated with the beams of the sun, and the earth of itself 
flowering with blossoms that fade not, and full of spices and 
plants, fair-flowering and incorruptible, and bearing blessed fruit. 
16 And so great was the blossom that the odour thereof was 
borne thence even unto us. 

17 And the dwellers in that place were clad with the raiment 
of shining angels, and their raiment was like unto their land. 

18 And angels ran round about them there. 19 And the glory 
of them that dwelt there was all equal, and with one voice they 
praised the Lord God, rejoicing in that place. 

20 The Lord saith unto us: This is the place of your leaders 
(or, high priests), the righteous men. 

21 And I saw also another place over against that one, very 
squalid; and it was a place of punishment, and they that were 
punished and the angels that punished them had their raiment 
dark, according to the air of the place. 


APOCALYPSE OF PETER 509 


22 And some there were there hanging by their tongues; 
and these were they that blasphemed the way of righteousness, 
and under them was laid fire flaming and tormenting them. 

23 And there was a great lake full of flaming mire, wherein 
were certain men that turned away from righteousness; and 
angels, tormentors, were set over them. 

24 And there were also others, women, hanged by their hair 
above that mire which boiled up; and these were they that 
adorned themselves for adultery. 

And the men that were joined with them in the defilement 
of adultery were hanging by their feet, and had their heads 
hidden in the mire, and said: We believed not that we should 
come unto this place. 

25 And I saw the murderers and them that were consenting 
to them cast into a strait place full of evil, creeping things, and 
smitten by those beasts, and so turning themselves about in 
that torment. And upon them were set worms like clouds of 
darkness. And the souls of them that were murdered stood 
and looked upon the torment of those murderers and said: 
O God, righteous is thy judgement. 

26 And hard by that place I saw another strait place wherein 
the discharge and the stench of them that were in torment ran 
down, and there was as it were a lake there. And there sat 
women up to their necks in that liquor, and over against them 
many children which were born out of due time sat crying : and 
from them went forth rays of fire and smote the women in the 
eyes: and these were they that conceived out of wedlock (?) and 
caused abortion. 

27 And other men and women were being burned up to their 
middle and cast down in a dark place and scourged by evil 
spirits, and having their entrails devoured by worms that rested 
not. And these were they that had persecuted the righteous 
and delivered them up. 

28 And near to them again were women and men gnawing 
their lips and in torment, and having iron heated in the fire set 
against their eyes. And these were they that did blaspheme 
and speak evil of the way of righteousness. 

29 And over against these were yet others, men and women, 
gnawing their tongues and having flaming fire in their mouths. 
And these were the false witnesses. 

30 And in another place were gravel-stones sharper than 
swords or any spit, heated with fire, and men and women clad 
in filthy rags rolled upon them in torment.t And these were 
they that were rich and trusted in their riches, and had no pity 
upon orphans and widows but neglected the commandmentsof God. 


1 This is suggested by the LXX of two passages in Job: xli. 30, his 
bed is of sharp spits; viii. 17, on an heap of stones doth he rest, and shall 
live in the midst of gravel-stones. 


510 APOCALYPSE OF PETER 


81 And in another great lake full of foul matter (pus) and 
blood and boiling mire stood men and women up to their knees. 
And these were they that lent money and demanded usury upon 
usury. 

32 And other men and women being cast down from a great 
rock (precipice) fell (came) to the bottom, and again were driven 
by them that were set over them, to go up upon the rock, and 
thence were cast down to the bottom and had no rest from this 
torment. And these were they that did defile their bodies, 
behaving as women: and the women that were with them were 
they that lay with one another as a man with a woman. 

83 And beside that rock was a place full of much fire, and 
there stood men which with their own hands had made images 
for themselves instead of God, [And beside them other men and 
women]! having rods of fire and smiting one another and never 
resting from this manner of torment... . 

84 And yet others near unto them, men and women, burning 
and turning themselves about and roasted as ina pan. And these 
were they that forsook the way of God. 


Cc 
THE BODLEIAN LEAF 


It measures but 2? by 2 inches and has 18 lines of 8 to 10 
letters on each side (Madan’s Summary Catalogue, No. 81810). 
The verso (second page) is difficult to read. 

Recto=Gr. 33, 34: women holding chains and scourging them- 
selves before those idols of deceit. And they shall unceasingly 
have this torment. And near 

Verso: them shall be other men and women burning in the 
burning of them that were mad after idols. And these are they 
which forsook the way of God wholly (?) and... 


D 
THE ETHIOPIC TEXT 


First published by the Abbé Sylvain Grébaut in Revue de 
[Orient Chrétien, 1910: a fresh translation from his Ethiopic 
text by H. Duensing appeared in Zettschr. f. ntl. Wiss., 1918. 

The Second Coming of Christ and Resurrection of the Dead 
(which Christ revealed unto Peter) who died because of their 
sins, for that they kept not the commandment of God their 
creator. 

And he (Peter) pondered thereon, that he might perceive the 
mystery of the Son of God, the merciful and lover of mercy. 

And when the Lord was seated upon the Mount of Olives, his 
disciples came unto him. 


! The bracketed words are intrusive. 


APOCALYPSE OF PETER 511 


And we besought and entreated him severally and prayed 
him, saying unto him: Declare unto us what are the signs of 
thy coming and of the end of the world, that we may perceive 
and mark the time of thy coming and instruct them that come 
after us, unto whom we preach the word of thy gospel, and whom 
we set over (in) thy church, that they when they hear it may 
take heed to themselves and mark the time of thy coming. 

And our Lord answered us, saying: Take heed that no man 
deceive you, and that ye be not doubters and serve other gods. 
Many shall come in my name, saying: I am the Christ. Believe 
them not, neither draw near unto them. For the coming of the 
Son of God shall not be plain (i. e. foreseen) ; but as the lightning 
that shineth from the east unto the west, so will I come upon the 
clouds of heaven with a great host in my majesty; with my cross 
going before my face will I come in my majesty; shining sevenfold 
more than the sun will I come in my majesty with all my saints, 
mine angels (mine holy angels). And my Father shall set a crown 
upon mine head, that I may judge the quick and the dead and 
recompense every man according to his works. 

And ye, take ye the likeness thereof (learn a parable) from the 
fig-tree: so soon as the shoot thereof is come forth and the 
twigs grown, the end of the world shall come. 

And JI, Peter, answered and said unto him: Interpret unto me 
concerning the fig-tree, whereby we shall perceive it; for through- 
out all its days doth the fig-tree send forth shoots, and every 
year it bringeth forth its fruit for its master. What then meaneth 
the parable of the fig-tree? We know it not. 

And the Master (Lord) answered and said unto me: Under- 
standest thou not that the fig-tree is the house of Israel? Even 
as a man that planted a fig-tree in his garden, and it brought 
forth no fruit. And he sought the fruit thereof many years, 
and when he found it not, he said to the keeper of his garden: 
Root up this fig-tree that it make not our ground to be un- 
fruitful. And the gardener said unto God: (Suffer us) to rid 
it of weeds and dig the ground round about it and water it. 
If then it bear not fruit, we will straightway remove its roots 
out of the garden and plant another in place of it. Hast thou 
not understood that the fig-tree is the house of Israel? Verily 
I say unto thee, when the twigs thereof have sprouted forth 
in the last days, then shall feigned Christs come and awake 
expectation, saying: I am the Christ, that am now come into 
the world. And when they (Israel) shall perceive the wickedness 
of their deeds they shall turn away after them and deny him [whom 
our fathers did praise], even the first Christ whom they crucified 
and therein sinned a great sin. But this deceiver is not the Christ. 
[Something is wrong here: the sense required is that Israel 
perceives the wickedness of antichrist and does not follow him.] 
And when they reject him he shall slay with the sword, and there 


512 APOCALYPSE OF PETER 


shall be many martyrs. Then shall the twigs of the fig-tree, that 
is, the house of Israel, shoot forth: many shall become martyrs 
at his hand. Enoch and Elias shall be sent to teach them that this 
is the deceiver which must come into the world and do signs and 
wonders to deceive. And therefore shall they that die by his hand 
be martyrs, and shall be reckoned among the good and righteous 
martyrs who have pleased God in their life.? 


And he showed me in his right hand the souls of all men. 
And on the palm of his right hand the image of that which 
shall be accomplished at the last day: and how the righteous 
and the sinners shall be separated, and how they tdof that are 
upright in heart, and how the evil-doers shall be rooted out unto 
all eternity. We beheld how the sinners wept (weep) in great 
affliction and sorrow, until all that saw it with their eyes wept, 
whether righteous or angels, and he himself also. 

And I asked him and said unto him: Lord, suffer me to speak 
thy word concerning the sinners: It were better for them if they 
had not been created. And the Saviour answered and said unto 
me: Peter, wherefore speakest thou thus, that not to have been 
created were better for them? Thou resistest God. Thou 
wouldest not have more compassion than he for his image: 
for he hath created them and brought them forth out of not 
being. Now because thou hast seen the lamentation which 
shall come upon the sinners in the last days, therefore is thine 
heart troubled; but I will show thee their works, whereby they 
have sinned against the Most High. 

Behold now what shall come upon them in the last days, 
when the day of God and the day of the decision of the judgement 
of God cometh. From the east unto the west shall all the 
children of men be gathered together before my Father that 
liveth for ever. And he shall command hell to open its bars of 
adamant and give up all that is therein. 

And the wild beasts and the fowls shall he command to restore 
all the flesh that they have devoured, because he willeth that 
men should appear; for nothing perisheth before God, and 
nothing is impossible with him, because all things are his. 

For all things come to pass on the day of decision, on the day 
of judgement, at the word of God: and as all things were done 
when he created the world and commanded all that is therein 
and it was done—even so shall it be in the last days; for all things 
are possible with God. And therefore saith he in the scripture: ? 
Son of man, prophesy upon the several bones and say unto the 
bones: bone unto bone in joints, sinew, nerves, flesh and skin 
and hair thereon [and soul and spirit]. 

And soul and spirit shall the great Uriel give them at the 

1 Hermas, Vision, III. i. 9, speaks of ‘those that have already been 


well-pleasing unto God and have suffered for the Name’s sake’. 
* Ezek, xxxvii. 


APOCALYPSE OF PETER 513 


commandment of God; for him hath God set over the rising 
again of the dead at the day of judgement. 

Behold and consider the corns of wheat that are sown in the 
earth. As things dry and without soul do men sow them in the 
earth: and they live again and bear fruit, and the earth restoreth 
them as a pledge entrusted unto it. 

[And this that dieth, that issown as seed in the earth, and shall 
become alive and be restored unto life, is man. Probably a gloss.] 

How much more shall God raise up on the day of decision 
them that believe in him and are chosen of him, for whose sake 
he made? the world? And all things shall the earth restore on 
the day of decision, for it also shall be judged with them, and 
the heaven with it.” 

And this shall come at the day of judgement upon them that 
have fallen away from faith in God and that have committed 
sin: Floods (cataracts) of fire shall be let loose; and darkness 
and obscurity shall come up and clothe and veil the whole world; 
and the waters shall be changed and turned into coals of fire, 
and all that is in them shall burn, and the sea shall become fire. 
Under the heaven shail be a sharp fire that cannot be quenched, 
and floweth to fulfil the judgement of wrath. And the stars 
shall fly in pieces by flames of fire, as if they had not been created, 
and the powers (firmaments) of the heaven shall pass away for 
lack of water and shall be as though they had not been. }fAnd 
the lightnings of heaven shall be no more, and by their enchant- 
ment they shall affright the worldt (probably: The heaven shall 
turn to lightning and the lightnings thereof shall affright the 
world). The spirits also of the dead bodies shall be like unto 
them (the lightnings?) and shall become fire at the command- 
ment of God. 

And so soon as the whole creation dissolveth, the men that are 
in the east shall flee unto the west, <and they that are in the 
west> unto the east; they that are in the south shall flee to 
the north, and they that are in <the north unto> the south. 
And in all places shall the wrath of a fearful fire overtake them; 
and an unquenchable flame driving them shall bring them unto 
the judgement of wrath, unto the stream of unquenchable fire 
that floweth, flaming with fire, and when the waves thereof 
part themselves one from another, burning, there shall be a great 
gnashing of teeth among the children of men. 

Then shall they all behold me coming upon an eternal cloud of 
brightness: and the angels of God that are with me shall sit 
(prob. And I shall sit) upon the throne of my glory at the right 
hand of my heavenly Father; and he shall set a crown upon 


1 See the Third Epistle to the Corinthians (pp. 290-1) for a dis- 
quisition on the theme, most probably based on our passage. 

2 Quoted by the heathen writer in Macarius Magnes: see above 
among the fragments (p. 507). 

870 Ll 


514 APOCALYPSE OF PETER 


mine head. And when the nations behold it, they shall weep, 
every nation apart. 

Then shall he command them to enter into the river of fire 
while the works of every one of them shall stand before them 
(something is wanting) to every man according to his deeds. 
As for the elect that have done good, they shall come unto 
me and not see death by the devouring fire. But the unrighteous, 
the sinners, and the hypocrites shall stand in the depths of 
darkness that shall not pass away, and their chastisement is 
the fire, and angels bring forward their sins and prepare for 
them a place wherein they shall be punished for ever (every one 
according to his transgression). 

Uriel (Urael) the angel of God shall bring forth the souls of 
those sinners (every one according to his transgression: perhaps 
this clause should end the preceding paragraph: so Grébaut takes 
it) who perished in the flood, and of all that dwelt in all idols, 
in every molten image, in every (object of) love, and in pictures, 
and of those that dwelt on all hills and in stones and by the 
wayside, whom men called gods: they shall burn them with 
them (the objects in which they dwelt, or their worshippers ?) 
in everlasting fire ; and after that all of them with their dwelling- 
places are destroyed, they shall be punished eternally. 


(Here begins the description of torments which we have, in another 
text, in the Akhmim fragment.) 


Gr, 22, Then shall men and women come unto the place pre- 
pared for them. By their tongues wherewith they have 
blasphemed the way of righteousness shall they be 
hanged up. There is spread wnder them unquenchable 
fire, that they escape it not. 

Gr. 23. Behold, another place: therein is a pit, great and 
full (of.. ) In it are they that have denied righteous- 
ness: and angels of punishment chastise them and there 
do they kindle upon them the fire of their torment. 

Gr, 24, And again behold [two: corrupt] women: they hang 
them up by their neck and by their hair; they shall 
cast them into the pit. These are they which plaited 
their hair, not for good (or, not to make them beautiful) 
but to turn them to fornication, that they might 
ensnare the souls of men unto perdition. And the men 
that lay with them in fornication shall be hung by 
their loins in that place of fire; and they shall say one 
to another: We knew not that we should come into 
everlasting punishment. 

Gr. 25. And the murderers and them that have made common 
cause with them shall they cast into the fire, in a place 
full of venomous beasts, and they shall be tormented 
without rest, feeling their pains; and their worms 


APOCALYPSE OF PETER 


shall be as many in number as a dark cloud. And the 
angel Ezraél shall bring forth the souls of them that 
have been slain, and they shall behold the torment of 
them that slew them, and say one to another: Righteous- 
ness and justice is the judgement of God. For we 
heard, but we believed not, that we should come into 
this place of eternal judgement. 

And near by this flame shall be a pit, great and 
very deep, and into it floweth from above all manner 
of ttorment,t foulness, and issue. And women are 
swallowed up therein up to their necks and tormented 
with great pain. These are they that have caused their 
children to be born untimely, and have corrupted the 
work of God that created them. Over against them 
shall be another place where sit their children [both] 
alive, and they cry unto God. And flashes (lightnings) 
go forth from those children and pierce the eyes of them 
that for fornication’s sake have caused their destruction. 

Other men and women shall stand above them, 
naked; and their children stand over against them in 
a place of delight, and sigh and cry unto God because 
of their parents, saying: These are they that have 
despised and cursed and transgressed thy command- 
ments and delivered us unto death: they have cursed 
the angel that formed us, and have hanged us up, and 
withheld from us (or, begrudged us) the light which 


515 


Gr. 26. 


Clem. 
Alex. 


Metho- 
dius. 


thou hast given unto all creatures. And the milk of Clem. 


their mothers flowing from their breasts shall congeal, 
and from it shall come beasts devouring flesh, which 
shall come forth and turn and torment them for ever 
with their husbands, because they forsook the com- 
mandments of God and slew their children. As for 
their children, they shal]l be delivered unto the angel 
Temlakos (i.e. a care-taking angel: see above, in the 
Fragments). And they that slew them shall be tormented 
eternally, for God willeth it so. 

Ezraél the angel of wrath shall bring men and women, 
the half of their bodies burning, and cast them into a 
place of darkness, even the hell of men; and a spirit of 
wrath shall chastise them with all manner of torment, 
and a worm that sleepeth not shall devour their entrails: 
and these are the persecutors and betrayers of my 
righteous ones. 

And beside them that are there, shall be other men 
and women, gnawing their tongues; and they shall 
torment them with red-hot iron and burn their 
eyes. These are they that slander and doubt of my 
righteousness. 


Alex. 


Gr27, 


Gr, 28, 


516 APOCALYPSE OF PETER 


Gr. 29. Other men and women whose works were done in 
deceitfulness shall have their lips cut off; and fire 
entereth into their mouth and their entrails. These are 
the false witnesses (al. these are they that caused the 
martyrs to die by their lying). 

Gr. 380. And beside them, in a place near at hand, tupon the 
stone shall be a pillar of fire,t and the pillar is sharper 
than swords. And there shall be men and women clad 
in rags and filthy garments, and they shall be cast 
thereon, to suffer the judgement of a torment that 
ceaseth not: these are they that trusted in their riches, 
and despised the widows and the woman with fatherless 
children .. . before God. 

Gr. 31. And into another place hard by, full of filth, do they 
cast men and women up to the knees. These are they 
that lent money and took usury. 

Gr. 82. And other men and women cast themselves down 
from an high place and return again and run, and devils 
drive them. [These are the worshippers of idols] tand 
they put them to the end of their wits} (drive them up 
to the top of the height) and they cast themselves down. 
And thus do they continually, and are tormented for 
ever. These are they which have tcuty} their flesh as 
[tapostles;] of a man: and the women that were with 
them ...and these are the men that defiled themselves 
together as women. (This is very corrupt: but the sense 
is clear in the Greek.) 

Gr. 83. And beside them (shall be a brazier?) ... and beneath 
them shall the angel Kzraél prepare a place of much 
fire: and all the idols of gold and silver, all idols, the 
work of men’s hands, and the semblances of images of 
eats and lions, of creeping things and wild beasts, and 
the men and women that have prepared the images 
thereof, shall be in chains of fire and shall be chastised 
because of their error before the idols, and this is their 
judgement for ever. (In the Greek they beat each other 
with rods of fire: and this ts better.) 

Gr. 34, And beside them shall be other men and women, burning 
in the fire of the judgement, and their torment is ever- 
lasting. These are they that have forsaken the command- 
ment of God and followed the (persuasions ?) of devils. 


(Parts of these two sections are in the Bodleian fragment. At 
this point the Akhmim fragment ends. The Ethiopic continues :) 


And there shall be another place, very high (corrupt sentences 
follow. Duensing omits them: Grébaut renders doubtfully : There 
shall be a furnace and a brazier wherein shall burn fire. The fire 
that shall burn shall come from one end of the brazier). The 


APOCALYPSE OF PETER 517 


men and women whose feet slip, shall go rolling down into a 
place where is fear. And again while the fire that is prepared 
floweth, they mount up and fall down again and continue to roll 
down. (This suggests a narrow bridge over a stream of fire which 
they keep trying to cross.) Thus shall they be tormented for ever. 
These are they that honoured not their father and mother and 
of their own accord withheld (withdrew) themselves from them. 
Therefore shall they be chastised eternally. 

Furthermore the angel Ezraél shall bring children and maidens, 
to show them those that are tormented. They shall be 
chastised with pains, with hanging up (?) and with a multitude 
of wounds which flesh-devouring birds shall inflict upon them. 
These are they that boast themselves (trust) in their sins, and 
obey not their parents and follow not the instruction of their 
fathers, and honour not them that are more aged than they. 

Beside them shall be girls clad in darkness for a garment, 
and they shall be sore chastised and their flesh shall be torn in 
pieces. These are they that kept not their virginity until they 
were given in marriage, and with these torments shall they be 
punished, and shall feel them. 

And again, other men and women, gnawing their tongues 
without ceasing, and being tormented with everlasting fire. 
These are the servants (slaves) which were not obedient unto 
their masters; and this then is their judgement for ever. 

And hard by this place of torment shall be men and women 
dumb and blind, whose raiment is white. They shall crowd one 
upon another, and fall upon coals of unquenchable fire. These 
are they that give alms and say: We are righteous before God: 
whereas they have not sought after righteousness. 

Ezraél the angel of God jshall bring them forth out of this 
fire and establish a judgement of decision+. This then is their 
judgement. A river of fire shall flow and all tjudgement7 (they 
that are judged) shall be drawn down into the middle of the river. 
And Uriel shall set them there. 

And there are wheels of fire,and men and women hung thereon 
by the strength of the whirling thereof. And they that are in 
the pit shall burn}: now these are the sorcerers and sorceresses. 
+Those wheels shall be in all decision (judgement, punishment) 
by fire without numberf. ; 

Thereafter shall the angels bring mine elect and righteous 
which are perfect in all uprightness, and bear them in their 
hands, and clothe them with the raiment of the life that is above. 
They shall see their desire on them that hated them, when he 
punisheth them, and the torment of every one shall be for ever 
according to his works. : E 

And all they that are in torment shall say with one voice: 
Have mercy upon us, for now know we the judgement of God, 
which he declared unto us aforetime, and we believed not. And 


518 APOCALYPSE OF PETER 


the angel Tatirdkos (Tartaruchus, keeper of hell: a word corre- 
sponding in formation to Temeluchus) shall come and chastise 
them with yet greater torment,and say unto them: Now do ye 
repent, when it is no longer the time for repentance, and nought 
of life remaineth. And they shall say: Righteous is the judge- 
ment of God, for we have heard and perceived that his judgement 
is good; for we are recompensed according to our deeds. 

Then will I give unto mine elect and righteous the washing 
(baptism) and the salvation for which they have besought me, 
in the field of Akrosja (Acherousia, a lake in other writings, e. g. 
Apocalypse of Moses—where the soul of Adam is washed in it: 
see also Paul 22, 28) which is called Anéslasleja (Elysium). 
They shall adorn with flowers the portion of the righteous, and 
I shall go ...1 shall rejoice with them. I will cause the peoples 
to enter in to mine everlasting kingdom, and show them that 
eternal thing (life?) whereon I have made them to set their hope, 
even I and my Father which is in heaven. 

I have spoken this unto thee, Peter, and declared it unto thee. 
Go forth therefore and go unto the land (or city) of the west. 
(Duensing omits the next sentences as unintelligible ; Grébaut and 
N. McLean render thus: and enter into the vineyard which 
I shall tell thee of, in order that by the sickness (sufferings) of 
the Son who is without sin the deeds of corruption may be 
sanctified. As for thee, thou art chosen according to the promise 
which I have given thee. Spread thou therefore my gospel 
throughout all the world in peace. Verily men shall rejoice: 
my words shall be the source of hope and of life, and suddenly 
shall the world be ravished.) 


(We now have the section descriptive of paradise, which in the 
Akhmim text precedes that about heil.) 


Gr. 4. And my Lord Jesus Christ our king said unto me: 
Let us go unto the holy mountain. And his disciples 
Gr.6. went with him, praying. And behold there were two 
Gr. 7. men there, and we could not look upon their faces, for 
a light came from them, shining more than the sun, 
and their raiment also was shining, and cannot be 
described, and nothing is sufficient to be compared 
unto them in this world. And the sweetness of them 
. . . that no mouth is able to utter the beauty of their 
appearance (or, the mouth hath not sweetness to express, 
&c.), for their aspect was astonishing and wonderful. 
+And the other, great, I sayt (probably: and, in a word, 
I cannot describe it), shineth in his (sic) aspect above 
Gr. 8,9. crystal. Like the flower of roses is the appearance of the 
colour of his aspect and of his body . . . his head (al. 
Gr. 10. their head wasamarvel). And upon his (their) shoulders 
(evidently something about their hair has dropped out) 


APOCALYPSE OF PETER 519 


and on their foreheads was a crown of nard woven of 

fair flowers. As the rainbow in the water,) so was 

their hair. And such was the comeliness of their counten- 

ance, adorned with all manner of ornament. And when Gr. 11. 
we saw them on a sudden, we marvelled. And I drew Gr. 12. 
near unto the Lord (God) Jesus Christ and said unto 

him: O my Lord, who are these? And he said unto Gr, 13, 
me: They are Moses and Elias. And I said unto him: Gr. 14. 
<Where then are) Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and 

the rest of the righteous fathers? And he showed us Gr. 15. 
a great garden, open, full of fair trees and blessed fruits, 

and of the odour of perfumes. The fragrance thereof Gr. 16. 
was pleasant and came even unto us. And thereof 

(al. of that tree) . . . saw I much fruit. And my Lord (Gr. 20). 
and God Jesus Christ said unto me: Hast thou seen 

the companies of the fathers? 

As is their rest,? such also is the honour and the glory of them 
that are persecuted for my righteousness’ sake. And I rejoiced 
and believed [and believed] and understood that which is written 
in the book of my Lord Jesus Christ. And I said unto him: 
O my Lord, wilt thou that I make here three tabernacles, one 
for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias? And he said 
unto me in wrath: Satan maketh war against thee, and hath 
veiled thine understanding; and the good things of this world 
prevail against thee. Thine eyes therefore must be opened and 
thine ears unstopped that <thou mayest see ?> * a tabernacle, 
not made with men’s hands, which my heavenly Father hath 
made for me and for the elect. And we beheld it and were full 
of gladness. 

And behold, suddenly there came a voice from heaven, saying: 
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: <he hath 
kept> my commandments. And then came a great and exceeding 
white cloud over our heads and bare away our Lord and Moses 
and Elias. And I trembled and was afraid: and we looked up; 
and the heaven opened and we beheld men in the flesh, and they 
came and greeted our Lord and Moses and Elias and went into 
another heaven. And the word of the scripture was fulfilled: 
This is the generation that seeketh him and seeketh the face of the 
God of Jacob. And great fear and commotion was there in heaven, 
and the angels pressed one upon another that the word of the 
scripture might be fulfilled which saith: Open the gates, ye princes. 

Thereafter was the heaven shut, that had been open. pe} 

And we prayed and went down from the mountain, glorifying 
God, which hath written the names of the righteous in heaven 
in the book of life. 

1 Probably: in the time of rain. From the LXX of Ezek. i. 28. 

2 Here Eth. inserts the clause, ‘And I rejoiced’, &c., rightly removed 
to the next sentence by Duensing. ® Or, There is but one tabernacle. 


520 APOCALYPSE OF PETER 


There is a great deal more of the Ethiopic text, but it is very 
evidently of later date; the next words are: 

‘Peter opened his mouth and said to me: Hearken, my son 
Clement; God created all things for his glory,’ and this proposition 
is dwelt upon. The glory of those who duly praise God is 
described in terms borrowed from the Apocalypse: ‘The Son at 
his coming will raise the dead . . . and will make my righteous 
ones shine seven times more than the sun, and will make their 
crowns shine like crystal and like the rainbow in the time of rain, 
(crowns) which are perfumed with nard and cannot be contemplated, 
(adorned) with rubies, with the colour of emeralds shining 
brightly, with topazes, gems, and yellow pearls that shine like 
the stars of heaven, and like the rays of the sun, sparkling, 
which cannot be gazed upon.’ Again, of the angels: ‘Their faces 
shine more than the sun; their crowns are as the rainbow in the 
time of rain. (They are perfumed) with nard. Their eyes shine 
like the morning star. The beauty of their appearance cannot be 
expressed. ... Their raiment is not woven, but white as that of 
the fuller, according as I saw on the mountain where Moses and 
Elias were. Our Lord showed at the transfiguration the apparel 
of the last days, of the day of resurrection, unto Peter, James 
and John the sons of Zebedee, and a bright cloud overshadowed 
us, and we heard the voice of the Father saying unto us: This 
is my Son whom I love and in whom I am well pleased: hear him. 
And being afraid we forgat all the things of this life and of the 
flesh, and knew not what we said because of the greatness of the 
wonder of that day, and of the mountain whereon he showed us 
the second coming in the kingdom that passeth not away.’ 

Next: ‘The Father hath committed all judgement unto the 
Son.’ The destiny of sinners—their eternal doom—is more than 
Peter can endure: he appeals to Christ to have pity on them. 

And my Lord answered me and said to me: ‘Hast thou under- 
stood that which I said unto thee before? It is permitted unto 
thee to know that concerning which thou askest: but thou 
must not tell that which thou hearest unto the sinners lest they 
transgress the more, and sin.’ Peter weeps many hours, and is 
at last consoled by an answer which, though exceedingly diffuse 
and vague, does seem to promise ultimate pardon for all: ‘My 
Father will give unto them all the life, the glory, and the kingdom 
that passeth not away,’ .. . ‘It is because of them that have 
believed in me that Iam come. It is also because of them that 
have believed in me, that, at their word, I shall have pity on men.’ 
The doctrine that sinners will be saved at last by the prayers of 
the righteous is, rather obscurely, enunciated in the Second Book 
of the Sibylline Oracles (a paraphrase, in this part, of the 
Apocalypse), and in the (Coptic) Apocalypse of Elias (see post). 

Ultimately Peter orders Clement to hide this revelation in 
a box, that foolish men may not see it. 


APOCALYPSE OF PETER 521 


The passage in the Second Book of the Sibylline Oracles which seems 
to point to the ultimate salvation of all sinners will be found in the last 
lines of the translation given below. 

_ The passage in the Coptic Apocalypse of Elias is guarded and obscure 
in expression, but significant. It begins with a sentence which has 
a parallel in Peter. 


The righteous will behold the sinners in their punishment, and 
those who have persecuted them and delivered them up. Then 
will the sinners on their part behold the place of the righteous 
and be partakers of grace. In that day will that for which the 
(righteous) shall often pray, be granted to them. 

That is, as I take it, the salvation of sinners will be granted at the 
prayer of the righteous. 

Compare also the Epistle of the Apostles, 40: ‘the righteous 
are sorry for the sinners, and pray for them. ... And I will 
hearken unto the prayer of the righteous which they make for 
them.’ 

I would add that the author of the Acts of Paul, who (in the Third 
Epistle to the Corinthians and elsewhere) betrays a knowledge of the 
Apocalypse of Peter, makes Falconilla, the deceased daughter of 
Tryphaena, speak of Thecla’s praying for her that she may be translated 
into the place of the righteous (Thecla episode, 28). 

My impression is that the maker of the Ethiopic version (or of its 
Arabic parent, or of another ancestor) has designedly omitted or 
slurred over some clauses in the passage beginning: ‘Then will I give 
unto mine elect’, and that in his very diffuse and obscure appendix to 
the Apocalypse, he has tried to break the dangerous doctrine of the 
ultimate salvation of sinners gently to his readers. But when the 
Arabic version of the Apocalypse is before us in the promised edition 
of MM. Griveau and Grébaut, we shall have better means of deciding. 


E 
APPENDIX 
SECOND BOOK OF THE SIBYLLINE ORACLES, 190-338 


It seems worth while to append here a translation of that portion of 
the Second Book which is most evidently taken from the Apocalypse 
of Peter. It may be remarked that Books I and II of the oracles really 
form but one composition, which is Christian and may be assigned to 
some time not early in the second century, or to the third. Many 
lines are borrowed from the older books, especially III and VIII. 


After saying (1. 187) that Elias will descend on earth and do 
three great signs, it proceeds: 

190 Woe unto all them that are found great with child in that 
day, and to them that give suck to infant children, and to 
them that dwell by the sea (the waves). Woe to them that 
shall behold that day. For a dark mist shall cover the 
boundless world, of the east and west, the south and north 


522 


200 


210 


214 


220 


230 


240 


APOCALYPSE OF PETER 


And then shall a great river of flaming fire flow from heaven 
and consume all places, the earth and the great ocean and 
the grey sea, lakes and rivers and fountains, and merciless 
Hades and the pole of heaven: but the lights of heaven shall 
melt together in one and into a void (desolate) shape (7). 
For the stars shall all fall from heaven into the sea (?), and 
all souls of men shall gnash their teeth as they burn in the 
river of brimstone and the rush of the fire in the blazing 
plain, and ashes shall cover all things. And then shall all 
the elements of the world be laid waste, air, earth, sea, light, 
poles, days and nights, and no more shall the multitudes of 
birds fly in the air nor swimming creatures any more swim 
the sea; no ship shall sail with its cargo over the waves; 
no straight-going oxen shall plough the tilled land; there 
shall be no more sound of swift winds, but he shall fuse 
all things together into one, and purge them clean. 

Now when the immortal angels of the undying God, 
Barakiel, Ramiel, Uriel, Samiel, and Azael,t knowing all the 
evil deeds that any hath wrought aforetime—then out of the 
misty darkness they shall bring all the souls of men to 
judgement, unto the seat of God the immortal, the great. 
For he only is incorruptible, himself the Almighty, who shall 
be the judge of mortal men. And then unto them of the 
underworld shall the heavenly one give their souls and spirit 
and speech; and their bones joined together, with all the 
joints, and the flesh and sinews and veins, and skin also over 
the flesh, and hair as before, and the bodies of the dwellers 
upon earth shall be moved and arise in one day, joined 
together in immortal fashion and breathing. 

Then shall the great angel Uriel break the monstrous bars 
framed of unyielding and unbroken adamant, of the brazen 
gates of Hades, and cast them down straightway, and bring 
forth to judgement all the sorrowful forms, yea, of the 
ghosts of the ancient Titans, and of the giants, and all whom 
the flood overtook. And all whom the wave of the sea hath 
destroyed in the waters, and all whom beasts and creeping 
things and fowls have feasted on: all these shall he bring 
to the judgement seat; and again those whom flesh-devouring 
fire hath consumed in the flames, them also shall he gather 
and set before God’s seat. 

And when he shall overcome Fate and raise the dead, then 
shall Adonai Sabaoth the high thunderer sit on his heavenly 
throne, and set up the great pillar, and Christ himself, the 
undying unto the undying, shall come in the clouds in glory 
with the pure angels, and shall sit on the seat on the right 
of the Great One, judging the life of the godly and the walk 
of ungodly men. 


1 These names are from Enoch. 


250 


260 


270 


280 


290 


SECOND BOOK OF THE SIBYLLINE ORACLES 523 


And Moses also the great, the friend of the Most High, 
shall come, clad in flesh, and the great Abraham himself 
shall come, and Isaac and Jacob, Jesus, Daniel, Elias, 
Ambacum (Habakkuk), and Jonas, and they whom the 
Hebrews slew: and all the Hebrews that were with (after ?) 
Jeremias shall be judged at the judgement seat, and he shall 
destroy them, that they may receive a due reward and 
expiate all that they did in their mortal life. 

And then shall all men pass through a blazing river and 
unquenchable flame, and the righteous shall be saved whole, 
all of them, but the ungodly shall perish therein unto all 
ages, even aS many as wrought evil aforetime, and com- 
mitted murders, and all that were privy thereto, liars, 
thieves, deceivers, cruel destroyers of houses, gluttons, 
marriers by stealth, shedders of evil rumours, sorely insolent, 
lawless, idolaters: and all that forsook the great immortal 
God and became blasphemers and harmers of the godly, 
breakers of faith and destroyers of righteous men. And all 
that look with guileful and shameless double faces—reverend 
priests and deacons—+and judge unjustly, dealing per- 
versely, obeying false rumours . . . more deadly than leopards 
and wolves, and very evil: and all that are high-minded, 
and usurers that heap up in their houses usury out of usury 
and injure orphans and widows continually: and they that 
give alms of unjust gain unto widows and orphans, and they 
that when they give alms of their own toil, reproach them; 
and they that have forsaken their parents in their old age and 
not repaid them at all, nor recompensed them for their 
nurture; yea, and they that have disobeyed and spoken 
hard words against their parents: they also that have 
received pledges and denied them, and servants that have 
turned against their masters; and again they which have 
defiled their flesh in lasciviousness, and have loosed the 
girdle of virginity in secret union, and they that make the 
child in the womb miscarry, and that cast out their offspring 
against right: sorcerers also and sorceresses with these shall 
the wrath of the heavenly and immortal God bring near unto 
the pillar, all round about which the untiring river of fire 
shall flow. And all of them shall the undying angels of the 
immortal everlasting God chastise terribly with flaming 
scourges, and shall bind them fast from above in fiery chains, 
bonds unbreakable. And then shall they cast them down in 
the darkness of night into Gehenna among the beasts of hell, 
many and frightful, where is darkness without measure. 

And when they have dealt out many torments unto all 
whose heart was evil, thereafter out of the great river shall 
a wheel of fire encompass them, because they devised wicked 


1 Something is lost or corrupt here. 


524 


800 


810 


820 


830 


338 


APOCALYPSE OF PETER 


works. And then shall they lament apart every one from 
another in miserable fate, fathers and infant children, mothers 
and sucklings weeping, nor shall they be sated with tears, 
nor shall the voice of them that mourn piteously apart be 
heard (?); but far under dark and squalid Tartarus shall 
they cry in torment, and in no holy place shall they abide 
and expiate threefold every evil deed that they have done, 
burning in a great flame; and shall gnash their teeth, all of 
them worn out with fierce thirst and hunger (al. force, 
violence), and shall call death lovely and it shall flee from 
them: for no more shall death nor night give them rest, 
and oft-times shall they beseech in vain the Almighty God, 
and then shall he openly turn away his face from them. 
For he hath granted the limit of seven ages for repentance 
unto men that err, by the hand of a pure virgin. 

But the residue which have cared for justice and good 
deeds, yea, and godliness and righteous thoughts, shall angels 
bear up and carry through the flaming river unto light, and 
life without care, where is the immortal path of the great 
God; and three fountains, of wine and honey and milk. 
And the earth, common to all, not parted out with walls or 
fences, shall then bring forth of her own accord much fruit, 
and life and wealth shall be common and undistributed. 
For there shall be no poor man, nor rich, nor tyrant, nor 
slave, none great nor small any longer, no kings, no princes; 
but all men shall be together in common. And no more 
shall any man say ‘night is come’, nor ‘the morrow’, 
nor ‘it was yesterday’. He maketh no more of days, nor of 
spring, nor winter, nor summer, nor autumn, neither mar- 
riage,nor death, nor selling, nor buying, nor set of sun, nor 
rising. For God shall make one Jong day. 

And unto them, the godly, shall the almighty and immortal 
God grant another boon, when they shall ask it of him. He 
shall grant them to save men out of the fierce fire and the 
eternal gnashing of teeth : and this will he do, for he will gather 
them again out of the everlasting flame and remove them 
elsewhither, sending them for the sake of his people unto 
another life eternal and immortal, in the Elysian plain 
where are the long waves of the Acherusian lake exhaustless 
and deep bosomed. 


Some artless iambic lines of uncertain date are appended here, 
which show what was thought of the doctrine: 


‘Plainly false: for the fire will never cease to torment the damned. 
[ indeed could pray that it might be so, who am branded with 
the deepest scars of transgressions which stand in need of utmost 
mercy. But let Origen be ashamed of his lying words, who saith 
that there is a term set to the torments.’ 


525 


APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 


Epiphanius tells us that the Caianites or Cainites had forged a book 
full of unspeakable matter in the name of Paul, which was also used 
by those who are called Gnostics, which they call the Anabaticon of 
Paul, basing it on the words of the apostle—that he was taken up into 
the third heaven. This has left no trace (Heresy, 38. 2). 

St. Augustine laughs at the folly of some who had forged an Apocalypse 
of Paul, full of fables, and pretending to contain the unutterable things 
which the apostle had heard. This is, I doubt not, our book. (Aug. 
on John, Tract 98.) Sozomen, in his Ecclesiastical History (vii. 19), 
says: The book now circulated as the Apocalypse of Paul the apostle, 
which none of the ancients ever saw, is commended by most monks; 
but some contend that this book was found in the reign we write of 
(of Theodosius). For they say that by a Divine manifestation there 
was found underground at Tarsus of Cilicia, in Paul’s house, a marble 
chest, and that in it was this book. However, when I inquired about 
this, a Cilician, a priest of the church of Tarsus, told me it was a lie, 
He was a man whose grey hairs showed him to be of considerable age, 
and he said that no such thing had happened in their city, and that he 
wondered whether the tale (or, the book) had not been made up by 
heretics. 

Sozomen’s story is that which appears in our book; and we need 
not doubt that this Apocalypse made its appearance in the last years 
of the fourth century. 

It is condemned in the Gelasian Decree, and is mentioned with 
disapproval by various late church writers. 

Though not an early book, it is made up very largely of early matter; 
and it had an immense vogue, especially in the West. Greek copies 
of it are rare, and the texts they contain are disfigured by many 
omissions. Of the Eastern versions—Syriac, Coptic, Ethiopic—the 
Syriac is the best. But possibly the full Latin version is superior to 
all other authorities. There are several abridged Latin texts, and 
from these were made the many versions which were current in almost 
every European language. 

In an early canto of the Inferno (ii. 28) Dante mentions the visit of 
the ‘Chosen Vessel’ to Hell 1—an undoubted allusion to the Apocalypse. 
And both in the Divine Comedy and in the hundreds of earlier mediaeval 
visions of the next world the influence of this book is perceptible, 
sometimes faintly, often very plainly indeed. 

The reader will soon see for himself that Paul is a direct descendant 
of Peter, especially in his description of Hell-torments.* He will also 
see that the book is very badly put together; and that whole episodes, 


1 ¢Andovvi poi lo Vas d’elezione,’ &c. 

2 I have not marked the parallels with Peter: the reader cannot 
miss them; but I have adduced passages from Elias and Zephaniah 
which seem to be the sources of several episodes in Paul. Our texts 
of Elias and Zephaniah are not good; we have them only in Coptic, 
edited by Steindorff. Note, by the way, that what I (and most others) 
call Zephaniah, Steindorff too cautiously calls an ‘anonymous 


Apocalypse’. 


526 APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 


e.g. the visit to Paradise, are repeated. This means that the author is 
combining different sources in a very unintelligent way. 

In the Greek, Latin, and Syriac the book is incomplete: it ends 
abruptly in a speech of Elijah. The Coptic version—only recently 
published—has a long continuation; part of this is, I think, original, 
but it tails off into matter which cannot be. This conclusion has 
even a third visit to Paradise! I give some particulars of it later. 

The plan of the book is briefly this: 

1, 2. Discovery of the revelation. 
3-6. Appeal of creation to God against man. 
7-10. The report of the angels to God about men. 

11-18. Deaths and judgements of the righteous and the wicked. 

19-80. First vision of Paradise. 

31-44. Hell. Paul obtains rest on Sunday for the lost. 

45-51. Second vision of Paradise. 

The full Latin version is the basis of my translation: the Greek, 
Syriac, and Coptic are used where the Latin is corrupt. 


Here beginneth the Vision of Saint Paul the Apostle. 


But I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord. I knew 
aman in Christ fourteen years ago, whether in the body I know not, 
or whether out of the body I know not—God knoweth—that such an 
one was caught up unto the third heaven: and I knew such a man, 
whether in the body or out of the body I know not—God knoweth— 
that he was caught up into paradise and heard secret words which 
it is not lawful for men to utter. For such an one will I boast, but 
for myself I will boast nothing, save of mine infirmities. 

1 At what time was it made manifest?+ In the consulate of 
Theodosius Augustus the younger and Cynegius, a certain honourable 
man then dwelling at Tarsus, in the house which had been the house 
of Saint Paul, an angel appeared unto him by night and gave him 
a revelation, saying that he should break up the foundation of the 
house and publish that which he found; but he thought this to be 
a lying vision. 2 But a third time the angel came, and scourged 
him and compelled him to break up the foundation. And he dug, 
and found a box of marble inscribed upon the sides : therein was the 
revelation of Saint Paul, and his shoes wherein he walked when he 
taught the word of God. But he feared to open that box, and brought 
it to the judge; and the judge took it, sealed as it was with lead, and 
sent it to the emperor Theodosius, fearing that it might be somewhat 
strange ; and the emperor when he received it, opened it and found 
the revelation of Saint Paul. A copy thereof he sent to Jerusalem 
and the original he kept with him. (Gr. reverses this: he kept the 
copy and sent away the original. It adds: And there was written 
therein as followeth.) 

3 Now while I was in the body, wherein I was caught up unto 
the third heaven, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying: 
Speak unto this people: How long will ye transgress, and add 


1 Syr. puts the story of the discovery at the end of the book. 


APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 527 


sin upon sin, and tempt the Lord that made you?! Saying that 
ye are Abraham’s children but doing the works of Satan (so Gr. ; 
Lat. Ye are the sons of God, doing the work of the devil), walking 
in the confidence of God, boasting in your name only, but being 
poor because of the matter of sin. Remember therefore and know 
that the whole creation is subject unto God, but mankind only 
sinneth. It hath dominion over the whole creation, and sinneth 
more than the whole of nature. 4 For oftentimes hath the sun, 
the great light, appealed unto the Lord, saying: O Lord God 
Almighty, I look forth upon the ungodliness and unrighteousness 
of men. Suffer me, and I will do unto them according to my 
power, that they may know that thou art God alone. And there 
came a voice unto it, saying: All these things do I know, for 
mine eye seeth and mine ear heareth, but my long-suffering 
beareth with them until they turn and repent. But if they 
return not unto me, I will judge them all. 5 And sometimes the 
moon and the stars have appealed unto the Lord, saying: O Lord 
God Almighty, unto us hast thou given rule over the night ; how 
jong shall we look upon the ungodliness and fornications and 
murders which the children of men commit? suffer us to do 
unto them according unto our powers, that they may know that 
thou art God alone. And there came a voice unto them, saying: 
I know all these things, and mine eye looketh upon them and 
mine ear heareth, but my long-suffering beareth with them until 
they turn and repent. But if they return not unto me, I will 
judge them. 6 Oftentimes also the sea hath cried out, saying: 
O Lord God Almighty, men have polluted thine holy name in 
me: suffer me and I will arise and cover every wood and tree 
and all the world, till I blot out all the children of men from 
before thy face, that they may know that thou art God alone. 
And again a voice came, saying: I know all, for mine eye seeth 
all things, and mine ear heareth, but my long-suffering beareth 
with them until they turn and repent. But if they return not, 
I will judge them. 

Sometimes also the waters have appealed against the children 
of men, saying: O Lord God Almighty, the children of men have 
all defiled thine holy name. And there came a voice, saying: 
I know all things before they come to pass, for mine eye seeth 
and mine ear heareth all things: but my long-suffering beareth 
with them until they turn. And if not, I will judge. Often also 
hath the earth cried out unto the Lord against the children of 
men, saying: O Lord God Almighty, I suffer hurt more than all 

1 The Apocalypse of Elias is probably the source here. It begins: 
The word of the Lord came unto me: Son of Man, say unto this 
people: Wherefore do ye heap sin upon sin and provoke God the 
Lord that made you? Love not the world, &c. ... After a few lines: 
For oftentimes hath the devil desired that the sun should not rise 
‘upon the earth, &c. 


528 APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 


thy creation, bearing the fornications, adulteries, murders, thefts, 
forswearings, sorceries, and witchcrafts of men, and all the evils 
that they do, so that the father riseth up against the son, and the 
son against the father, the stranger against the stranger, every 
one to defile his neighbour’s wife. The father goeth up upon his 
son’s bed, and the son likewise goeth up upon the couch of his 
father; and with all these evils have they that offer a sacrifice 
unto thy name polluted thine holy place. Therefore do I suffer 
hurt more than the whole creation, and I would not yield mine 
excellence and my fruits unto the children of men. Suffer me 
and I will destroy the excellence of my fruits. And there came 
a voice and said: I know all things, and there is none that can 
hide himself from his sin. And their ungodliness do I know; 
but my holiness suffereth them until they turn and repent. But 
if they return not unto me, I will judge them. 7 Behold then 
ye children of men. The creature is subject unto God; but 
mankind alone sinneth. 

Therefore, ye children of men, bless ye the Lord God without 
ceasing at all hours and on all days; but especially when the sun 
setteth. For in that hour do all the angels go unto the Lord to 
worship him and to present the deeds of men which every man 
doeth from morning until evening, whether they be good or evil. 
And there is an angel that goeth forth rejoicing from the man 
in whom he dwelleth <and another goeth with a sad counte- 
nance, Gr.>. 

When therefore the sun is set, at the first hour of the night, in 
the same hour goeth the angel of every people and of every man 
and woman, which protect and keep them, because man is the 
image of God: and likewise at the hour of morning, which is the 
twelfth hour of the night, do all the angels of men and women go 
to meet God and present all the work which every man hath 
wrought, whether good or evil. And every day and night do the 
angels present unto God the account of all the deeds of mankind. 
Unto you, therefore, I say, O children of men, bless ye the Lord 
God without ceasing all the days of your life. 

8 At the hour appointed, therefore, all the angels, every one 
rejoicing, come forth before God together to meet him and 
worship him at the hour that is set ; tand lo, suddenly at the set 
time there was a meeting,t and the angels came to worship in 
the presence of God, and the spirit came forth to meet them, and 
there was a voice, saying: Whence come ye, our angels, bringing 
burdens of news? 9 They answered and said: We are come 
from them that have renounced the world for thy holy name’s 
sake, wandering as strangers and in the caves of the rocks, and 
weeping every hour that they dwell on the earth, and hungering 
and thirsting for thy name’s sake; with their loins girt, holding 
in their hands the incense of their heart, and praying and bless- 
ing at every hour, suffering anguish and subduing themselves, 


APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 529 


weeping and lamenting more than all that dwell on the earth. 
And we that are their angels do mourn with them; whither 
therefore it pleaseth thee, command us to go and minister lest 
they do otherwise, but the poort more than all that dwell on the 
earth. (The sense required as shown by Gr. is that the angels 
ask that these good men may continue in goodness.) And the 
voice of God came unto them, saying: Know ye that from hence- 
forth my grace shall be established with you, and mine help, 
which is my dearly beloved Son, shall be with them, ruling them 
at all times; and he shall minister unto them and never forsake 
them, for their place is his habitation. 10 When, then, these 
angels departed, lo, there came other angels to worship in the 
presence of the majesty, to meet therewith, and they were 
weeping. And the spirit of God went forth to meet them, and 
the voice of God came, saying: Whence are ye come, our angels, 
bearing burdens, ministers of the news of the world? They 
answered and said in the presence of God: We are come from 
them which have called upon thy name; and the snares of the 
world have made them wretched, devising many excuses at all 
times, and not making so much as one pure prayer out of their 
whole heart all the time of their life. Wherefore then must we be 
with men that are sinners? And the voice of God came unto them: 
Ye must minister unto them until they turn and repent; but 
if they return not unto me, I will judge them. 

Know therefore, O children of men, that whatsoever is wrought 
by you, the angels tell it unto God, whether it be good or evil. 

11 [Syr. Again, after these things, I saw one of the spiritual} 
ones coming unto me, and he caught me up in the spirit, and 
carried me to the third heaven.] 

And the angel answered and said unto me: Follow me, and I 
will show thee the place of the righteous where they are taken 
whenthey aredead. And thereafter will I take thee to the bottom- 
less pit and show thee the souls of the sinners, into what manner 
of place they are taken when they are dead. 

And I went after the angel, and he took me into heaven, and 
I looked upon the firmament, and saw there the powers; and 
there was forgetfulness which deceiveth and draweth unto itself 
the hearts of men, and the spirit of slander and the spirit of 
fornication and the spirit of wrath and the spirit of insolence, 
and there were the princes of wickedness. These things saw 
I beneath the firmament of the heaven. 

And again I looked and saw angels without mercy, having no 
pity, whose countenances were full of fury, and their teeth stick- 
ing forth out of their mouth: their eyes shone like the morning 
star of the east, and out of the hairs of their head and out of their 
mouth went forth sparks of fire. And I asked the angel, saying: 
Who are these, Lord? And the angel answered and said unto 
me: These are they which are appointed unto the souls of sinners 


870 Mom 


530 APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 


in the hour of necessity, even of them that have not believed that 
they had the Lord for their helper and have not trusted in him.t 

12 And I looked into the height and beheld other angels whose 
faces shone like the sun, and their loins were girt with golden 
girdles, holding palms in their hands, and the sign of God, clad in 
raiment whereon was written the name of the Son of God, full of 
all gentleness and mercy. And I asked the angel and said: Who 
are these, Lord, that are of so great beauty and compassion ? 
And the angel answered and said unto me: These are the angels 
of righteousness that are sent to bring the souls of the righteous 
in the hour of necessity, even them that have believed that they 
had the Lord for their helper. And I said unto him: Do the 
righteous and the sinners of necessity meet [witnesses] when they 
are dead? 2 And the angel answered and said unto me: The way 
whereby all pass unto God is one: but the righteous having an 
holy helper with them are not troubled when they go to appear 
in the presence of God. 

18 And I said unto the angel: I would see the souls of the 
righteous and of the sinners as they depart out of the world. 
And the angel answered and said unto me: Look down upon the 
earth. And I looked down from heaven upon the earth and 
beheld the whole world, and it was as nothing in my sight; and 
I saw the children of men as though they were nought, and 
failing utterly; *? and I marvelled, and said unto the angel: Is 
this the greatness of men? And the angel answered and said 
unto me: This it is, and these are they that do hurt from morning 
until evening. And I looked, and saw a great cloud of fire spread 
over the whole world, and said unto the angel: What is this, 
Lord? And he said to me: This is the unrighteousness that is 
mingled +by the princes of sinnerst (Gr. mingled with the 
destruction of sinners; Syr. mingled with the prayers of the 
sons of men). 

1 Apocalypse of Zephaniah (Steindorff’s ‘anonymous Apocalypse’): 
I went with the angel of the Lord and looked before me and saw a 
place through which passed thousand thousands and myriads of 
myriads of angels, whose faces were as of panthers, and their teeth 
stuck forth out of their mouth, and their eyes were bloodshot, and their 
hair loose like women’s hair, and burning scourges were in their hands. 
(I feared and asked: Whoare these? The angel answered:) These are 
the ministers of the whole creation, which come unto the souls of the 
ungodly and take them and lay them down here: they fly three days 
with them in the air before they take them and cast them into their 
everlasting torment. 

* Probably the sense was: Must the righteous meet the sinners, or 
their dreadful angels ? 

* Apocalypse of Zephaniah: I saw the whole earth . . . beneath, 
like a drop of water (upon a bucket) that cometh up out of the well. 


Our fragmentary text of the Apocalypse apparently begins with 
a description of the death of a righteous man. 


APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 531 


14 And I when I heard that sighed and wept, and said unto the 
angel: I would wait for the souls of the righteous and of the 
sinners, and see in what fashion they depart out of the body. 
And the angel answered and said unto me: Look again upon the 
earth. And I looked and saw the whole world: and men were as 
nought, and failing utterly ; and I looked and saw a certain man 
about to die; and the angel said to me: He whom thou seest is 
righteous. And again I looked and saw all his works that he 
had done for the name of God, and all his desires which he remem- 
bered and which he remembered not, all of them stood before 
his face in the hour of necessity. And I saw that the righteous 
man had grown in righteousness, and found rest and confidence: 
and before he departed out of the world there stood by him holy 
angels, and also evil ones: and I saw them all; but the evil ones 
found no abode in him, but the holy ones had power over his 
soul and ruled it until it went out of the body. And they stirred 
up the soul, saying: O soul, take knowledge of thy body whence 
thou art come out; for thou must needs return into the same 
body at the day of resurrection, to receive that which is promised 
unto all the righteous. They received therefore the soul out of 
the body, and straightway kissed it as one daily known of them, 
saying unto it: Be of good courage, for thou hast done the will 
of God while thou abodest on the earth. And there came to meet 
it the angel that watched it day by day, and he said unto it: 
Be of good courage, O soul: for I rejoice in thee because thou 
hast done the will of God on the earth; for I told unto God all 
thy works, how they stood. Likewise also the spirit came forth 
to meet it and said: O soul, fear not, neither be troubled, until 
thou come unto a place which thou never knewest; but I will 
be thine helper, for I have found in thee a place of refreshment 
in the time when I dwelt in thee, when I was (thou wast ?) on the 
earth. And the spirit [thereof] strengthened it, and the angel 
thereof took it up and carried it into the heaven. +fAnd the 
angel saidt (Syr. And there went out to meet it wicked powers, 
those that are under heaven. And there reached it the spirit of 
error, and said): Whither runnest thou, O soul, and presumest to 
enter heaven? stay and let us see if there be aught of ours in 
thee. And lo! we have found nothing in thee. I behold also 
the help of God, and thine angel; and the spirit rejoiceth with 
thee because thou didst the will of God upon earth. (Syr. has 
more here. ‘There is a conflict between the good and evil angels. 
The spirit of error first laments. Then the spirit of the tempter 
and of fornication meet it and it escapes, and they lament. 
All the principalities and evil spirits come to meet it and find 
nothing, and gnash their teeth. The guardian angel bids them 
go back, ‘Ye tempted this soul and it would not listen to you’. 
And the voice of many angels is heard rejoicing over the soul. 
Probably this is original matter.) And they brought it until it 


532 APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 


did worship in the presence of God. And when they (it?) had 
ceased, forthwith Michael and all the host of the angels fell and 
worshipped the footstool of his feet and his gates, and said together 
unto the soul: This is the God of all, which made thee in his 
image and likeness. And the angel returned and declared, saying: 
Lord, remember his works; for this is the soul whereof I did report 
the works unto thee, Lord, doing according to thy judgement. 
And likewise the spirit said: I am the spirit of quickening that 
breathed upon it; for I had refreshment in it in the time when 
I dwelt therein, doing according to thy judgement. And the 
voice of God came, saying: Like as this soul hath not grieved me, 
neither will I grieve it, for like as it hath had mercy, I also will 
have mercy. Let it be delivered therefore unto Michael the 
angel of the covenant, and let him lead it into the paradise of 
rejoicing that it become fellow-heir with all the saints. And 
thereafter I heard the voices of thousands of thousands of angels 
and archangels and the cherubim and the four-and-twenty elders 
uttering hymns and glorifying the Lord and crying: Righteous 
art thou, O Lord, and just are thy judgements, and there is no 
respect of persons with thee, but thou rewardest every man 
according to thy judgement. And the angel answered and said 
unto me: Hast thou believed and known that whatsoever every 
one of you hath done, he beholdeth it at the hour of his necessity ? 
And I said: Yea, Lord. 

15 And he said unto me: Look down again upon the earth 
and wait for the soul of a wicked man going forth of the body, 
one that hath provoked the Lord day and night, saying: I know 
nought else in this world, I will eat and drink and enjoy the things 
that are in the world. For who is he that hath gone down into 
hell and come up and told us that there is a judgement there? 
And again I looked and saw all the despising of the sinner, and all 
that he did, and they stood together before him in the hour of 
necessity: and it came to pass in that hour when he was led out 
of his body to the judgement, that he (MS. I) said: It were 
better for me (MS. him) that I (he) had not been born. And after 
that the holy angels and the evil and the soul of the sinner came 
together, and the holy angels found no place in it. But the evil 
angels threatened (had power over) it, and when they brought it 
forth out of the body, the angels admonished it thrice, saying: 
O wretched soul, look upon thy flesh whence thou art come out; 
for thou must needs return into thy flesh at the day of resurrection 
to receive the due reward for thy sins and for thy wickedness. 
16 And when they had brought it forth, the accustomed (i. e. 
guardian) angel went before it! and said unto it: O miserable 
soul, I am the angel that clave unto thee and day by day reported 
unto the Lord thine evil deeds, whatsoever thou wroughtest by 
night or day; and if it had been in my power I would not have 


1 Here the Coptic version begins. 


APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 533 


ministered unto thee even one day; but of this I could do 
nothing, for God is merciful and a just judge, and he commanded 
us not to cease ministering unto your soul till ye should repent: 
but thou hast lost the time of repentance. I indeed am become 
a stranger unto thee and thou to me. Let us go then unto the 
just judge: I will not leave thee until I know that from this 
day I am become a stranger unto thee. (Here Copt. inserts a 
quite similar speech of the spirit to the soul, which may be 
original.) And the spirit confounded it, and the angel troubled 
it. When therefore they were come unto the principalities, and 
it would now go to enter into heaven, one burden (labour, suffer- 
ing) was laid upon it after another: error and forgetfulness and 
whispering met it, and the spirit of fornication and the rest of 
the powers, and said unto it: Whither goest thou, wretched soul, 
and darest to run forward into heaven? Stay, that we may see 
whether we have property of ours in thee, for we see not with 
thee an holy helper. (Syr. adds: And the angel answered and 
said: Know ye that it is a soul of the Lord, and he will not cast 
it aside, neither will I surrender the image of God into the hand 
of the wicked one. The Lord supported me all the days of the 
life of the soul, and he can support and help me: and I will not 
cast it off until it go up before the throne of God on high. When 
he shall see it, he hath power over it, and will send it whither he 
pleases.) And after that I heard voices in the height of the 
heavens, saying: Present this miserable soul unto God, that it 
may know that there is a God, whom it hath despised. When 
therefore it was entered into the heaven, all the angels, even 
thousands of thousands, saw it, and all cried out with one voice, 
saying: Woe unto thee, miserable soul, for thy »works which 
thou diddest upon the earth ; what answer wilt thou make unto 
God when thou drawest near to worship him? The angel which 
was with it answered and said: Weep with me, my dearly 
beloved, for I have found no rest in this soul. And the angels 
answered him and said: Let this soul be taken away out of our 
midst, for since it came in, the stench of it is passed upon us the 
angels. And thereafter it was presented, to worship in the 
presence of God; and the angel showed it the Lord God that 
made it after his own image and likeness. And its angel ran 
before it, saying: O Lord God Almighty, I am the angel of this 
soul, whose works I presented unto thee day and night, not 
doing according to thy judgement. And likewise the spirit said: 
I am the spirit which dwelt in it ever since it was made, and 
I know it in itself, and it followed not my will: judge it, Lord, 
according to thy judgement. And the voice of God came unto 
it and said: Where is thy fruit that thou hast yielded, worthy 
of those good things which thou hast received? did I put a 


1 Here Copt.has a long description of the powers of darkness which 
is certainly not original. 


534 APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 


distance even of a day between thee and the righteous? did I not 
make the sun to rise upon thee even as upon the righteous ?_ And 
it was silent, having nothing to answer; and again the voice 
came, saying: Just is the judgement of God, and there is no 
respect of persons with God, for whosoever hath done his mercy, 
he will have mercy on him, and whoso hath not had mercy, neither 
shall God have mercy on him. Let him therefore be delivered 
unto the angel Tartaruchus (Gr. Temeluchus) that is set over 
the torments, and let him cast him into the outer darkness, 
where is weeping and gnashing of teeth, and let him be there 
until the great day of judgement. And after that I heard the 
voice of the angels and archangels saying: Righteous art thou, 
O Lord, and just is thy judgement. 

17 And again I beheld, and lo, a soul which was brought by 
two angels, weeping and saying: Have mercy on me, thou 
righteous God, O God the judge; for to-day it is seven days 
since I went forth out of my body, and I was delivered unto these 
two angels, and they have brought me unto those places which 
I had never seen. And God the righteous judge said unto it: 
What hast thou done? for thou hast never wrought mercy; 
therefore wast thou delivered unto such angels, which have no 
merey, and because thou hast not done right, therefore neither 
have they dealt pitifully with thee in the hour of thy necessity. 
Confess therefore thy sins which thou hast committed when 
thou wert in the world. And it answered and said: Lord, I have 
not sinned. And the righteous Lord God was wroth with 
indignation when it said: I have not sinned; for it lied. And 
God said: Thinkest thou that thou art yet in the world? If 
every one of*you there when he sinneth, hideth and concealeth 
his sin from his neighbour, yet here no thing is hidden, for when 
the souls come to worship before the throne, both the good works 
and the sins of every one are made manifest. And when the 
soul heard that, it held its peace, having no answer. And I heard 
the Lord God, the righteous judge, saying again: Come, thou 
angel of this soul, and stand in the midst. And the angel of the 
sinful soul came, having a writing in his hands, and said: These, 
Lord, that are in mine hands, are all the sins of this soul from its 
youth up unto this day, even from ten years from its birth: and 
if thou bid me, Lord, I can tell the acts thereof since it began 
to be fifteen years old.1_ And the Lord God the righteous judge 
said: I say unto thee, O angel, I desire not of thee the account 
since it began to be fifteen years old: but declare its sins of 
five years before that it died and came hither. And again God 


+ Apocalypse of Zephaniah: J looked and saw that a writing (the 
same word, chirographum) was in his hand: he began to open it, and 
when he had spread it out I read it in mine own language, and I found 
all my sins that I had committed, recorded by him, even those which 
I had committed from my childhood up unto this day. 


APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 535 


the righteous judge said: For by myself I swear, and by mine 
holy angels and by my power, that if it had repented five years 
before it died, even for the walk (conversation) of one year, there 
should be forgetfulness of all the evil which it committed before, 
and it should have pardon and remission of sins: but now let 
it perish. And the angel of the sinful soul answered and said: 
Command, Lord, that (such and such an) angel to bring forth 
those (such and such) souls. 18 And in that same hour the souls 
were brought forth into the midst, and the soul of the sinner 
knew them. And the Lord said unto the soul of the sinner: 
I say unto thee, O soul, confess thy deeds which thou didst upon 
these souls whom thou seest, when they were in the world. And 
it answered and said: Lord, it is not yet a full year since I slew 
this one and shed its blood upon the earth, and with another 
I committed fornication; and not that only, but I did it much 
harm by taking away its substance. And the Lord God the 
righteous judge said: Knewest thou not that he that doth 
violence to another, if he that suffered violence die first, he is 
kept in this place until he that hurt him dieth, and then do both 
of them appear before the judge? and now hath every one 
received according as he did. And I heard a voice saying: Let 
that soul be delivered into the hands of Tartaruchus,! and he 
must be taken down into hell. Let him take him into the lower 
prison and let him be cast into torments and be left there until 
the great day of judgement. And again I heard thousands of 
thousands of angels singing an hymn unto the Lord and saying: 
Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just are thy judgements. 

19 The angel answered and said unto me: Hast thou perceived 
all these things? And I said: Yea, Lord. And he said unto 
me: Follow me again, and I will take thee and show thee the 
places of the righteous. And I followed the angel and he took 
me up unto the third heaven and set me before the door of a 
gate; and I looked on it and saw, and the gate was of gold, and 
there were two pillars of gold full of golden letters; and the angel 
turned again to me and said: Blessed art thou if thou enterest in 
by these gates, for it is not permitted to any to enter save only 
to those that have kept goodness and pureness of their bodies in 
all things. And I asked the angel and said: Lord, tell me for 
what cause are these letters set upon these tables? The angel 
answered and said unto me: These are the names of the righteous 
that minister unto God with their whole heart, which dwell on 
the earth. And again I said: Lord, then are their names. 
<written while they are yet on the earth? And he said: Not 
only are their names written, but)? also their countenance and 
the likeness of them that serve God is in heaven, and they are 

1 So Gr.: Lat. (Syr.), Tartarus; Copt., Temeluchus. 

* Omitted in Latin by homoeoteleuton: supplied from Coptic; 
Syriac amplifies. 


536 APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 


known unto the angels: for they know them that with their 
whole heart serve God before they depart out of the world. 

20 And when I had entered within the gate of paradise there 
came to meet me an old man whose face shone like the sun, and 
he embraced me and said: Hail, Paul, dearly beloved of God. 
And he kissed me with a joyful countenance, but he wept, and 
I said unto him: Father (Lat. Brother), why weepest thou? 
And again sighing and weeping he said: Because we are vexed 
by men, and they grieve us sore; for many are the good things 
which the Lord hath prepared, and great are his promises, but 
many receive them not. And I asked the angel and said: Who 
is this, Lord? And he said unto me: This is Enoch the scribe of 
righteousness. 

And I entered within that place and straightway I saw Elias,! 
and he came and saluted me with gladness and joy. And when 
he had seen me, he turned himself away and wept and said unto 
me: Paul, mayest thou receive the reward of thy labour which 
thou hast done among mankind. As for me, I have seen great 
and manifold good things which God hath prepared for all the 
righteous, and great are the promises of God, but the more part 
receive them not; yea hardly through much toil doth one and 
another enter into these places. 

21 And the angel answered and said unto me: What things 
soever I now show thee here, and whatsoever thou hearest, 
reveal them not unto any upon earth. And he led me and 
showed me: and I heard there words which it is not lawful for 
a man to utter; and again he said: Yet again follow me and 
I will show thee that which thou must relate and tell openly. 

And he brought me down from the third heaven, and led me 
into the second heaven, and again he led me to the firmament, 
and from the firmament he led me unto the gates of heaven. 
And the beginning of the foundation thereof was upon the river 
that watereth all the earth. And I asked the angel and said: 
Lord, what is this river of water? and he said unto me: This is 
the Ocean. And suddenly I came out of heaven, and perceived 
that it is the light of the heaven that shineth upon all the earth 
(or, all that land). And there the earth (or, land) was seven times 
brighter than silver. And I said: Lord, what is this place? 
and he said unto me: This is the land of promise. Hast thou 
not yet heard that which is written: Blessed are the meek, for 
they shall inherit the earth? The souls therefore of the righteous 
when they are gone forth of the body are sent for the time into 
this place. And I said unto the angel: Shall then this land be 
made manifest after (Lat. before) a time? The angel answered 
and said unto me: When Christ whom thou preachest cometh to 
reign, then by the decree of God the first earth shall be dissolved, 


1 Lat. has ‘the sun’, from confusing Helias with Helios. Gr. omits 
the paragraph. 


APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 537 


and then shall this land of promise be shown and it shall be 
like dew or a cloud; and then shall the Lord Jesus Christ the 
eternal king be manifested and shall come with all his saints to 
dwell therein; and he shall reign over them a thousand years, 
and they shall eat of the good things which now I will show thee. 

22 And I looked round about that land and saw a river flowing 
with milk and honey. And there were at the brink of the river 
trees planted, full of fruits: now every tree bare twelve fruits 
in the year, and they had various and divers fruits: and I saw 
the fashion (creation) of that place and all the work of God, and 
there I saw palm-trees of twenty cubits and others of ten cubits: 
and that land was seven times brighter than silver. And the 
trees were full of fruits from the root even to the upper branches. 
(Lat. is confused here. Copt. has: From the root of each tree 
up to its heart there were ten thousand branches with tens of 
thousands of clusters, [and there were ten thousand clusters on 
each branch,] and there were ten thousand dates in each cluster. 
And thus was it also with the vines. Every vine had ten 
thousand branches, and each branch had upon it ten thousand 
bunches of grapes, and every bunch had on it ten thousand 
grapes. And there were other trees there, myriads of myriads 
of them, and their fruit was in the same proportion.) And I said 
unto the angel: Wherefore doth every tree bring forth thousands 
of fruits? The angel answered and said unto me: Because the 
Lord God of his bounty giveth his gifts in abundance unto the 
worthy; for they also of their own will afflicted themselves 
when they were in the world, doing all things for his holy name’s 
sake. 

And again I said unto the angel: Lord, are these the only 
promises which the most holy Lord God promiseth? and he 
answered and said unto me: No; for there are greater by seven 
times than these. But I say unto thee, that when the righteous 
are gone forth out of the body and shall see the promises and the 
good things which God hath prepared for them, yet again they 
shall sigh and cry, saying: Wherefore did we utter a word out 
of our mouth to provoke our neighbour even for a day? And 
I asked again and said: Be these the only promises of God? 
And the angel answered and said unto me: These which now thou 
seest are for them that are married and keep the purity of their 
marriage, being continent. But unto the virgins, and unto 
them that hunger and thirst after righteousness and afflict 
themselves for the name of the Lord, God will give things seven- 
fold greater than these, which now I will show thee. 

And after that he took me out of that place where I saw these 
things, and lo, a river, and the waters of it were white exceedingly, 
more than milk; and I said unto the angel: What is this? and 
he said to me: This is the lake Acherusa where is the city of 
Christ: but not every man is suffered to enter into that city: 


538 APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 


for this is the way that leadeth unto God, and if any be a forni- 
cator or ungodly, and turn and repent and bear fruits meet for 
repentance, first when he cometh out of the body he is brought 
and worshippeth God, and then by the commandment of the Lord 
he is delivered unto Michael the angel, and he washeth him in 
the lake Acherusa and so bringeth him in to the city of Christ 
with them that have done no sin. And I marvelled and blessed 
the Lord God for all the things which I saw. 

23 And the angel answered and said unto me: Follow me, 
and I will bring thee into the city of Christ. And he stood by 
(upon) the lake Acherusa, and set me in a golden ship,! and angels 
as it were three thousand sang an hymn before me until I came 
even unto the city of Christ. And they that dwelt in the city of 
Christ rejoiced greatly over me as I came unto them, and 
I entered in and saw the city of Christ. And it was all of gold, 
and twelve walls compassed it about, and there were twelve 
towers within (a tower on each wall, Copt.; 12,000 towers, Syr.), 
and every wall had a furlong between them (i. e. the walls were 
a furlong apart, so Syr.; Copt. the circumference of each was 
100 furlongs) round about; and I said unto the angel: Lord, 
how much is one furlong? The angel answered and said unto me: 
It is as much as there is betwixt the Lord God and the men that 
are on the earth, for the great city of Christ is alone.? And 
there were twelve gates in the circuit of the city, of great beauty, 
and four rivers that compassed it about. There was a river of 
honey, and a river of milk, and a river of wine, and a river of oil. 
And I said unto the angel: What are these rivers that compass 
this city about? And he saith to me: These are the four rivers 
which flow abundantly for them that are in this land of promise, 
whereof the names are these: the river of honey is called Phison, 
and the river of milk Euphrates, and the river of oil Geon, and 
the river of wine Tigris. Whereas therefore when the righteous 
were in the world they used not their power over these things, 
but hungered and afflicted themselves for the Lord God’s sake, 
therefore when they enter into this city, the Lord will give them 
these things without number (?) and without all measure. 

24 And I when I entered in by the gate saw before the doors 
of the city trees great and high, having no fruits, but leaves only. 
And I saw a few men scattered about in the midst of the trees, 
and they mourned sore when they saw any man enter into the 
city. And those trees did penance for them, humbling themselves 
and bowing down, and again raising themselves up. 

And I beheld it and wept with them, and I asked the angel 


1 Apocalypse of Zephaniah (beginning of the second fragment): | 
They took me by the hand and lifted me up into that ship and began | 


to sing before me, even thousand thousands and myriads of myriads 
of angels. 
* Not in Syr. or Copt. 


APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 539 


and said: Lord, who are these that are not permitted to enter 
into the city of Christ? And he said unto me: These are they 
that did earnestly renounce the world day and night with fasting, 
but had an heart proud above other men, glorifying and praising 
themselves, and doing nought for their neighbours. For some 
they greeted friendly, but unto others they said not even ‘ Hail’, 
and unto whom they would they opened, and if they did any 
small thing for their neighbour they were puffed up. And I said: 
What then, Lord? their pride hath prevented them from entering 
into the city of Christ? And the angel answered and said unto 
me: The root of all evils is pride. Are they better than the Son 
of God who came unto the Jews in great humility? And I asked 
him and said: Wherefore is it then that the trees humble them- 
selves and are again raised up? And the angel answered and said 
unto me: All the time that these spent upon earth (Of old time 
they were on the earth, Copt.) serving God (they served God): 
but because of the shame and reproaches of men they were 
ashamed (did blush) for atime and humbled themselves; but they 
were not grieved, neither did repent, to cease from this pride that 
was in them (and one day they bowed themselves because of the 
disgrace of man, for they cannot endure the pride that is in him, 
Copt.). This is the cause why the trees humble themselves and 
again are raised up. And I asked and said: For what cause are 
they let in unto the gates of the city? The angel answered and 
said unto me: Because of the great goodness of God, and because 
this is the entry of all his saints which do enter into this city. 
Therefore are they left in this place, that when Christ the eternal 
king entereth in with his saints, when he cometh in, all the 
righteous shall entreat for them; and then shall they enter into 
the city with them: yet none of them is able to have confidence 
such as they have that have humbled themselves, serving the 
Lord God all their life long. 

25 But I went forward and the angel led me and brought me 
unto the river of honey, and I saw there Esaias and Jeremias and 
Ezekiel and Amos and Micheas and Zacharias, even the prophets 
lesser and greater, and they greeted me in the city. I said unto 
the angel: What is this path? and he said unto me: This is the 
path of the prophets: every one that hath grieved his soul and 
not done his own will for God’s sake, when he is departed out of 
the world and hath been brought unto the Lord God and wor- 
shipped him, then by the commandment of God he is delivered 
unto Michael, and he bringeth him into the city unto this place 
of the prophets, and they greet him as their friend and neighbour, 
because he hath performed the will of God. 

26 Again he led me where was the river of milk, and I saw in 
that place all the children whom the king Herod slew for the name 
of Christ, and they greeted me, and the angel said unto me: 
All they that keep chastity in cleanness, when they are gone out 


540 APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 


of the body, after they worship the Lord God, are delivered unto 
Michael and brought unto the children: and they greet them, 
saying: They are our brothers and friends and members: among 
them shall they inherit the promises of God. 

27 Again he took me and brought me to the north side of the 
city, and led me to where was the river of wine; and I saw there 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Lot and Job and other saints, and 
they greeted me. And I asked and said: What is this place, Lord ? 
The angel answered and said unto me: All they that are enter- 
tainers of strangers, when they are departed out of the world, 
first worship the Lord God, and then are delivered unto Michael 
and brought by this path into the city, and all the righteous 
greet him as a son and brother, and say unto him: Because thou 
hast kept kindliness and the entertainment of strangers, come 
thou and havean inheritance in the city of our Lord God. Every 
one of the righteous shall receive the good things of God in the 
city according to his deeds. 

28 And again he took me to the river of oil on the east side of 
the city. And I saw there men rejoicing and singing psalms, 
and said: Who are these, Lord? and the angel said unto me: 
These are they that have devoted themselves unto God with 
their whole heart, and had in them no pride. For all that rejoice 
in the Lord God and sing praises to the Lord with their whole 
heart are brought here into this city. 

29 And he took me into the midst of the city, by the twelve 
walls (to the twelfth wall, Copt.). Now there was in that place 
an higher wall; and I asked and said: Is there in the city of 
Christ a wall more excellent in honour than this place? And 
the angel answered and said unto me: The second is better than 
the first, and likewise the third than the second; for one excelleth 
the other even unto the twelfth wall. And I said: Wherefore, 
Lord, doth one excel another in glory? show me. And the angel 
answered and said unto me: All they that have in them even 
a little slandering or envy or pride, somewhat is taken away from 
his glory, even if he be in the city of Christ. Look thou behind 
thee. 

And I turned myself and saw golden thrones set at the several 
gates, and upon them men having golden crowns and jewels: and 
I looked and saw within among the twelve men, thrones set in 
another order (row, fashion?), which appeared of much glory 
so that no man is able to declare the praise of them. And I asked 
the angel and said: Lord, who is upon the throne? And the 
angel answered and said unto me: These are the thrones of them 
that had goodness and understanding of heart and yet made. 
themselves foolish for the Lord God’s sake, knowing neither the 

1 Apocalypse of Zephaniah: (The angel) ran unto all the righteous © 


that are there, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Enoch, Elias, and David. He 
conversed with them as a friend with a friend, who talk together. 


APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 541 


Scriptures nor many psalms, but keeping in mind one chapter of 
the precepts of God they performed it with great diligence, and 
had a right intent before the Lord God; and for these great 
wonder shall take hold upon all the saints before the Lord God, 
who shall speak one with another, saying: Stay and behold the 
unlearned that know nothing [more], how they have earned such 
and so fair raiment and so great glory because of their innocency. 

And I saw in the midst of the city an altar exceeding high. 
And there was one standing by the altar whose visage shone like 
the sun, and he held in his hands a psaltery and an harp and sang 
praises, saying: Alleluia. And his voice filled all the city. And 
when all that were upon the towers and the gates heard him, they 
answered: Alleluia, so that the foundations of the city were 
shaken. And I asked the angel and said: Who is this, Lord, 
that is of so great might? And the angel said unto me: This 
is David. This is the city of Jerusalem; and when Christ the 
king of eternity shall come in the fullness (confidence, freedom) 
of his kingdom, he shall again go before him to sing praises, and 
all the righteous together shall sing praises, answering: Alleluia. 
And I said: Lord, how is it that David only above the rest of 
the saints maketh (made) the beginning of singing praises? And 
the angel answered and said unto me: When (or, because) Christ 
the Son of God sitteth on the right hand of his Father, this David 
shall sing praises before him in the seventh heaven: and as it is 
done in the heavens, so likewise is it below: for without David 
it is not lawful to offer a sacrifice unto God: but it must needs 
be that David sing praises at the hour of the offering of the body 
and blood of Christ: as it is performed in heaven, so also is it 
upon earth. 30 And I said unto the angel: Lord, what is 
Alleluia? And the angel answered and said unto me: Thou dost 
examine and inquire of all things. And he said unto me: Alleluia 
is spoken in the Hebrew, that is the speech of God and of the 
angels: now the interpretation of Alleluia is this: tecel . cat . 
marith . macha (Gr.thébel marématha). And I said: Lord, what 
is tecel cat marith macha? Andthe angel answered and said unto 
me: This is tecel cat marith macha: Let us bless him all together. 
I asked the angel and said: Lord, do all they that say Alleluia 
bless God? And the angel answered and said unto me: So it is: 
and again, if any sing Alleluia, and they that are present sing not 
with him, they commit sin in that they sing not with him. And 
I said: Lord, doth a man likewise sin if he be doting or very 
aged? ‘The angel answered and said unto me: Not so: but he 
that is able, and singeth not with him, know ye that such a one 
is a despiser of the word, for it would be proud and unworthy 
that he should not bless the Lord God his creator. 

31 And when he had ceased speaking unto me, he led me out 
without the city through the midst of the trees and back from 
the place of the land of good things (or, men) and set me at the 


542 APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 


river of milk and honey: and after that he led me unto the 
ocean that beareth the foundations of the heaven. 

The angel answered and said unto me: Perceivest thou that 
thou goest hence? And I said: Yea, Lord. And he said unto 
me: Come, follow me, and I will show thee the souls of the un- 
godly and the sinners, that thou mayest know what manner of 
place they have. And I went with the angel and he took me by 
the way of the sunsetting, and I saw the beginning of the heaven, 
founded upon a great river of water, and I asked: What is this 
river of water? And he said unto me: This is the ocean which 
compasseth the whole earth about. And when I was come 
beyond (to the outside of) the ocean, I looked and there was no 
light in that place, but darkness and sorrow and sadness: and 
I sighed.t 

And I saw there a river of fire burning with heat, and in it was 
a multitude of men and women sunk up to the knees, and other 
men up to the navel; others also up to the lips and others up to 
the hair: and I asked the angel and said: Lord, who are these 
in the river of fire? And the angel answered and said unto me: 
They are neither hot nor cold,” for they were not found either in 
the number of the righteous or in the number of the wicked; for 
they passed the time of their life upon the earth, spending some 
days in prayer, but other days in sins and fornications, until 
their death. And I asked and said: Who are these, Lord, that 
are sunk up to their knees in the fire? He answered and said 
unto me: These are they which when they are come out of the 
church occupy themselves in disputing with idle (alien) talk. 
But these that are sunk up to the navel are they who, when they 
have received the body and blood of Christ, go and commit 
fornication, and did not cease from their sins until they died; 
and they that are sunk up to their lips are they that slandered 
one another when they gathered in the church of God ; but they 
that are sunk up to the eyebrows are they that beckon one to 
another, and privily devise evil against their neighbours. 

82 And I saw on the north side a place of sundry and diverse 
torments, full of men and women, and a river of fire flowed down 
upon them. And I beheld and saw pits exceeding deep, and in 
them many souls together, and the depth of that place was as 
it were three thousand cubits; and I saw them groaning and 
weeping and saying: Have mercy on us, Lord. And no man had 
mercy on them. And I asked the angel and said: Who are 
these, Lord? And the angel answered and said unto me: These 


1 Copt.inserts an enumeration of several pits of torment : premature 
and not original. 

2 Something seems wanting in all the texts. These, who were neither 
hot nor cold, should not be in the river, but beside it. In fact, in the 
Ethiopic Apocalypse of the Virgin (see p. 564) which is copied from 
this, these souls do sit beside the river. 


APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 543 


are they that trusted not in the Lord that they could have him 
for their helper. And I inquired and said: Lord, if these souls 
continue thus, thirty or forty generations being cast one upon 
another, if (unless?) they be cast down yet deeper, I trow the 
pits would not contain them. And he said to me: The abyss 
hath no measure: for beneath it there followeth also that which 
is beneath: and so it is that if a strong man took a stone and 
cast it into an exceeding deep well and after many hours (long 
time) it reacheth the earth, so also is the abyss. For when the 
souls are cast therein, hardly after five hundred years do they 
come at the bottom. 388 And I when I heard it, mourned and 
lamented for the race of men. The angel answered and said unto 
me: Wherefore mournest thou? art thou more merciful than 
God? for inasmuch as God is good and knoweth that there are 
torments, he beareth patiently with mankind, leaving every one 
to do his own will for the time that he dwelleth on the earth. 

34 Yet again I looked upon the river of fire, and I saw there 
a man caught by the throat (Copt. an old man who was being 
dragged along, and they immersed him up to the knees. And the 
angel Aftemeloukhos came with a great fork of fire, &c. Syr. 
similar. Some sentences are lost in Lat.) by angels, keepers of 
hell (Tartaruchi), having in their hands an iron of three hooks 
wherewith they pierced the entrails of that old man. And I asked 
the angel and said: Lord, who is this old man upon whom such 
torments are inflicted? And the angel answered and said unto 
me: He whom thou seest was a priest who fulfilled not well his 
ministry, for when he was eating and drinking and whoring he 
offered the sacrifice unto the Lord at his holy altar. 

85 And I saw not far off another old man whom four evil 
angels brought, running quickly, and they sank him up to his 
knees in the river of fire, and smote him with stones and wounded 
his face like a tempest, and suffered him not to say: Have mercy 
on me. And I asked the angel and he said unto me: He whom 
thou seest was a bishop, and he fulfilled not well his bishopric: 
for he received indeed a great name, but entered not into (walked 
not in) the holiness of him that gave him that name all his life; 
for he gave not righteous judgement, and had not compassion on 
widows and orphans: but now it is recompensed unto him 
according to his iniquity and his doings. 

36 And I saw another man in the river of fire sunk up to the 
knees: and his hands were stretched out and bloody, and worms 
issued out of his mouth and his nostrils, and he was groaning and 
lamenting and crying out, and said: Have mercy on me for 
I suffer hurt more than the rest that are in this torment. And 
I asked: Who is this, Lord? And he said unto me: This whom 
thou seest was a deacon, who devoured the offerings and com- 
mitted fornication and did not right in the sight of God: there- 
fore without ceasing he payeth the penalty. 


544 APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 


And I looked and saw beside him another man whom they 
brought with haste and cast him into the river of fire, and he was 
there up to the knees; and the angel that was over the torments 
came, having a great razor, red-hot, and therewith he cut the 
lips of that man and the tongue likewise. And I sighed and 
wept and asked: Who is this man, Lord? And he said unto me: 
This that thou seest was a reader and read unto the people: but 
he kept not the commandments of God: now also he payeth his 
own penalty. 

87 And I saw another multitude of pits in the same place, and 
in the midst thereof a river filled with a multitude of men and 
women, and worms devoured them. But I wept and sighed and 
asked the angel: Lord, who are these? And he said unto me: 
These are they that extorted usury on usury and trusted in their 
riches, not having hope in God, that he was their helper. 

And after that I looked and saw a very strait place, and there 
was as it were a wall, and round about it fire. And I saw within 
it men and women gnawing their tongues, and asked: Who are 
these, Lord? And he said unto me: These are they that mocked 
at the word of God in the church, not attending thereto, but as 
it were making nought of God and of his angels: therefore now 
likewise do they pay the due penalty. 

38 And I looked in and saw another pool (Lat. old man!) 
beneath in the pit, and the appearance of it was like blood: and 
I asked and said: Lord, what is this place? And he said unto 
me: Into this pit do all the torments flow. And I saw men and 
women sunk up to the lips, and asked: Who are these, Lord? 
And he said unto me: These are the sorcerers which gave unto 
men and women magical enchantments, and they found no rest 
(i. e. did not cease ?) until they died. 

And again I saw men and women of a very black countenance 
in a pit of fire, and I sighed and wept and asked: Who are these, 
Lord? And he said unto me: These are whoremongers and 
adulterers who, having wives of their own, committed adultery, 
and likewise the women after the same sort committed adultery, 
having their own husbands: therefore do they pay the penalty 
without ceasing. 

89 And I saw there girls clad in black raiment, and four fearful 
angels holding in their hands red-hot chains, and they put them 
upon their necks (heads) and led them away into darkness. 
And again I wept and asked the angel: Who are these, Lord? 
And he said unto me: These are they which being virgins defiled 
their virginity, and their parents knew it not: wherefore without 
ceasing they pay the due penalty. 

And again I beheld there men and women with their hands 
and feet cut off and naked, in a place of ice and snow, and worms 
devoured them. And when I saw it I wept and asked: Who 
are these, Lord? and he said unto me: These are they that 


APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 545 


injured the fatherless and widows and the poor, and trusted not 
in the Lord: wherefore without ceasing they pay the due penalty. 

And I looked and saw others hanging over a channel of water, 
and their tongues were exceeding dry, and many fruits were set 
in their sight, and they were not suffered to take of them. And 
I asked: Who are these, Lord? And he said unto me: These 
are they that brake the fast before the time appointed: therefore 
without ceasing do they pay this penalty. 

And I saw other men and women hanged by their eyebrows 
and their hair, and a river of fire drew them, and I said: Who 
are these, Lord? And he said unto me: These are they that gave 
themselves not unto their own husbands and wives, but unto 
adulterers, and therefore without ceasing they pay the due penalty. 
(For this Copt. has: men and women hung head downwards, 
torches burning before their faces, serpents girt about them 
devouring them. These are the women that beautified them- 
selves with paints and unguents and went to church to ensnare 
men. Syr. and Gr. omit.) 

And I saw other men and women covered with dust, and their 
appearance was as blood, and they were in a pil of pitch and 
brimstone and borne down in a river of fire. And I asked: 
Who are these, Lord? And he said unto me: These are they 
that committed the wickedness of Sodom and Gomorrah, men 
with men, wherefore they pay the penalty without ceasing. 
(Copt., Syr., Gr. omit this paragraph.) 

40 And I looked and saw men and women clad in white 
(bright) apparel, and their eyes were blind, and they were set in 
a pit, and I asked: Who are these, Lord? And he said unto me: 
These are they of the heathen that gave alms and knew not the 
Lord God; wherefore without ceasing they pay the due penalty. 

And I looked and saw other men and women upon a spit of 
fire, and beasts tearing them, and they were not suffered to say: 
Lord, have mercy on us. And I saw the angel of the torments 
(Aftemeloukhos, Copt.) laying most fierce torments upon them 
and saying: Acknowledge the Son of God. For it was told you 
before, but when the scriptures of God were read unto you, ye 
paid no heed: wherefore the judgement of God is just, for your 
evil doings have taken hold upon you, and brought you into these 
torments. But I sighed and wept; and I inquired and said: 
Who are these men and women that are strangled in the fire and 
pay the penalty? And he answered me: These are the women 
which defiled the creation of God when they brought forth 
children from the womb, and these are the men that lay with 
them. But their children appealed unto the Lord God and unto 
the angels that are over the torments, saying: Avenge us of our 
parents: for they have defiled the creation of God. Having the 
name of God, but not observing his commandments, they gave 
us for food unto dogs and to be trampled on by swine, and others 


870 Nl 


546 APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 


they cast into the river (Copt. adds: and did not permit us to 
grow up into righteous men and to serve God). But those 
children were delivered unto the angels of Tartarus (Gr. unto an 
angel) that they should bring them into a spacious place of mercy: 
but their fathers and mothers were haled (strangled) into ever- 
lasting torment. 

And thereafter I saw men and women clad in rags full of pitch 
and brimstone of fire, and there were dragons twined about their 
necks and shoulders and feet, and angels having horns of fire 
constrained them and smote them and closed up their nostrils, 
saying unto them: Wherefore knew ye not the time wherein it 
was right for you to repent and serve God, and ye did not? And 
I asked: Who are these, Lord? And he said unto me: These 
are they that seemed to renounce the world (Lat. God), wearing 
our garb, but the snares of the world made them to be miserable: 
they showed no charity and had no pity upon the widows and 
fatherless: the stranger and pilgrim they did not take in, neither 
offered one oblation nor had pity on their neighbour: and their 
prayer went not up even one day pure unto the Lord God; but 
the many snares of the world held them back, and they were not 
able to do right in the sight of God. And the angels carried (Lat. 
surrounded) them about into the place of torments: and they 
that were in torments saw them and said unto them: We indeed 
when we lived in the world neglected God, and ye did so likewise. 
And we when we were in the world knew that we were sinners, but 
of you it was said: These are righteous and servants of God: now 
we know that ye were only called by the name of the Lord. 
Wherefore also they pay the due penalty. 

And I sighed and wept and said: Woe unto men! woe unto 
the sinners! to what end were they born? And the angel 
answered and said unto me: Wherefore weepest thou? Art thou 
more merciful than the Lord God which is blessed for ever, who 
hath established the judgement and left every man of his own 
will to choose good or evil and to do as pleaseth him? Yet again 
I wept very sore, and he said unto me: Weepest thou, when as 
yet thou hast not seen the greater torments? Follow me, and 
thou shalt see sevenfold greater than these. 

41 And he took me from the north side (to the west, Syr.) 
and set me over a well, and I found it sealed with seven seals. 
And the angel that was with me answered and said unto the 
angel of that place: Open the mouth of the well, that Paul the 
dearly beloved of God may behold; for power hath been given 
unto him to see all the torments of hell. And the angel said 
unto me: Stand afar off, that thou mayest be able to endure the 
stench of this place. When therefore the well was opened, 
straightway there arose out of it a stench hard and evil ex- 
ceedingly, which surpassed all the torments: and I looked into 
the well and saw masses (lumps) of fire burning on every side, 


APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 547 


and anguish, and there was straitness in the mouth ot the pit so as 
to take but one man in. And the angel answered and said unto 
me: If any be cast into the well of the abyss, and it be sealed over 
him, there shall never be remembrance made of him in the presence 
of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost or of the holy angels. 
And I said: Who are they, Lord, that are cast into this well? 
And he said unto me: They are whosoever confesseth not that 
Christ is come in the flesh and that the Virgin Mary bare him, 
and whosoever saith of the bread and the cup of blessing of the 
Eucharist that it is not the body and blood of Christ. 

42 And I looked from the north unto the west and saw there 
the worm that sleepeth not, and in that place was gnashing of 
teeth. And the worms were of the measure of one cubit, and on 
them were two heads; and I saw there men and women in cold 
and gnashing of teeth. And I asked and said: Lord, who are 
they that are in this place? And he said unto me: These are 
they which say that Christ rose not from the dead, and that this 
flesh riseth not again. And I inquired and said: Lord, is there 
no fire nor heat in this place? And he said unto me: In this 
place is nothing else but cold and snow. And again he said to. 
me: Even if the sun (seven suns, Copi.) rose upon thein, they 
would not be warmed, because of the excessive cold of this place, 
and the snow. And when I heard this I spread forth mine hands. 
and wept and sighed, and again I said: It were better for us if 
we had not been born, all we that are sinners. 43 But when they 
that were in that place saw me weeping, with the angei, they 
also cried out and wept, saying: Lord God, have mercy upon us. 

And after that I beheld the heaven open and Michael the 
archangel coming down out of heaven, and with him all the host 
of the angels; and they came even unto them that were set in 
torment. And they when they saw them wept again and cried 
out and said: Have mercy upon us, thou Michael, archangel, 
have mercy upon us and upon the race of men, for it is by thy 
prayers that the earth standeth. We have now seen the judge- 
ment and have known the Son of God. It was not possible for 
us to pray for this before we came into this place: for we heard 
that there was a judgement, before we departed out of the world, 
but the snares and the life of the world suffered us not to repent. 
And Michael answered and said: Hearken when Michael speaketh: 
I am he that stands in tke presence of God alway. As the Lord 
liveth, before whose face I stand, I cease not for one day nor 
one night to pray continually for the race of men; and I indeed 
pray for them that are upon earth: but they cease not from 
committing wickednesses and fornication. And they bring not 
forth aught of good while they are upon earth; and ye have 
wasted in vanity the time wherein ye ought to have repented 
But I have prayed alway, and now do I entreat that God would 
send dew and that rain may be sent upon the earth, and still 


948 APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 


pray I until the earth yield her fruits: and I say that if any man 
doeth but a little good I will strive for him and protect him 
until he escape the judgement of torment. Where then be your 
prayers? where be your repentances? ye have lost the time 
despicably. Yet now weep ye, and I will weep with you, and 
the angels that are with me, together with the dearly beloved 
Paul, if peradventure the merciful God will have pity and grant 
you refreshment. And they when they heard these words cried 
out and wept sore, and all said with one voice: Have mercy 
upon us, O Son of God. And I, Paul, sighed and said: O Lord God, 
have mercy upon thy creature, have mercy on the children of 
men, have mercy upon thine image. 

44, I beheld and saw the heaven shake like unto a tree that is 
moved by the wind: and suddenly they cast themselves down 
upon their faces before the throne: and I saw the four-and- 
twenty elders and the four beasts worshipping God: and I saw 
the altar and the veil and the throne, and all of them were 
rejoicing, and the smoke of a sweet odour rose up beside the altar 
of the throne of God; and I heard a voice saying: For what 
cause do ye entreat me, our angels, and our ministers? And 
they cried out, saying: We entreat thee, beholding thy great 
goodness unto mankind. And thereafter I saw the Son of God 
coming down out of heaven, and on his head was a crown. And 
when they that were in torments saw him they all cried out with 
one voice, saying: Have mercy upon us, O exalted Son of God 
(or, Son of God Most High): thou art he that hast granted 
refreshment unto all that are in heaven and earth; have mercy 
upon us likewise: for since we beheld thee we have been re- 
freshed. And there went forth a voice from the Son of God 
throughout all the torments, saying: What good works have ye 
-done that ye should ask of me refreshment? My blood was shed 
for you, and not even so did ye repent: for your sake I bare 
a crown of thorns on mine head, for you I received buffets upon 
my cheeks, and not even so did ye repent. I asked for water 
when I hanged upon the cross, and they gave me vinegar mingled 
with gall: with a spear did they open my right side: for my 
name’s sake have they slain my servants the prophets, and the 
righteous: and for all these things did I give you a place of 
repentance, and ye would not. Yet now because of Michael the 
archangel of my covenant and the angels that are with him, and 
because of Paul my dearly beloved whom I would not grieve, 
and because of your brethren that are in the world and do offer 
-oblations, and because of your sons, for in them are my com- 
mandments,! and yet more because of mine own goodness: on 
‘that day whereon I rose from the dead I grant unto all you that 
are in torment refreshment for a day and a night for ever. And 
all they cried out and said: We bless thee, O Son of God, for that 


* Among them are some that keep my commandments: so Copt. 


APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 549° 


thou hast granted us rest for a day and a night: for better unto. 
us is the refreshment of one day than the whole time of our life 
wherein we were upon earth: and if we had known clearly that 
this place was appointed for them that sin, we should have done 
none other work whatsoever, neither traded nor done any wicked- 
ness. For what profit was our pride in the world? (Copt. What 
profit was it to us to be born into the world?) For this our 
pride is taken captive, which came up out of our mouth against 
our neighbour (Copt. our life is like the breath of our mouth): 
and this pain and our sore anguish and tears and the worms. 
which are under us, these are worse unto us than the torments 
which we jsuffert. (This is hardly sense, but Copt.agrees; should 
it not have been ‘these are worse than not to have been born ’?) 
And as they thus spake, the angels of torment and the evil angels 
were wroth with them and said: How long have ye wept and 
sighed? for ye have had no mercy. For this is the judgement of 
God on him that hath not had mercy. Yet have ye received this 
great grace, even refreshment for the night and day of the Lord’s 
day, because of Paul the dearly beloved of God who hath come 
down unto you. 

45 And after these things the angel said unto me: Hast thou 
seen all these things? And I said: Yea, Lord. And he said 
unto me: Follow me, and I will bring thee into Paradise, that 
the righteous which are there may see thee: for, behold, they 
hope to see thee, and are ready to come and meet thee with joy 
and exultation. And I followed after the angel in the swiltness. 
of the Holy Ghost, and he set me in Paradise and said unto me: 
This is Paradise, wherein Adam and his wife erred. And I 
entered into Paradise and saw the head of the waters, and the 
angel beckoned unto me and said to me: Behold, saith he, these 
waters: for this is the river Phison that compasseth about all 
the land of Evila, and this other is Geon that goeth about sil 
the land of Egypt and Ethiopia, and this other is Tigris that is 
over against the Assyrians, and this other is Euphrates that 
watereth the land of Mesopotamia. And I entered in further 
and saw a tree planted, out of whose roots flowed waters, and 
out of it was the beginning of the four rivers, and the Spirit of 
God rested upon that tree, and when the spirit breathed the 
waters flowed forth: and I said: Lord, is this tree that which 
maketh the waters to flow? And he said unto me: Because 
in the beginning, before the heaven and the earth were made 
to appear, and all things were invisible, the Spirit of God moved 
(was borne) upon the waters; but since by the commandment 
of God the heaven and the earth appeared the spirit hath rested 
upon this tree; wherefore when the spirit breatheth, the waters 
flow out from the tree. And he took hold on mine hand and led 
me unto the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and said: 
This is the tree whereby death entered into the world, and Adam 


550 APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 


taking of it from his wife did eat, and death entered into the 
world. Andheshowed me another tree in the midst of Paradise, 
and saith unto me: This is the tree of life. 

46 And as I yet looked upon the tree, I saw a virgin coming 
from afar off, and two hundred angels before her singing hymns: 
and I inquired and said: Lord, who is this that cometh in such 
glory? and he said unto me: This is Mary the virgin, the mother 
of the Lord. And she came near and saluted me, and said: 
Hail, Paul, dearly beloved of God and angels and men. For 
all the saints have besought my son Jesus who is my Lord, that 
thou shouldest come here in the body that they might see thee 
before thou didst depart out of the world. And the Lord said 
to them: Wait and be ye patient: yet a little while, and ye 
shall see him, and he shall be with you for ever. And again 
they all with one accord said unto him: Grieve us not, for we 
desire to see him while he is in the flesh, for by him hath thy 
name been greatly glorified in the world, and we have seen 
that he hath excelled (done away with) all the works whether 
of the lesser or the greater. Wor we inquire of them that come 
hither, saying: Who is he that guided you in the world? and 
they have told us: There is one in the world whose name is 
Paul; he declareth Christ, preaching him, and we believe that 
by the power and sweetness of his speech many have entered 
into the kingdom. Behold, all the righteous are behind me, 
coming to meet thee. But I say unto thee, Paul, that for this 
cause I come first to meet them that have performed the will 
of my son and my Lord Jesus Christ, even I come first to meet 
them and leave them not as strangers until they meet with 
him in peace. 

47 While she was yet speaking I saw three men coming from 
afar, very beautiful, after the appearance of Christ, and their 
forms were shining, and their angels; and I asked: Who are 
these, Lord? And he answered: These are the fathers of the 
people, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And they came near and 
greeted me, and said: Hail, Paul, dearly beloved of God and men: 
blessed is he that endureth violence for the Lord’s sake. And 
Abraham answered me and said: This is my son Isaac, and Jacob 
my best beloved, and we knew the Lord and followed him. 
Blessed are all they that have believed thy word that they may 
inherit the kingdom of God by labour and self-sacrifice (re- 
nunciation) and sanctification and humility and charity and 
meekness and right faith in the Lord: and we also had devotion 
unto the Lord whom thou preachest, covenanting that we will 
come unto every soul of them that believe in him, and minister 
unto him as fathers minister unto their sons. 

While they yet spake I saw twelve men coming from afar with 
honour, and I asked: Who are these, Lord? And he said: These 
are the patriarchs. And they came and saluted me and said: 


APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 55) 


Hail, Paul, dearly beloved of God and men. The Lord hath 
not grieved us, that we might see thee yet being in the body, 
before thou departedst out of the world. And every one of 
them signified his name unto me in order, from Ruben unto 
Benjamin; and Joseph said unto me: I am he that was sold; 
and I say unto thee, Paul, that for all that my brethren did 
unto me, in nothing did I deal evilly with them, not in all the 
labour which they laid upon me, nor did I hurt them in any thing 
(Copt. kept no evil thought against them) from morning until 
evening. Blessed is he that is hurt for the Lord’s sake and hath 
endured, for the Lord will recompense him manifold more when 
he departeth out of the world. 

48 While he yet spake I saw another coming from afar, 
beautiful, and his angels singing hymns, and I asked: Who is 
this, Lord, that is fair of countenance? And he said unto me: 
Dost thou not know him? And TI said: No, Lord. And he said 
to me: This is Moses the lawgiver, unto whom God gave the 
law. And when he was nigh me, straightway he wept, and after 
that he greeted me; and I said unto him: Why weepest thou? 
for I have heard that thou excellest all men in meekness. And 
he answered, saying: I weep for them whom I planted with much 
labour, for they have borne no fruit, neither doth any of them 
do well. And I have seen all the sheep whom I fed that they 
are scattered and become as having no shepherd, and that all 
the labours which I have endured for the children of Israel are 
come to nought, and however great wonders I did in their midst 
[and] they understood not: and I marvel how the strangers 
and uncircumcised and idolaters are converted and entered 
into the promises of God, but Israel hath not entered in: and 
now I say unto thee, O brother Paul, that in that hour when the 
people hanged up Jesus whom thou preachest, God the Father 
of all, which gave me the law, and Michael and all the angcis 
and archangels, and Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and ali 
the righteous wept over the Son of God that was hanged on the 
cross. And in that hour all the saints waited upon me, looking 
on me and saying: Behold, Moses, what they of thy people 
have done unto the Son of God. Therefore blessed art thou, 
O Paul, and blessed is the generation and people that hath 
believed thy word. 

49 While he yet spake there came other twelve and saw me 
and said: Art thou Paul that is glorified in heaven and upon 
earth? And I answered and said: Who are ye? The first 
answered and said: I am Esaias whose head Manasses cut with 
a saw of wood. And the second said likewise: I am Jeremias 
who was stoned by the children of Israel, and slain. And the 
third said: I am Ezechiel whom the children of Israel dragged 
by the feet over the stones in the mountain until they scattered 
my brains abroad: and all of us endured these labours, desiring 


652 APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 


to save the children of Israel: and I say unto thee that after 
the toils which they laid upon me I would cast myself down upon 
my face before the Lord, praying for them and bowing my knees 
unto the second hour of the Lord’s day, even until Michael came 
and raised me up from the earth. Blessed art thou, Paul, and 
blessed is the people that hath believed through thee. 

And as they passed by, I saw another, fair of countenance, 
and asked: Who is this, Lord? [And when he saw me he was 
glad]and hesaid unto me: This is Lot, which was found righteous 
inSodom. And he came near and greeted me and said: Blessed 
art thou, Paul, and blessed is the generation unto whom thou 
hast ministered. And I answered and said unto him: Art thou 
Lot, that wast found righteous in Sodom? And he said: I enter- 
tained angels in mine house as strangers, and when they of the 
city would have done them violence I offered them my two 
daughters, virgins, that had never known man, and gave them 
to them, saying: Use them as ye will, only do no ill unto these 
men, for therefore have they entered under the roof of mine 
house. Therefore ought we to have confidence, and know that 
whatsoever any man hath done, God recompenseth him manifold 
more when he cometh (they come) unto him. Blessed art thou, 
Paul, and blessed is the generation which hath believed thy 
word. 

When therefore he had ceased speaking unto me, I saw another 
coming from afar off, very beautiful in the face, and smiling, 
and his angels singing hymns, and I said unto the angel that was 
with me: Hath, then, every one of the righteous an angel for his 
fellow? And he saith to me: Every one of the saints hath his 
own, that standeth by him and singeth hymns, and the one 
departeth not from the other. And I said: Who is this, Lord? 
And he said: This is Job. And he drew near and greeted me 
and said: Brother Paul, thou hast great praise with God and 
men. Now I am Job, which suffered much for the season of 
thirty years by the issue of a plague; and in the beginning the 
blains that came forth of my body were as grains of wheat; 
but on the third day they became like an ass’s foot, and the 
worms that fell from them were four fingers long: and thrice 
the devil appeared unto me? and saith to me: Speak a word 
against the Lord, and die. But I said unto him: If thus be the 
will of God that I continue in the plague all the time of my life 
until I die, I will not rest from blessing the Lord God, and I shall 
receive the greater reward. For I know that the sufferings of 
this world are nought compared with the refreshment that is 
thereafter: wherefore blessed art thou, Paul, and blessed is the 
people which hath believed by thy means. 

50 While he yet spake there came another crying out from 


» It seems as if the author had read the Testament of Job (ed. by 
me in Apocrypha Anecdota, ii), in which are very similar details. 


APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 553 


afar off and saying: Blessed art thou, Paul, and blessed am 
I that have seen thee the beloved of the Lord. And I asked the 
angel: Who is this, Lord? and he answered and said unto me: 
This is Noe of the days of the flood. And straightway we greeted 
one another, and he, rejoicing greatly, said unto me: Thou art 
(or, Art thou) Paul the best beloved of God. And I asked him: 
Who art thou? And he said: I am Noe that was in the days of 
the flood: but I say unto thee, Paul, that I spent an hundred 
years making the ark, not putting off the coat (tunic) which 
I wore, and I shaved not the hair of mine head. Furthermore 
I kept continence, not coming near mine own wife, and in those 
hundred years the hair of mine head grew not in greatness, 
neither was my raiment soiled. And I besought men at that 
time, saying: Repent, for a flood of waters cometh upon you. 
But they mocked me and derided my words; and again they said 
unto me: This is the time of them that would play and sin as 
much as they will, that have leave to fornicate not a little (Lat. 
confused; other versions omit): for God looketh not on these 
things, neither knoweth what is done of us men, and moreover 
there is no flood of waters coming upon this world. And they 
ceased not from their sins until God blotted out ail flesh that 
had the breath of life in it. But know thou that God loveth 
one righteous man more than all the world of the wicked. There- 
fore blessed art thou, O Paul, and blessed is the people that hath 
believed by thy means. 

51 And I turned myself and saw other righteous ones coming 
from afar off, and I asked the angel: Who are these, Lord? and 
he answered me: These are Elias and Eliseus. And they greeted 
me, and I said unto them: Who are ye? And one of them 
answered and said: Iam Elias the prophet of God. Iam Elias that 
prayed, and because of my word the heaven rained not for three 
years and six months, because of the iniquities of men. Righteous 
and true is God, who doeth the will of his servants; for often- 
times the angels besought the Lord for rain, and he said: Be 
patient until my servant Elias pray and entreat for this, and I 
will send rain upon the earth. 

[Here the Greck, Latin, and Syriac texts end, save that the 
Syriac adds thus much: ; 

And he gave not, until I called upon him again; then he 
gave untothem. But blessed art thou, O Paul, that thy generation 
and those thou teachest are the sons of the kingdom. Aud 
know thou, O Paul, that every man who believes through thee 
hath a great blessing, and a blessing is reserved for him. Then 
he departed from me. ; 

And the angel who was with me led me forth, and said unto 
me: Lo, unto thee is given this mystery and revelation: as 
thou pleasest, make it known unto the sons of men. 

And I, Paul, returned unto myself, and I knew all that I had 


554 APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 


seen: and in life I had not rest that I might reveal this mystery, 
but I wrote it and deposited it under the ground and the founda- 
tions of the house of a certain faithful man with whom I used 
to be in Tarsus a city of Cilicia. And when I was released from 
this life of time, and stood before my Lord, thus said he unto 
me: Paul, have we shown all these things unto thee that thou 
shouldst deposit them under the foundations of a house? Then 
send and disclose concerning this revelation, that men may read 
it and turn to the way of truth, that they also may not come 
to these bitter torments. 

And thus was this revelation discovered. ... 

Then follows the history of the finding, which in the other texts 
is prefixed to the book.] 

But this conclusion can hardly be the original one. The Coptic 
seems in part better. After the words ‘rain upon the earth’, it 
continues: 

The sufferings which each endureth for God’s sake will 
God requite unto him twofold. Blessed art thou, Paul, and 
blessed are the heathen who shall believe through thee. And 
whilst he was speaking, Enoch (here Enoch replaces Elisha) 
also came and saluted me and said unto me: The man who 
endureth suffering for God’s sake, God will not afflict when he 
goeth out of the world. 

Then there are similar meetings with Zacharias and John 
Baptist, and Abel. Zacharias says: 

‘I am he whom they killed when I was offering up the offering 
unto God: and when the angels came for the offering, they 
carried my body up to God, and no man found my body whither 
it had been taken.’ 

Then Adam, taller than the rest, appears. And this seems 
a suitable finale to the procession of saints. 

After this Paul is carried into the third heaven. The angel 
who is with him changes in appearance and bursts into flames of 
fire, and a voice forbids Paul to reveal what he has seen. 

There is a description of a mysterious vision of an altar with 
seven eagles of light on the right and seven on the left. And 
this is followed by more descriptions of Paradise—partly re- 
sembling a vision seen by one Siophanes, in the Book of Bar- 
tholomew (p. 185). Some sentences also are taken from, or at least 
found in, the Apocalypse of Zephaniah. The meek, the prophets, 
David, all figure again in this episode: last are the martyrs. 
The conclusion runs thus (in substance): 

The angel of the Lord took me up and brought me to the 
Mount of Olives. I found the apostles assembled and told them 
all I had seen. They praised God and commanded us, that 
is me, Mark, and Timothy, to write the revelation. And while 
they were talking, Christ appeared from the chariot of the 
cherubim and spoke greetings to Peter, John, and especially 


APOCALYPSE OF PAUL 555 


Paul. He promised blessings to those who should write or 
read the Apocalypse, and curses on those who should deride 
it. Peter and Paul should end their course on the fifth of Epiphi 
(29 June). He then bade a cloud take the apostles to the various 
countries allotted to them, and commanded them to preach the 
Gospel of the Kingdom. And a doxology follows. 


I am disposed to think that nothing after the appearance of Adam 
in this version can be original. The rest is to a great extent, I think, 
a pasticcio from other Coptic apocrypha. It is quite possible, of course, 
that the original end of the Apocalypse was lost at an early date: 
but the supposition is probable that after the appearance of Adam a 
short conclusion followed in which Paul returned to earth. With so 
ill-proportioned and inartistic a book it is not perhaps worth while 
to spend much time on conjectural restoration. Yet another possibility 
should be pointed out. The climax of the Apocalypse is reached when 
the Sunday is granted as a day of rest from torment. Paul has seen 
Paradise and hell, and there is no more for him to do. Everything 
after ch. 44 is an otiose appendix. 

And we do find in the Ethicpiec Apocalypse of the Virgin, which 
copies that of Paul very literally, that the end comes at ch. 44, when 
the Virgin procures rest from Friday evening to Monday morning for 
the lost. The Greek Apocalypse—one form at least-—ends when she 
has gained for them the days of Pentecost. 

It may be the case, then, that the Apocalypse of Paul as first issued 
ended here, and that it was reissued with the appendix about Paradise 
(45-end). In the shorter Latin recensions there is no trace of anything 
after ch. 44: but this does not furnish a conclusive argument. More 
to the point would be the discovery of a copy of the full text ending 
with 44, 


APOCALYPSE OF THOMAS 


The emergence of this book has been recent. The Gelasian Decree 
condemns the book ‘called the Revelation of Thomas’ as aporryphal, 
and that was all that was known of it. In 1908 a quotation in the 
Berlin MS. (eighth-ninth century) of Jerome’s Chronicle was noticed 
by Dr. Frick. Ait the eighteenth year of Tiberius, the manuscript has 
this note: 

In a certain apocryphal book, said to be of Thomas the apostle, 
it is written that the Lord Jesus told him that from his ascension 
into heaven to his second advent the time comprised is nine 
jubilees. 

This does not appear in any of the published texts. Already in 1967 
F. Wilhelm had printed, in his Deutsche Legenden und Legendare, a 
text from a Munich MS. which attracted little attention, but was 
in fact the lost Apocalypse, or part of it. 

In the same year E. Hauler showed that a leaf of a fifth-century 
palimpsest at Vienna—the same that contains a leaf of the Epistle of 
the Apostles (see p. 485)—was a fragment of this book. Professor 
E. von Dobschiitz had, before this, begun making preparation for an 


556 APOCALYPSE OF THOMAS 


edition of the Apocalypse based on manuscripts at Munich and Rome, 
which has not yet appeared. In the Journal of Theological Studies for 
1910 I printed the beginning of the book from a Verona MS. (of eighth 
century). Maffei had noticed this, and in 1755 Dionisi had printed 
it in a forgotten volume. In 1911 Dom Bihlmeyer printed another 
‘uninterpolated’ text from Munich in the Revue Bénédictine. Yet 
more: in 1913 Max Forster (Studien z. engl. Philol. : Der Vercelli-Codex) 
showed that the fifteenth sermon in the famous Anglo-Saxon MS. 
at Vercelli is an Old English version of this Revelation; that a Hatton 
MS. and the Blickling Homilies also contain matter drawn from it; 
and that a shortened Latin form is to be found in a dialogue printed 
by Suchier (L’Enfant sage, 1910, p. 272). Lastly, there are quotations 
from it in some odd—I think Irish—homilies in a Reichenau MS. 
at Carlsruhe, printed by Dom de Bruyneas ‘ Apocryphes Priscillianistes’ 
in the Revue Bénéd., 1907. 

There is, then, a quantity of material which we shall look to Professor 
Dobschiitz to co-ordinate. Latin appears to have been the original 
language, and the data of the fuller text point to the days of Arcadius 
and Honorius. How much earlier the shorter text may be it is not 
easy to say: and I would not commit myself to the assertion that there 
is not a Greek document at the back of that. 


APOCALYPSE OF THOMAS 


A. Verona fragment (eighth century) and Withelm’s text (Munich 
Clm. 4585, ninth century). 

Here beginneth the epistle of the Lord unto Thomas. 

Hear thou, Thomas, the things which must come to pass in 
the last times: there shall be famine and war and earthquakes 
in divers places, snow and ice and great drought shall there be, 
and many dissensions among the peoples, blasphemy, iniquity, 
envy and villainy, indolence, pride and intemperance, so that 
every man shall speak that which pleaseth him. And my priests 
shall not have peace among themselves, but shall sacrifice unto 
me with deceitful mind: therefore will I not look upon them. 
Then shall the priests behold the people departing from the 
house of the Lord and turning unto the world (?) and setting up 
(or, transgressing) landmarks in the house of God. And they 
shall claim (vindicate) for themselves many [things and] places 
that were lost and that shall be subject unto Caesar (?) as also 
they were aforetime: giving poll-taxes of (for) the cities, even 
gold and silver,? and the chief men of the cities shall be con- 
demned (here Verona ends: Munich continues), and their substance 
brought intof the treasury of the kings, and they shall be filled. 


1 This is at least certain for the passage about Arcadius and 
Honorius: H is not the eighth letter in the Greek alphabet! But the 
sentence, which is omitted in the Anglo-Saxon version, may be an 
interpolation. 

* The Anglo-Saxon renders: setting up gold and silver heads in 
their cities. 


APOCALYPSE OF THOMAS 557 


For there shall be great disturbance throughout all the people, 
and death.1. The house of the Lord shall be desolate, and their 
altars shall be abhorred, so that spiders weave their webs therein. 
The place of holiness shall be corrupted, the priesthood polluted, 
distress (agony) shall increase, virtue shall be overcome, joy 
perish, and gladness depart. In those days evil shall abound: 
there shall be respecters of persons, hymns shall cease out of the 
house of the Lord, truth shall be no more, covetousness shall 
abound among the priests; an upright man (al. an upright 
priesthood) shall not be found. 

On a sudden there shall arise near the last time a king, a lover 
of the law, who shall hold rule not for long: he shall leave two 
sons. The first is named of the first letter (A, Arcadius), the 
second of the eighth (H, Honorius). The first shall die before 
the second (Arcadius died in 408; Honorius in 428).? 

Thereafter shall arise two princes to oppress the nations, 
under whose hands there shall be a very great famine in the 
right-hand part of the east, so that nation shall rise up against 
nation and be driven out from their own borders. 

Again another king shall arise, a crafty man(?), and shall 
command a golden image of Caesar (?) to be made (al. to be 
worshipped in the house of God), wherefore (?) martyrdoms 
shall abound. Then shall faith return unto the servants of the 
Lord, and holiness shall be multiplied and distress (agony) 
increase. The mountains ® shall tbe comforted} and shall drop 
down sweetness tof fire from the facet, that the number of the 
saints may be accomplished. 

After a little space there shall arise a king out of the east, 
a lover of the law, who shall cause all good things and necessary 
to abound in the house of the Lord: he shall show mercy unto 
the widows and to the needy, and command a royal gift to be 
given unto the priests: in his days shall be abundance of ali 
things. 

And after that again a king shall arise in the south part of the 
world, and shall hold rule a little space: in whose days the 
treasury shall fail because of the wages of the Roman soldiers, 
+so that the substance of all the aged shall be commanded (to be 
taken) and given to the king to distributef. ; 

Thereafter shall be plenty of corn and wine and oil, but great 
dearness of money, so that the substance of gold and silver shall 
be given for corn, and there shall be great dearth. 

At that time shall be very great rising (?) of the sea, so that 
no man shali tell news to any man. The kings of the earth and 
the princes and the captains shall be troubled, and no man shall 


1 The predictions in these paragraphs are very like those in the 
Testament of the Lord, i. 3-5. 

2 This paragraph is omitted in AS, 

3 This sentence omitted in AS. 


558 APOCALYPSE OF THOMAS 


speak freely (boldly). Grey hairs shall be seen upon boys, and 
the young (?) shall not give place unto the aged. 

After that shall arise another king, a crafty man, who shall 
hold rule for a short space: in whose days there shall be all 
manner of evils, even the death of the race of men from the 
east even unto Babylon. And thereafter death and famine and 
sword in the land of Chanaan even unto (Rome?).1 Then shall 
all the fountains of waters and wells boil over (?) and be turned 
into blood (or, into dust and blood). The heaven shall be moved, 
the stars shall fall upon the earth, the sun shall be cut in half 
like the moon, and the moon shall not give her light. There 
shall be great signs and wonders in those days when Antichrist 
draweth near. These are the signs unto them that dwell in the earth. 
In those days the pains of great travail shall come upon them. 
(al. In those days, when Antichrist now draweth near, these are 
the signs. Woe unto them that dwell on the earth; in those days 
great pains of travail shall come upon them.)? Woe unto them 
that build, for they shall not inhabit. Woe unto them that 
break up the fallow, for they shall labour without cause. Woe 
unto them that make marriages, for unto famine and need shall 
they beget sons. Woe unto them that join house to house or 
field to field, for all things shall be consumed with fire. Woe unto 
them that look not unto (?) themselves while time alloweth, for 
hereafter shall they be condemned for ever. Woe unto them that 
turn away from the poor when he asketh. 

[Here is a break: the text goes on: For I am <the Son) of the 
high and powerful: I am the Father of all. (al. And know ye: 
I am the Father most high: I am the Father of all spirits.) 
This, as we shall see, is the beginning of the older(?) and shorter 
text, and of the Vienna fragment: only, in the latter, some words 
now unintelligible precede it: not the words, however, which 
are in Wilhelm’s text. I will continue with Wilhelm.] 

These are the seven signs <before> the ending of this world. 
There shall be in all the earth famine and great pestilences and 
much distress: then shall all men be led captive among all 
nations and shall fall by the edge of the sword. 

On the first day of the judgement will be a great marvel (or, 
the beginning shall be). At the third hour of the day shall be 
a great and mighty voice in the firmament of the heaven, and a 
great cloud of blood coming down out of the north, and great 
thunderings and mighty lightnings shall follow that cloud, and 
there shall be a rain of blood upon all the earth. These are the 
signs of the first day (Monday in the Anglo-Saxon, and so for the 
other days). 

And on the second day there shall be a great voice in the 

1 The manuscript has ‘nona’, ninth. 


* Some of the following clauses are quoted (without acknowledge- 
ment) in the Irish (?) homily mentioned above. 


APOCALYPSE OF THOMAS 559 


firmament of the heaven, and the earth shall be moved out of its 
place: and the gates of heaven shall be opened in the firmament 
of heaven toward the east, and a great power shall be sent 
(belched) forth by the gates of heaven and shall cover all the 
heaven even until evening (al. and there shall be fears and 
tremblings in the world). These are the signs of the second day. 

And on the third day, about the second hour, shall be a voice 
in heaven, and the abysses of the earth shall utter their voice 
from the four corners of the world. The first heaven shall be 
rolled up like a book and shall straightway vanish. And because 
of the smoke and stench of the brimstone of the abyss the days 
shall be darkened unto the tenth hour. Then shall all men say: 
I think that the end draweth near, that we shail perish.1 These 
are the signs of the third day. 

And on the fourth day at the first hour, the earth of the east 
shall speak, the abyss shall roar: then shall all the earth be 
moved by the strength of an earthquake. In that day shall all 
the idols of the heathen fall, and ali the buildings of the earth. 
These are the signs of the fourth day. 

And on the fifth day, at the sixth hour, there shall be great 
thunderings suddenly in the heaven, and the powers of light and 
the wheel of the sun shall be caught away, and there shati be 
great darkness over the world until evening, and the stars shall 
be turned away from their ministry. In that day all nations 
shall hate the world and despise the life of this world. ‘These are 
the signs of the fifth day. 

And on the sixth day there shall be signs in heaven. At the 
fourth hour the firmament of heaven shall be cloven from the 
east unto the west. And the angels of the heavens shall be 
looking forth upon the earth <through> the opening of the 
heavens. And all men shall see above the earth the host of the 
angels looking forth out of heaven. Then shall all men flee. 

(Here Wilhelm’s text ends abruptly.) 
B. Bihlmeyer’s text, from Munich Clm. 4568 (eleventh to twelfth 
century, from Benedictbeuren) : and the Vienna fragment. 

Hear thou, O Thomas, for I am the Son of God the Father, 
and I am the father of all spirits. Hear thou of me the signs 
which shall come to pass at the end of this world, when the end 
of the world shall be fulfilled (Vienna: that it pass away) before 
mine elect depart out of the world. I will tell thee that which 
shall come to pass openly unto men (07, will tell thee openly, &c.): 
but when these things shall be the princes of the angels know 
not, seeing it is now hidden from before them (Viennu adds: at 
what day the end shall be fulfilled, and some defective clauses). 

1 Here AS. has a long speech: ‘Woe unto us wretched and sinful,’ 
&c.: men lament that they were warned of these things and did not 
repent, but went on living in worldly delights. 


560 APOCALYPSE OF THOMAS 


Then shall there be in the world sharings (participations) 
between king and king, and in all the earth shall be great famine, 
great pestilences, and many distresses, and the sons of men shall 
be led captive among all nations and shall fall by the edge of the 
sword (and there shall be great commotion in the world: Vienna 
omits). Then after that when the hour of the end draweth nigh, 
there shall be for seven days great signs in heaven, and the powers 
of the heavens shall be moved. 

Then shall there be on the first day the beginning: at the third 
hour of the day a great and mighty voice in the firmament of 
heaven and a bloody cloud coming up (down, Vienna) out of the 
north, and great thunderings and mighty lightnings shall follow 
it, and it shall cover the whole heaven, and there shall be a rain 
of blood upon all the earth. These are the signs of the first day. 

And on the second day there shall be a great voice in the 
firmament of heaven, and the earth shall be moved out of its 
place, and the gates of heaven shall be opened in the firmament 
of heaven toward the east, and the (smoke of a great fire shall 
break forth through the gates of heaven and shall cover all the 
heaven until evening. In that day there shall be fears and great 
terrors in the world. These are the signs of the second day. 
Vienna ts defective here). 

But on the third day about the third hour shall be a great voice 
in heaven, and the abysses of the earth (Vienna ends) shall roar 
from the four corners of the world; the pinnacles (so) of the 
firmament of heaven shall be opened, and all the air shall be 
filled with pillars of smoke. There shall be a stench of brimstone, 
very evil, until the tenth hour, and men shall say: We think the 
time draweth nigh that we perish. These are the signs of the 
third day. 

And on the fourth day at the first hour, from the land of the 
east the abyss shall melt (so) and roar. Then shall all the earth 
be shaken by the might of an earthquake. In that day shall the 
ornaments of the heathen fall, and all the buildings of the earth, 
before the might of the earthquake. These are the signs of the 
fourth day. 

But on the fifth day at the sixth hour, suddenly there shall be 
a great thunder in heaven, and the powers of light and the wheel 
of the sun shall be caught away (JS. opened), and there shall 
be great darkness in the world until evening, and the air shall 
be gloomy (sad) without sun or moon, and the stars shall cease 
from their ministry. In that day shall all nations behold as in 
a mirror (?) (or, behold it as sackcloth) and shail despise the life 
of this world. These are the signs of the fifth day. 

And on the sixth day at the fourth hour there shall be a great 
voice in heaven, and the firmament of the heaven shall be cloven 
from the east unto the west, and the angels of the heavens shall 
be looking forth upon the earth by the openings of the heavens, 


APOCALYPSE OF THOMAS 56) 


and all these that are on the earth shall behold the host of the 
angels looking forth out of heaven. Then shall all men flee unto 
the monuments (mountains?) and hide themselves from the face 
of the righteous angels, and say: Would that the earth would 
open and swallow us up! And such things shall come to pass as 
never were since this world was created. 

Then shall they behold me coming from above in the light of my 
Father with the power and honour of the holy angels. Then at 
my coming shall the fence of fire of paradise be done away—because 
paradise is girt round about with fire. And this shall be that 
perpetual fire that shall consume the earth and all the elements of 
the world. 

Then shall the spirits and souls of all men come forth from 
paradise and shall come upon all the earth: and every one of 
them shall go unto his own body, where it is laid up, and every 
one of them shall say: Here lieth my body. And when the 
great voice of those spirits shall be heard, then shall there be 
a great earthquake over all the world, and by the might thereof 
the mountains shall be cloven from above and the rocks from 
beneath. Then shall every spirit return into his own vessel, 
and the bodies of the saints which have fallen asleep shall arise. 

Then shall their bodies be changed into the image and likeness 
and the honour of the holy angels, and into the power of the 
image of mine holy Father. Then shall they be clothed with the 
vesture of life eternal, out of the cloud of light which hath never 
been seen in this world; for that cloud cometh down out of the 
highest realm of the heaven from the power of my Father. And 
that cloud shall compass about with the beauty thereof all the 
spirits that have believed in me. 

Then shail they be clothed, and shall be borne by the hands 
of the holy angels like as I have told you aforetime. Then also 
shall they be lifted up into the air upon a cloud of light, and shall 
go with me rejoicing unto heaven, and then shall they continue 
in the light and honour of my Father. Then shall there be unto 
them great gladness with my Father and before the holy angels. 
These are the signs of the sixth day. ; 

And on the seventh day at the eighth hour there shall be 
voices in the four corners of the heaven. And all the air shall 
be shaken, and filled with holy angels, and they shall make war 
among them all the day long. And in that day shali mine elect 
be sought out by the holy angels from the destruction of the 
world. ‘Then shall all men see that the hour of their destruction 
draweth near. These are the signs of the seventh day. _ 

And when the seven days are passed by, on the eighth day at 
the sixth hour there shall be a sweet and tender voice in heaven 
from the east. Then shall that angel be revealed which hath 
power over the holy angels: and all the angels shall go forth with 
him, sitting upon chariots of the clouds of mine holy Father (so). 


870 oo 


562 APOCALYPSE OF THOMAS 


rejoicing and running upon the air beneath the heaven to deliver 
the elect that have believed in me. And they shall rejoice that 
the destruction of this world hath come. 

The words of the Saviour unto Thomas are ended, concerning the 
end of this world. 


None of the Latin texts seem to be complete. But we see that 
Wilhelm’s text is a blend of two sorts of Apocalypse—that akin to 
Daniel which, under the form of prophecy, describes events contem- 
porary with the author and continues them into the future: and that 
which is more akin to John and describes the signs of the end. 

Bihlmeyer’s text has only the latter element, and as it agrees pretty 
closely with our oldest authority, the Vienna fragment (though in 
that, as I have said, something did precede Bihlmeyer’s opening), 
I judge it to be the older of the two forms. The first part of Wilhelm’s 
text with its clumsy indication of Arcadius and Honorius by means of 
their initials is much in the manner of the later Sibyllines, in which this 
particular trick is pushed to an absurd length, and used for quite 
imaginary personages as well as historic ones. In the second part 
Wilhelm’s text departs widely from the Vienna fragment, and here 
again shows itself as probably inferior. 

The Apocalypse, we see, was known in England in the ninth century 
at least: and I think it must probably be regarded as the ultimate 
parent of a little piece which is found in innumerable manuscripts 
and has often been printed: I mean Jerome on the Fifteen Signs of 
the last days before the judgement. The beginning of this states that 
Jerome found it ‘in the annals of the Hebrews’. Its popularity was 
very great. Illustrations of the Fifteen Signs are occasionally to be 
found in manuscripts, and I have seen them on the alabaster tablets 
carved at Nottingham in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, but 
the best-known representation of them is in a window at All Saints’, 
North Street, York, where they are accompanied by mottoes taken 
from the ‘Prick of Conscience’, which used to be attributed to Richard 
of Hampole. 


The Anglo-Saxon version in the Vercelli Book (no. xv) begins thus: 


We are told in this book how Saint Thomas the apostle of God 
asked our Lord when the time of Antichrist should be. Then the 
Lord spake unto him and said thus: 

It behoveth that it be in the next days. Then shall be hunger 
and war, &c.: 


The text conforms, generally speaking, to the longer recensions. 
The signs of the fifth day are omitted. The conclusion diverges from 
the Latin and tells how the Virgin, Michael, and Peter successively 
intercede with the Judge, and he forgives a third part of the sinners 
at the prayer of each. But not all are pardoned: for we then have 
the sentences: Venite benedicti and Discedite maledicti as in Matt. xxv. 

Quite recently (in Proc. R.I.A.) the Rev. St. J. Seymour has pointed 
out the probable dependence of the Saltair na Rann (eleventh century) 
on our apocalypse in its description of the Signs of the End. 


563 


THE APOCALYPSE OF THE VIRGIN. A. GREEK 


We have this in Greek in a great many texts. The oldest I have 
found was edited by me in 1893. A very brief summary of it will 
suffice, for it is a late and dreary production. 


The Virgin at the Mount of Olives prays to be told about the 
torments of hell and the next world. Michael is sent. He takes 
her to the west: the earth opens and discloses the lost who did 
not worship the Trinity. 

She sees a great darkness. At her prayer it is lifted and she 
sees souls tormented with boiling pitch. No one has yet inter- 
ceded for them, neither Abraham, John Baptist, Moses, nor Paul. 
They are unbelievers. 

They go to the south: there is a river of fire with souls im- 
mersed at various depths. Cursers of their parents. Causers of 
abortion. False swearers. A man hung by the feet and devoured 
by worms is a usurer. A woman hung by the ears, with serpents 
coming out of her mouth and biting her, is a backbiter and gossip. 

They go (again!) to the west. In a cloud of fire lie those who: 
lay late on Sunday. On fiery seats sit those who did not rise at 
the entry of the priest. On an iron tree hang blasphemers and 
slanderers. A man hung by hands and feet is the evil steward 
(oeconomus) of a church. Wicked priests, readers, bishops, 
widows of priests who married again, an ‘archdeaconess ’, covetous 
women, are severally described. 

They go to the left-hand of paradise. In a river of pitch and 
fire are the Jews who crucified Jesus, those who denied baptism, 
those guilty of various impurities, sorcerers, murderers, they who: 
strangle their children. In a lake of fire are bad Christians. 

A great appeal of the Virgin follows, in which she entreats all 
the saints to intercede, with her, for the Christians. At iast the 
Son appears, and grants the days of Pentecost as a season of 
rest to the lost. 

In some textsa visit of the Virgin to paradise follows this ; but 
it is usually short and uninteresting. In one of the Eastern books 
on the Assumption (see p. 222) there is a very diffuse account 
of paradise as seen by the Virgin. 


APOCALYPSE OF THE VIRGIN. B. ETHIOPIC 


This is wholly different from the Greek. It was edited with a Latin 
version by Chaine in 1909 (Corpus Scriptt. Christ. Orient. i. 7) with 
texts of the Protevangelium and a story of the Assumption. 

The Apocalypse is almost wholly borrowed from that of Paul. 
Chaine takes it to be a version from Arabic, and the Arabic he thinks 
was translated from Greek. 


564 APOCALYPSE OF THE VIRGIN 


John is the narrator. The Virgin called him to listen to a 
wonderful mystery which had been revealed to her: as she 
prayed at Golgotha at noon on the sixth day of the week a cloud 
came and took her into the third heaven. The Son appeared 
and said that he would show her a great mystery. ‘Look upon 
the earth beneath.’ (Here we have ch. 18 of Paul, and from this 
point we continue with the text of Paul sometimes amplified 
with quotations from the Bible.) 

At Paul 31 we have the addition—doubtless correct—that the 
souls who were neither hot nor cold sit beside the river of fire. 
There are several variations and additions to the list of torments, 
not worth specifying, but the section which corresponds to Paul 40 
must be quoted (unpleasant as the topic is) on account of its 
affinity with Peter. 

Women are seen, bitten by serpents, dogs, lions, and leopards 
of fire. They are nuns who violated the rule and slew their 
children. 

Often they caused their death before they were born. They 
shed their blood on the ground, or killed them when born, or 
their fathers gave poison to the mothers. ‘But these children 
ery out before the throne of my Father, and say: Lord, they 
have not suffered us to grow up to do good or evil: the half 
of us they gave to the dogs and cast the other half to the swine. 
And when we heard the words of these children, I and my Father 
and the Comforter were grieved, and I commanded Temliaqos 
to set them in a beautiful abode. But for their fathers and 
mothers this is their torment for ever.’ 

The Virgin says: If they repent wilt thou not forgive them? 
Yes, if they do so from their heart. But as for their pastors 
who did not admonish them, their part shall be with Eli and 
Fola. Eli did not reprove his sons, Fola sold his daughters 
for an ox. 

I do not know who Fola was. 


The Apocalypse ends with ch. 44 of Paul. There is no trace in it of 
Paul 1-12 or 45-51. 


REVELATION OF STEPHEN 


The ‘Revelation called of Stephen’ is condemned, like that of 
Thomas, in the Gelasian Decree. Sixtus Senensis, Bibliotheca Sancta 
(1593), p. 115, says: ‘The Apocalypse of Stephen the first martyr 
who was one of the seven deacons of the apostles was prized by the 
Manichaean heretics as Serapion witnesses.’ Serapion of Thmuis, he 
elsewhere says (p. 299), wrote a large and very notable work against 
the Manichaeans in Greek ‘which I have lately read’. Our texts of 
Serapion contain no mention of the Apocalypse of Stephen. But no 
Manichaean would have cared about the book which I am going to 


REVELATION OF STEPHEN 565 


speak of.’ It has been usually guessed that the writing so described 
was the account of the finding of St. Stephen’s body, the whereabouts 
of which was revealed by Gamaliel in a vision to Lucian. With Stephen 
were found the bodies of Gamaliel and his son Abibas, and of Nico- 
demus. Lucian’s narrative was known to Augustine: it purports to 
be of the year 415, and there is little in it, as compared with similar 
‘inventions’ of relics, which justifies its being solemnly condemned as 
apocryphal. 

So says I. Franko, who in 1906 (Zeitschr. f. Ntl. Wiss.) published 
a Slavonic romance which, he says, is the real beginning of Lucian’s 
narrative. 

The substance of it is this: 

Two years after the Ascension there was a contest about 
Jesus. Many learned men had assembled at Jerusalem from 
Ethiopia, the Thebaid, Alexandria, Jerusalem, Asia, Mauretania, 
and Babylon. There was a great clamour among them like 
thunder, lasting till the fourth hour. 

Stephen, a learned man of the tribe of Benjamin, stood on 
a high place and addressed the assembly. Why this tumult? 
said he. Blessed is he who has not doubted concerning Jesus. 
Born of a pure virgin he filled the world with light. By Satan’s 
contrivances Herod slew 14,000 (144,000) children. He spoke 
of the miracles of Jesus. Woe to the unbelievers when he shall 
come as judge, with angels, a fiery chariot, a mighty wind: the 
stars shall fall, the heavens open, the books be brought forward. 
The twelve angels who are set over every soul shall unveil the 
deeds of men. The sea shall move and give up what is in it. 
The mountains fail, all the surface of the earth becomes smooth. 
Great winged thrones are set. The Lord, and Christ, and the 
Holy Spirit take their seats. The Father bids Jesus sit on his 
right hand. 

At this point the crowd cried out: Blasphemy! and took 
Stephen before Pilate. 

Pilate stood on the steps and reproached them: You com- 
pelled me to crucify the Innocent; why rage against this man? 
Why gnash your teeth? Are ye yet foolish? 

They led Stephen away. Caiaphas ordered him to be beaten 
tillthe bloodran. And he prayed: Lay not this sin to their charge. 
We saw how angels ministered to him. 


1 I must record one of the very rare errors of Fabricius here. He 
(Cod. Apocr. N. T., i, p. 965) cites Sixtus Senensis as saying (on the 
authority of Serapion) that the Manichaeans so prized the Revelation 
of Stephen as to carry it in the skin of their thighs! This long puzzled 
me, and I couid not find it in Sixtus. But at last I noticed that at the 
end of the article just preceding Stephanus, Victor Vitensis is quoted 
to this effect: The Manichaeans so honoured their teacher that they 
used to have these words inscribed on the skin of their thighs, ‘ Mant- 
chaeus, disciple of Christ Jesus’. Perhaps some one has already explained 
this in print; if so, I have not seen it. 


566 REVELATION OF STEPHEN 


In the morning Pilate called his wife and two children: they 
baptized themselves and praised God. 

Three thousand men now assembled and disputed with Stephen 
for three days and three nights. On the fourth day they took 
counsel and sent to Caesarea of Palestine for Saul of Tarsus, 
who had a commission to seize upon Christians. He took his 
place on the judgement seat and said: I wonder that thou, 
a wise man, and my kinsman, believest all this. None of the 
Sanhedrin have given up the Law. I have been through all 
Judaea, Galilee, Peraea, Damascus, and the city of the Jesitites 
to seek out believers. 

Stephen lifted up his hands and said: Silence, persecutor ! 
Recognize the Son of God. Thou makest me doubt of my own 
descent. But I see that thou shalt ere long drink of the same 
cup as I. What thou doest, do quickly. Saul rent his clothes 
and beat Stephen. Gamaliel, Saul’s teacher, sprang forth and 
gave Saul a buffet, saying: Did I teach thee such conduct? 
know that what this man saith is acceptable and good. 

Saul was yet more enraged, and looked fiercely on him, saying: 
I spare thine old age, but thou shalt reap a due reward for this, 
Gamaliel answered: I ask nothing better than to suffer with 
Christ. The elders rent their clothes, cast dust on their heads, 
and cried: Crucify the blasphemers. 

Saul said: Guard them until the morrow. Next day he sat 
on the judgement seat and had them brought before him, and 
they were led away to be crucified. An angel came and cast 
away the cross, and Stephen’s wounds were healed. Seven men 
came and poured molten lead into his mouth and pitch into 
his ears. They drove nails into his breast and feet, and he 
prayed for their forgiveness. Again an angel came down and 
healed him, and a great multitude believed. 

Next day all assembled and took him out of the city to judge 
him. He mounted upon a stone and addressed them: How 
long will ve harden your hearts? The Law and the Prophets 
spake of Christ. In the first Law, and the second, and the other 
books it is written: When the year of the covenant cometh 
I will send my beloved angel, the good spirit of sonship, from 
a pure maiden, the fruit of truth, without ploughshare and 
without seed, and an image of sowing (?), and the fruit shall 
grow after the ... of planting for ever from the word of my 
covenant, and signs shall come to pass. And Isaiah saith: Unto 
us a child is born, &e. And again: Behold, a virgin shall con- 
ceive, &c. And the prophet Nathan said: I saw one, a maiden 
and without touch of man, and a man child in her arms, and that 
was the Lord of the earth unto the end of the earth. And again 
the prophet Baruch saith: Christ the eternal appeareth as a 
stone from the mountain and breaketh in pieces the idol temples 
ofthe... Davidalso said: Arise, O Lord, unto thy resting place, 


REVELATION OF STEPHEN 567 


&c. Understand then, O foolish ones, what the prophet saith: 
In this word shalt thou judge. 

And he looked up to heaven and said: I see the heaven 
opened and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God. 

Then they laid hands on him, saying: He blasphemeth! 
Gamaliel said: Wherein? This righteous man hath seen the 
Son saying to the Father: Lo, the Jews rage against me and 
cease not to ill-treat them that confess my name. And the 
Father said: Sit thou on my right hand until I make thine 
enemies thy footstool. 

Then they bound Stephen and took him away to Alexander, the 
reader, who was a chief of the people, and of the troop in Tiberias. 

In the fourth watch of the night, a light as of lightning shone 
round about him, and a voice said: Be strong. Thou art my 
first martyr, and thine hour is nigh. I will write the record of 
thee in the book of everlasting life. 

The Jews took counsel and decreed that he should be stoned. 
There were with him Abibas, Nicodemus, Gamaliel, Pilate, 
his wife and two children, and a multitude of believers. Saui 
stood forth and beckoned, and said: It would have been better 
that this man should not be slain, because of his great wisdom: 
but forasmuch as he is an apostate, I condemn Stephen to be 
stoned. The people said: He shall be stoned: but those who 
stood in the front rank with staves looked on each other and 
durst not lay hands on him: for he was renowned among the 
people. 

Saul was wroth, and stripped those servants of their garments 
and laid them on the table; and commanded the men to stone 
Stephen. 

Stephen looked round and said: Saul, Saul, that which thou 
doest unto me to-day, that same will the Jews do unto thee 
to-morrow. And when thou sufferest, thou shalt think on me. 

The people cast stones upon him so thickly that the light of 
the sun was darkened. Nicodemus and Gamaliel put their 
arms about him and shielded him, and were slain, and gave up 
their souls to Christ. 

Stephen prayed, saying: Forgive them that stone us, for by 
their means we trust to enter into thy kingdom. And at the 
tenth hour he gave up the ghost. Then beautiful youths ap- 
peared, and fell upon the bodies and wept aloud: and the 
people beheld the souls borne up by angels into heaven, and saw 
the heavens open and the hosts coming to meet the souls. And 
the people mourned for three days and three nights. 

Pilate took the bodies and put each one into a silver coffin 
with his name upon it: but Stephen’s coffin was gilt: and he 
laid them in his secret sepulchre. But Stephen prayed: Let 
my body be buried in my land of Serasima in Kapogemala 
(Caphargamala) until the revealing, when the martyrs that 


568 REVELATION OF STEPHEN 


follow me shall be gathered together. And an angel came and 
removed the bodies thither. 

But Pilate rose early to burn incense before the bodies, and 
found them not; and rent his clothes, saying: Was I then not 
worthy to be thy servant? On the night following, Stephen 
appeared and said to him: Weep not. I prayed God to hide 
our bodies. In the time of our revealing one of thy seed shall 
find us after a vision, and thy desire shall be fulfilled. But 
build a house of prayer and celebrate our feast in the month 
of April. After seven months thou also shalt rest. And Pilate 
did so: and he died, and was buried at Kapartasala: and his 
wife also died in peace. But the holy martyrs appeared thrice 
to venerable and believing men, speaking to them, and revealing 
divine words: for after their death many believed. 

One of Franko’s two manuscripts omits all mention of Pilate, who 
is indeed not necessary to the story. The statements about him are 
quite irreconcilable with other legends, even those of the Eastern 
Church which take the favourable view of him. 

Franko is clearly right in saying that this romance implies a con- 
tinuation, and most likely right in holding that the Lucian-narrative 
implies a previous story. But the extravagance of the Slavonic text 
is such that one cannot but think it has been improved by the trans- 
lator: and if Pilate could be gratuitously inserted—as I think he has 
been—by one redactor, others may equally well have been at work. 


APPENDIX I 
UNKNOWN GOSPEL 


In 1935 [Sir] Harold Idris Bell and T. C. Skeat published the following 
text as Fragments of an Unknown Gospel, which by reason of its extreme- 
ly early date (not later than the middle of the second century) and its 
content is of unusual interest. It shows striking parallels, in language 
and matter, with both the Synoptic Gospels and St. John; but I believe 
its editors to have been right in their original conclusion that it ‘is not 
a mere réchauffé of elements derived from the canonical Gospels’. The 
last incident which it describes might, I think, be based on one of Our 
Lord’s parables about sowing—that of the seed growing secretly, or the 
mustard seed—but it is followed by an action, presumably miraculous, 
on the part of Jesus himself, which appears to emphasize the point of 
the foregoing saying ; the addition at any rate is quite new. The editors 
successfully maintained most of their original supplements and inter- 
pretations against some objections and alternative suggestions made 
in 1936 by Professor Carl Schmidt. There is nothing to suggest that 
the fragments come from any of the uncanonical Gospels know to 
antiquity—for instance, the Gospel of the Egyptians, that according to 
the Hebrews, or the Gospel of St. Peter—or to connect it with any of 
the other fragments of uncanonical Gospels in the papyri; and there is no 
trace of heretical tendency in it. It is a much more convincing document 
than most extant apocrypha. In fragment 1 the text of the recto seems to 
follow naturally upon that of the verso; apart from this the editors are 
uncertain about the order in which the pieces of narrative are to be 
placed. 


Fragment 1, verso 

(And Jesus said) to the lawyers, (Punish?) every transgressor and 
lawless person, and not me... what he doth, how doth he it? And 
turning unto the rulers of the people, he spake this saying: Search 
the scriptures, in which ye think ye have life ; these are they which 
testify of me. Do not think that I came to accuse you to my father ; 
there is one that accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye trust. And 
when they said, We know that God spake unto Moses; but as for 
thee, we know not whence thou art ; Jesus answering said unto them, 
Now is your unbelief accused... . 


Recto 
... that they might draw (?) ... and having taken up stones with 
one accord might stone him; and the rulers laid hands on him that 
they might take him, and deliver him unto the multitude ; and they 
could not take him, because the hour of his betrayal was not yet 
come; and the Lord himself going forth out of their hands con- 
veyed himself away from them. And behold a leper came unto him 


570 APPENDIX 


and said, Jesu, master, J journeying with lepers, and eating with 
them in the inn, myself took leprosy ; now if thou wilt, I am made 
clean. Then said the Lord unto him, I will; be thou clean. And 
immediately the leprosy departed from him. And the Lord said unto 
him, Go, shew thyself unto the priests... . 


Fragment 2, recto 


When they were come unto him, they by questioning tempted him, 
saying, Jesu, master, we know that thou art come from God; for 
those things which thou doest do testify above all the prophets ; 
tell us therefore, is it lawful to pay unto the kings what is due unto 
the government? Shall we pay them, or not ? Jesus knowing their 
mind, being moved with indignation said unto them, Why do ye 
with your mouth call me master, and ye hear not what I say ? Well 
did Esaias prophesy of you, saying, This people honoureth me with 
their lips, but their heart is far from me; teaching the command- 
ments of men for doctrines. 


Verso 


.. . having closed (it?) up in a secret (?) place (?) . . . it is sub- 
jected (?) obscurely ... the weight thereof unweighed. ... And 
when they were perplexed at his strange question, Jesus walked 
and stood upon the bank of the river Jordan, and stretching forth 
his right hand he (filled? it with seed?) and scattered (it) upon the 
....And then... water; ...and it (sprang up?) before them, and 
it brought forth fruit... . 


Two more small fragments yield no connected sense. 


APPENDIX II 
ACTS OF PAUL 


SINncE Dr. James’s translation (pp. 270 ff.) was made, much more of this 
book, in the Greek version, has come to light. The largest addition is from 
the Hamburg papyrus codex, which was published by Carl Schmidt in 
1936, and dated by him about a.p. 300. In it his previous conclusions, 
in outline and in detail, are generally confirmed. Here we have eleven 
fairly well-preserved pages, the first eight of which contain parts of 
the text which are not to be found in the Coptic manuscript, or are 
represented there in a very fragmentary state. After this two leaves 
(four pages) have been lost ; when the text of the codex begins again we 
are well into the Martyrium, which it continues to the end. Most of the 
text of the eighth page is covered by three other Greek manuscripts: one, 
an Oxyrhynchus parchment leaf already published (late fourth century), 
and subsequently identified as belonging to the Acts of Paul; another, 2 
Berlin papyrus, which a fragment at Michigan was found to join (probably 


II. ACTS OF PAUL 571 


end of third century); and a further small fragment from another 
Michigan papyrus (third or fourth century); most of these overlap, and 
the verso of the last was finally shown by Professor W. D. McHardy to 
overlap with, and be continued by the text of a leaf of Schmidt’s Coptic 
manuscript believed by him to belong to another work, and translated 
separately by James on pp. 31 ff. of this book. The gap between the 
first eight and the last three pages of the Hamburg codex is thus partly 
filled and the amount still missing can be calculated. In his work on the 
Greek text Schmidt produces convincing evidence for the debt of its 
author to the Acts of Peter and on consideration of this would finally date 
its composition a.p. 180-90. The first page of the Hamburg text shows 
us Paul at Ephesus defending his cause before the governor, Hieronymus ; 
it must have been preceded by some account of his preaching there and 
also (as Schmidt shows, from comparison with an Ethiopic Letter of 
Pelagia where the same material has evidently been used) of a journey 
previously made by him into the mountains and his meeting there with 
a huge lion, which at its own request he baptized. We meet the lion later 
in the story, which is from this point preserved in full ; Nicephorus’ con- 
densed version of it is translated by James on p. 292, where the position 
of Paul’s sojourn at Ephesus is still undetermined. The new documents 
show the order of Paul’s travels in the latter part of the Acts to have 
been: Ephesus, Philippi, Corinth, Rome. 

In my translation I have adopted as many of the supplements and 
interpretations of Schmidt, and also of Kurfess (Ztschr. f. ntl. Wiss. 
XXXVii. 184 ff.) as seemed to me likely.? I owe several other suggestions 
to Prof. G. D. Kilpatrick. For further studies on the Acta Pauli, and 
smaller fragments of the Greek version, see: Oxyrhynchus Papyri, xiii. 
1602; H. A. Saunders, Harvard Theological Review, xxxi. 73 ff.; G. D. 
Kilpatrick and C. H. Roberts, J.T.S. xlvii. 196 ff.; W. D. McHardy, 
Expository Times, lviii, no. 10, 279. 

(The governor speaks:) ... our(?) gods. Say, then, what are.... 
Paul said unto him, (Do what thou wilt?) ; for thou hast no power 
over me save over my body ; thou shalt not kill my soul. But hearken. 
how thou must be saved, and taking all my (sayings?) to heart... 
(who?) hath fashioned the (sun?) and the earth and the stars and 
principalities and dominions and all good things in the world be- 
cause of ... for the use of men .. . they being carried away and 
enslaved ... by (?) gold ... and silver and precious stones... and 
adulteries and drunkenness. For having considered (?) they went 
(the ways?) that lead unto deception by reason of the things afore- 
said, and were slain. Now therefore since the Lord will, that we 
should live in God because of the error in the world, and not die in 
(our) sins, he saveth through the chaste men who preach, that ye 
may repent and believe that there is one God and one Jesus Christ 
and there is none other; for your gods are of brass and stone and 


1 See also Nicetas of Paphlagonia, ‘Panegyric on St. Paul’, in Orientalia 
Christiana, xxiii (1931), 58-96. ag 

2 Cf. the review by Sir Harold Idris Bell in J.T.S. xxxviii (1938), 189-— 
91 of Schmidt’s edition of the Hamburg papyrus. 


572 APPENDIX 


wood, being able neither to take food nor see nor hear nor even 
stand. Take a good resolution and be saved, lest God be wroth and 
consume ye with fire unquenchable, and your memorial perish. 
And when the governor heard these things . . . in the theatre with 
the multitude he said, Men of Ephesus, that this man hath spoken 
well, I know; but also that it is not yet time for ye to learn these 
things. What therefore ye will, determine. Then said some, Burn 
him by the. ... But the goldsmiths said, To the beasts with the man. 
And there arose a great tumuli; and Hieronymus when he had 
scourged him condemned him to the beasts. Now the brethren, 
since it was Pentecost, wept not, neither did they bow the knee, 
but they stood and prayed rejoicing. But after six days Hieronymus 
made an hunting show, so that all who beheld the greatness of the 
wild beasts were astonished. [Page 2] While Paul was bound ... 
he turned not away from (his purpose? but) he prayed . . . (when) he 
heard the noise of the waggons and the tumult of them that did 
handle the beasts. And (a lion) came beside the wicket of the 
stadium wherein Paul was enclosed, and cried out mightily, so that 
all the people cried, The lion! For he roared fierce and furiously, so 
that even Paul left off praying, being afraid. And there was a man 
named Diophantus, a freedman of Hieronymus, whose wife was a 
disciple of Paul and sat by him night and day, so that Diophantus 
was jealous, and was instant for the beast fight. 4nd Artemilla the 
wife of Hieronymus desired to hear Paul pray; and she said unto 
the wife of Diophantus, Eubula, (Let us go?) and hear the prayer 
of him who fighteth with the beasts. And she went and told Paul; 
and Paul being filled with joy said, Bring her. And she put on 
sadder raiment, and came away unto him with Eubula. But when 
Paul saw her, he groaned and said, Woman, thou ruler of this 
world, thou mistress of much gold, thou citizeness of much luxury, 
thou proud of thy raiment, sit down upon the ground and forget 
thy riches, thy beauty and thine ornaments; for these shall avail 
thee naught, if thou ask (?) not God who accounteth the things but 
dung, which are here marvellous (?), but freely granteth the won- 
drous things that are yonder. Gold perisheth, riches are consumed, 
raiment weareth out, beauty groweth old, great cities are changed, 
and the world is destroyed in fire through the wickedness of men. 
God only remaineth, and the adoption given through him in which 
it is necessary to be saved. And now, O Artemilla, hope in God 
and he shall deliver thee; hope in Christ and he shall give thee 
forgiveness of sins and shall set upon thee a crown of liberty, that 
thou mayest no more serve idols and the savour of sacrifice, but a 
living God and the father of Christ, whose glory is for ever and 
ever, Amen. And these things Artemilla having heard with Eubula, 
she prayed Paul that he would straightway baptize her in God. 


II. ACTS OF PAUL 573 


And the fight with the wild beasts was (appointed) for the morrow. 
[Page 3] And Hieronymus heard through Diophantus that the 
women sat beside Paul night and day, and he was angered not a 
little with Artemilla and Eubula the freedwoman. And when he had 
supped, Hieronymus departed the earlier, that he might speedily 
accomplish the hunting show. But they said unto Paul, Wilt thou 
that we bring a smith, that thou mayest be loosed and baptize us in 
the sea? And Paul said unto them, I will it not ; for I trust in God, 
who hath delivered the whole world out of bondage. And Paul 
cried unto God on the sabbath, as the Lord’s day drew nigh, on the 
day when Paul was to fight with the beasts; and he said, O my 
God, Christ Jesus, who hast redeemed me out of so many evils, 
grant that before Artemilla and Eubula, that are thine own, the 
bonds be rent from off mine hands. And while Paul called witness 
upon these things, there entered in a youth exceeding fair and 
comely, and loosed the bonds of Paul, the youth smiling the while, 
and straightway departed. But because of the vision which befell 
Paul and the miraculous sign concerning the bonds, his grief at the 
beast fight vanished and he rejoiced and leapt as if in paradise, and 
taking Artemilla he went forth from the strait and dark place were 
the prisoners are guarded. And when they were gone forth unknown 
to the watchers and were even now in safety, Paul (called to witness?) 
his own God saying, The (gates are open? . . . bless?) thy dispensa- 
tion .. . that Artemilla be initiated with the seal in the Lord ; and 
then the locked gates flew open in the name of God . . . the guards 
were fallen into a deep sleep; and straightway came forth the 
matron and the blessed Paul with (Kubula) ... the darkness... 
and a young man, like .. . of Paul, lightened not by a lamp (but) 
by the (sanctity?) of his person, went before them, so that they 
came nigh unto the sea; and the shining one stood over against 
(them?) . . . and Paul when he had prayed laid his hand upon 
Artemilla and blessed the water in the name of Christ Jesus, so that 
the sea swelled exceedingly ; and Artemilla being seized with great 
fear well nigh swooned ; (and Paul cried out?) and said, O thou who 
lightenest and shinest, help, lest the heathen say [page 4] that the 
captive Paul hath fled having slain Artemilla. And again the 
young man smiled ; and the matron came to herself, and journeyed 
unto the house, as the day was already breaking. But as she (?) 
entered in, the guards being asleep, he brake bread, and brought 
water also and gave her to drink with a word, and sent her away to 
Hieronymus her husband; but he did supplicate. And early in the 
morning there was an outcry from the citizens, Let us gu to the 
spectacle, let us go and see him that hath God, fighting with 
the beasts. But Hieronymus himself came thither, both because 
of the suspicion which he had toward his wife, and also because he 


574, APPENDIX 


(Paul) had not fled ; and he bade Diophantus and the other servants 
bring Paul into the stadium. And he (?) was haled forth, saying 
naught, but bowed down and groaning, that he was triumphed 
over by the city ; and being led away straightway he was cast into 
the stadium; so that all were vexed at the grave mien of Paul. 
And Artemilla together with Eubula falling most perilously sick 
(with care) lest Paul should perish, Hieronymus was grieved not a 
little concerning his wife, but also because it was already noised 
abroad in the city, and he had not his wife with him. When there- 
fore he was seated, the chief huntsman commanded that there be 
set loose against him a lion taken in hunting but a little while before, 
very fierce, so that the whole multitude . . . that Paul should be 
killed .. . but the lion leapt down out of the cage, and did not roar 
while Paul prayed. Moreover . . . out of the thornbrakes .. . and 
great wonder came upon them all, for he was exceedingly great and 
mighty. But Paul (persevered in his?) proper work of prayer to Jesus 
Christ, and rendered witness ; and (?) the lion, when he had looked 
round about him, and fully shewn himself, came running and lay 
down beside the legs of Paul, like a docile lamb and as it were his 
servant ; and when he had left off praying, even as one that awaketh 
out of dreams he spake unto Paul in human speech, Grace (?) be with 
thee. And Paul was not afraid but himself said, Grace be with thee, 
lion ; and he laid his hand upon him. And all the multitude cried out, 
Away with the magician, away with the sorcerer. But the lion gazed 
at Paul and Paul at the lion, and Paul perceived that this was the 
lion [page 5] which had come and been baptized. And moved by 
faith Paul said, Lion, was it thou whom I baptized ? And the lion 
answering spake unto Paul, saying, Yea. And again spake Paul 
unto him, saying, And how wast thou taken in hunting? And the 
lion spake with one (sic) voice, Even as thou, Paul. And Hierony- 
mus sent in many wild beasts, so that Paul might be destroyed, and 
against the lion, archers that they might destroy him also; and out 
of a clear sky a hailstorm very thick and exceeding great did 
violently hurtle from heaven, so that many perished and all the 
rest fled. But neither Paul was touched, nor the lion, but the other 
wild beasts perished because of the hail, which was so heavy that 
Hieronymus’ ear was struck and shorn off; and the multitude 
fleeing cried out, Save us, God, save us, thou God of the man who 
hath fought with the wild beasts. And Paul bade farewell to the 
lion, which spake no more; and he went forth from the stadium, 
and went down unto the harbour, and entered into the (?) ship 
bound for Macedonia ; for many were they who sailed, (deeming) 
the city about to perish. Therefore went he with them as one of the 
fugitives; but the lion departed into the mountains as was his 
natural wont. Now Artemilla and Eubula mourned not a little, 


II. ACTS OF PAUL 575 


fasting and considering (?) what had befallen Paul. But when it 
was night there came (a youth?) plainly into the bedchamber 
where . . . Hieronymus had a running sore from his ear. . . Arte- 
milla by reason of grief . . . (the youth drew near and) said unto 
them, Be not troubled (concerning Paul?) ... for in the name of 
Christ Jesus and in the power of the Almighty, Paul his servant hath 
departed into Macedonia, there also to fulfil the dispensations of the 
Lord; but you . . . great astonishment possessed them. But Hierony- 
mus even now grown sober in the night in his pains said, O thou God 
who didst help the man who fought with the beasts, save me 
through (?) the youth (?) that did come in a vision through the locked 
bedchamber. And he seeing them in fear and great . . . those who 
sat by, leaping up (?) ... the physicians . . . a ery, By the will of 
Christ Jesus, . . . the ear. And it became whole, as the youth had 
charged them, (saying), Treat thyself with honey. 


The Greek text, which does not insert the correspondence with the 
Corinthians here (see above, pp. 288 ff.), has no account of Paul’s sojourn at 
Philippi. There is no certainty that it was described in the Coptic either ; 
for there is no ground for the suggested supplement ‘to Philippi’ on p. 288, 
at the end of section VI, and the passage which begins VII has been 
wrongly restored by Schmidt; it belongs to the account of the visit to 
Corinth, which reads in the Greek as follows: 


[Page 6| From Philippi to Corinth 


And when Paul came unto Corinth from Philippi unto the house of 
Epiphanius there was joy; so that all our people rejoiced, and 
withal wept, when Paul told them what he had suffered in Philippi 
in the houses of labour, and in every place, what befell him, so 
that finally his tears fiowed freely (?), and prayer was made with- 
out ceasing by all for Paul, and he accounted hiinself happy, that 
with such likemindedness they ordered his affairs every day in 
prayer to the Lord; and so the greatness of his joy was unsurpass- 
able and the soul of Paul was exalted by reason of (?) the benevo- 
lence of the brethren, so that for forty days he taught the tale of 
his endurances, (namely), in whatsoever place each thing hefeil 
him and what great and wondrous works were vouchsafed unto 
him; so that at each declaration he did glorify the almighty God 
and Christ Jesus, who had found Paul well pleasing in every place. 
But when the days were fulfilled that Paul should be sent to Rome, 
there arose grief among the brethren (concerning) when they should 
see him again. And Paul being filled with the holy spirit said: Men 
and brethren, be diligent concerning fasting (?) and charity; for 
behold, I go away into a furnace of fire . . . I, and I prevail not if 
the Lord afford me not power. For David journeyed with Saul... 
and (though) angered, (spared?) Nabal, being persuaded by the wife 


576 APPENDIX 


of Nabal; for there was with him Christ Jesus, the God (?) .. . this 
precious fast. 


(Here belong the Coptic fragments translated above, p. 298 (section IX). 
The text, now augmented by the Greek, is here retranslated.) 


(And the grace of the Lord?) shall walk with (me? that I may ful- 
fil?) every dispensation that shall come upon me . . . in patience. 
But they were sorrowful, and fasted. And Cleobius was in the spirit 
and said unto them, Brethren, it is necessary that Paul fulfil every 
dispensation and afterward go up unto the ... of death... and 
(in?) much instruction and knowledge and sowing of the word ; and 
that he being envied shall depart out of this world. But when the 
brethren and Paul (?) heard these things they lifted up their voice 
and said, O God of our Lord, the father of Christ, do thou help 
Paul thy servant that he may remain with us by reason of our 
weakness. And Paul was touched with compunction, and put away 
the fast with them; and as the offering was made by Paul... 
[page 7] (the bread divided?) of itself into parts ... (asking?) what 
this sign might be (that they?) beheld... what... would say, but 
to him... would not. But the spirit came upon Myrte, so that she 
said unto them, Brethren, wherefore are ye afraid when ye behold 
this sign? For Paul the servant of the Lord shall save many in 
Rome, and shall feed many with the word, so that there shall be 
no numbering them ; and he be manifest more than all the faithful ; 
and thereafter mightily shall the glory of the Lord Christ Jesus 
come upon him, so that there shall be great grace in Rome. Thus 
straightway afterward was the spirit in Myrte stilled. And each one 
partook of the bread and they feasted (Copt. were in joy) after 
the custom of the fast, to the sound of the psalms of David, and 
songs ; and Paul was glad. And on the morrow, when they had con- 
tinued all night in the will of God, Paul said, Men and brethren, I 
shall sail on the day of the preparation, and I depart unto Rome, 
that I may not stay those things which are commanded and laid 
upon me; for unto this was I appointed. And they were exceedingly 
grieved when they heard these words; and all the brethren con- 
tributed according to their power, that Paul might be troubled in 
nothing save in that he was parting from the brethren. Now when 
he went up into the ship, while they all prayed, Artemon the cap- 
tain of the ship was one that had been baptized by Paul; and he 
(greeted?) Paul (joyfully?), for that such great matters were en- 
trusted unto him, (as if?) the Lord himself were entering into (the 
ship). But when the ship had set sail, Artemon partook with Paul 
in the grace of God to glorify the Lord Christ Jesus who made pro- 
vision for Paul. And when they were upon the high sea, and there 
was silence, Paul being heavy by reason of his fasts and vigils fell 


II. ACTS OF PAUL 577 


asleep. And the Lord came unto him walking upon the sea, and he 
stirred Paul and said unto him, Arise, and see. And he awoke 
and said, Thou art my Lord Christ Jesus the king of heaven. But 
wherefore art thou thus (?) sad and downcast, Lord? If thou art 
pained, manifest it, Lord, for I am not a little anguished to see 
thee thus. And the Lord said, Paul, again am I about to be cruci- 
fied. And Paul said, God forbid, Lord, that I should see this. But 
the Lord said unto Paul, Paul, depart, and go even unto Rome and 
exhort the brethren, that they continue in the calling which is unto 
the Father. And ...the Lord... walking upon the sea, went before 
him and shewed. . .. And when the voyage was accomplished... 
Paul came out with great sadness ; and he saw upon the harbour a 
man standing, who awaited Artemon the captain ; and when he had 
seen him, saluted him. ... [Page 8] And he said unto him, Claudius, 
behold Paul the beloved of the Lord, who is come here with me. 
And then Claudius embraced Paul and saluted him and without 
delay himself carried the (gear) from the ship unto his own home. 
And he rejoiced greatly, shewing also the things concerning him 
unto the brethren, so that straightway the house of Claudius was 
full of joy and thankfulness, for they saw how Paul put away his 
(look) of grief and taught the word of truth and spake: Men and 
soldiers of Christ, hear: how oft hath God delivered Israel from the 
hand of lawless men ; and so long as they kept the things pertaining 
unto the Lord, he left them not. For he saved them out of the 
hand of Pharaoh, that was lawless, and Og, a king more unholy, 
and from Adar (Arad?) and the foreign peoples. And since they 
kept the things pertaining unto the Lord, he further gave unto them 
of the fruit of the loins, having promised them the land of Canaan, 
and subjected the foreign peoples unto them ; and thereafter, what 
things he vouchsafed unto them in the desert and waterless place. 
Moreover he sent out prophets to preach our Lord Christ Jesus, who 
receiving according unto order and lot and due portion the spirit 
of Christ, having suffered affliction, were slain of the people. When 
therefore they departed from the living God according to their own 
lusts, they did lose their everlasting inheritance. And now, 
brethren, there doth impend a great trial ; which having endured, 
we shall have access unto the Lord; and let us receive as a refuge 
and a shield of good will Jesus Christ who gave himself for us; 
if at least ye receive the word so as it is, that God hath for our 
sakes sent down a spirit of power at the last times into flesh, that 
is, into Mary the Galilaean according unto the word of prophecy, 
which was borne in the womb and made of her so that she gave 
birth and bore Jesus Christ our king out of Bethlehem of Judaea, 
who was brought up in Nazara, and having gone on to Jerusalem 
and all Judaea, taught: The kingdom of heaven is at hand; leave 


870 Pp 


578 APPENDIX 


the darkness, receive the light, ye who did proceed (?) in the 
shadow of death; a light hath arisen unto you. And he did great 
and marvellous things; so that he chose out of the tribes twelve 
men whom having anointed (?) in understanding and faith he kept 
with himself, raising the dead, and healing diseases, and cleansing 
lepers, and healing the blind, [end of page S| and curing the maimed, 
raising up the palsied, cleansing those possessed of devils; in 
general he went through all the (land) by .. . ministering and... 
of the river ... Israel; fora woman ... having an issue of blood... 
and...not...our Lord Jesus Christ... be led into the council (?)... 
go through ... cemeteries ... greatly by ... the king of glory ...the 
rest of the seed .. . the king of glory... 

Remains of several more lines end the Berlin and Michigan papyrus. 
Little can have been lost after this before the beginning of the verso of the 
other Michigan fragment, whose text is continued on the leaf of the 
Heidelberg Coptic manuscript translated by James on p. 31. 


... all the miracles (?) .. . for he maketh . . . works (And as they?) 
wondered, (and pondered these things?) in their hearts, he said 
unto them, &c. 


Here, as McHardy observes, Jesus’ own words are reported. 


INDEX OF APOCRYPHAL WRITINGS 
MENTIONED 


Abbaton, revelation about, 509. 
Abdias, Apostolic History of, 228, 
257, 337, 397, 438, 462. 
Abgarus, letters, 153 7., 476, 
Acts: 
in general, xix, 228: 
of Andrew, 22, 387; of A. and 
Matthias, 453; of A. and Peter, 
458; of A. and Paul, 472. 
of Barnabas, 474. 
of Bartholomew, 467. 
of James the great, 462, 470. 
of James the Less, 464. 
of John, 23, 228, 464, 469 
of Jude, see Simon. 
of Matthew, 460, 466. 
of Matthias, see Andrew. 
of Paul, 23, 270, 470; of P.and An- 
drew, 472; of P.and Thecla, 272. 
of Peter, 22, 300, 470, 472, 474, 
571; of P. and Andrew, 458. 
of Philip, 22, 439, 469. 
of Pilate, see Pilate. 
of Simon and Jude, 464. 
of Thaddaeus, 471. 
of Thecla and Paul, 272. 
of Thomas, 22, 364, 468, 470. 
of Titus by Zenas, 271, 272 n., 
285; 291. 
of disciples of the Apostles, 471. 
Agrapha, 33. 
Alexandrines, Ep. to, 478-9. 
Andrew, Acts, xx, 22, 24, 337, 453, 
472. 
Gospel of, 22. 
Apocalypses: xxi. 
of Baruch, 37. 
of Elias, 485 ”., 521, 525 n. 
of James, 37, 504. 
of John (questions), 
(Mysteries), 504. 


xxi, 504, 


Apocalypses, cont. : 
of the Virgin Mary, 563. 
of Paul, xxi, 21, 525. 
of Peter, xxi, 23, 505. 
of Philip, 605. 
of Stephen, 564. 
of Thomas, 555. 
unknown, 505. 


of Zephaniah, 5257, 530n., 
534 n., 538 7., 540 n. 
Apostolic Constitutions, Canons, 


Liturgies, xxili, xxiv. 
Aquila, Acts, 471. 
Arabic Gospel of Infancy, 80. 
Archko Volume, 90. 
Armenian Gospel of Infancy, 83. 
Ascension of Isaiah quoted, 325. 
Aseneth, History of, 172 n. 
Assumption of the Virgin, narra. 
tives of, xix, 194. 
Avenging of the Saviour, 159, 


Barnabas, Acts, 470. 
Gospel, xxvi, 22, 23. 
Bartholomew, Acts, 467. 
Book of the Resurrection, 181. 
Gospel (Questions of), xix, 22, 
166. 


Baruch, Apoc. of, 37. 

Basilides, Gospel of, 21. 

Benan, Letter of, 90. 

Bezae, Codex, additions in, 33. 
Birgitta St., revelation of, 150 n 
Bobiensis, Codex, addition in, 33. 


Clementine Literature, xxiv. 
Books of, xxv, 505. 
Hoinilies, 36. 
Recognitions, 20. 

Cock, Book of the, 150. 

Cornelius, Acts, 471. 


870 Pp 2 


580 INDEX OF APOCRYPHAL WRITINGS MENTIONED 


Devil, Dispute with Jesus, xxvi, 187. 

Didache, xxiii. 

Didascalia, xxiii. 

Dionysius the Areopagite, writings, 
XXV. 


Ebionites, Gospel of, see Gospels. 
Egyptians, Gospel acc. to, see 
Gospels. 
Elizabeth of Schénau, revelation of, 
150 n. 
Epistles : xxi. 
of Abgarus and Christ, 476. 
of the Apostles, 485. 
of Herod to Pilate, 155. 
of Lentulus, 477. 
of Paul to Corinthians (3rd), 288. 
to Alexandrians, 478, 479. 
to Laodiceans, 478. 
of Paul and Seneca, 480. 
of Pilate to Claudius, 146, to 
Tiberius, 153, to Herod, 155. 
of Tiberius to Pilate, 156, to 
Abgarus, 153 n. 
of Titus, 265-6, 303, 349. 
Eurippus, Life of John Baptist, xxv. 
Evernew Tongue, the, 505. 


Fayoum Gospel fragment, 25, 
Freer-logion, 34. 


Gamaliel, Gospel of, 151. 
Gnostic Apocrypha, xxii. 
Gospels : 

of Andrew, 22. 

Arabic, of Infancy, 80. 

Armenian, of Infancy, 83. 

of Barnabas, 22, 23. 

of Bartholomew, 22, 166. 

of Basilides, &c., 21. 

of the Ebionites, 8. 

of the Egyptians, 10. 

of Gamaliel, 151. 

according to the Hebrews, 1. 

of Hesychius, 22. 

of the Infancy, 38. 

of James the Less, 22 

of Lucianus, 22. 

of Marcion, 21. 

of Matthew (Ps.-), 38, 70. 

of Matthias, 12, 22, 23. 

of Nicodemus, 94. 

of the Passion, 90. 


Gospels, cont. 
of Peter, 13, 22, 90: 
forgery), 89. 
of Philip, 12. 
of Thomas, 14, 22, 24, 49. 
of the Twelve, 10, 504. 
unknown, fragments of, 20, 25. 


(modern 


Hebrews, Gospel acc. to, see Gospels. 

Hell, Descent into, Pt. II of Acts 
of Pilate, 117. 

Hermione, Acts, 471. 

Hesychius, Gospels acc. to, 22. 

Hystaspes, 297. 


Infancy, Gospels and Narratives of, 
88 


English, metrical, 68. 
Trish Apocrypha, 505. 


James the Brother of the Lord : 

Ascents of, 20. 
Book of (Protevangelium), 38. 
Questions of, 187. 
James the Great: 
Acts, 462, 470. 
Apocalypse, 37, 504. 
James the Less: 
Acts, 464. 
Gospel, 22. 

Jesus Christ, Priesthood of, xxv. 
Letters, 476. 
revelation to the Apostles, 505. 
Testament, xxiv, 485. 
Vengeance of, 159. 

Wisdom of, xxiii. 

Je, Books of, xxiii. 

Job, Testament of, 552 n. 

John Baptist, Lives of, xxv. 

John Evangelist : 

Acts, xx, 23, 228, 469. 

Apocalypses, xxi, 187, 504. 

Book of, 187. 

Gnostic book of, xxii. 

Narrative of the Assumption of 
the Virgin, 201. 

Joseph of Arimathaea : 
Narrative of the Assumption, 216. 
Story of, 161. 

Joseph the carpenter : 
Apocryphon, 38. 

History, or Death of, 84. 

Jude, see Simon. 


INDEX OF APOCRYPHAL WRITINGS MENTIONED 581 


Laodiceans, Ep. to, 478. 
Lazarus, Revelation of, xxvi. 
Lentulus, letter of, 477. 
Leucius: xx. 
Acts of John, 228. 
Linus, Passions of Peter and Paul, 
36, 470. 
Longinus, Acts, 471. 
Lucianus, Gospels acc. to, 22. 
Luke, Acts, 471. 
Lusa Apostolorum, 23. 


Marcellus, Passion of Peter and 

Paul, 470. 

Mark : 
Acts, 471. 
Author of Apoc. of Paul (Coptic), 
554, 

Author of Life of John Baptist, xxv. 
Mary Magdalene, Life of, 157 
Mary, the Virgin : 

Apocalypse, 555, 563; Gospel 
(Gnostic), xxii; Letters, 478 ; 
questions of, 20. 

Birth of (Gnostic), 19; narratives 
of Birth, 38, 79; death (as- 
sumption of), xix, 22, narra- 
tives, 194. 

Syriac history of, 67, 80, 222. 

Matthew : 

Acts, 460, 466. 

Gospel of Pseudo-M., 38, 70. 
Matthias : 

Acts, with Andrew, 458. 

Gospel or Traditions of, 12, 22. 
Mechtildis, revelation of, 150 n. 
Melito (Ps.-): 

Narrative of Assumption, 209. 

Acts of John, 257. 

Mellitus, see Melito. 

Memoria Apostolorum, 21. 

Ministry of Jesus, Coptic narratives 
of, 147. 


Nazarenes, Gospel of, see Gospel 
acc. to the Hebrews. 
Nicodemus, Gospel of (Acts of 
Pilate), 94. 
[570. 
Oxyrhynchus papyri, 25, 264, 325, 
Passion, Gospels and Narratives of, 


Paul: 

Acts, xviii, xx, 23, 270 (incl. Paul 
and Thecla, 272), 470; of P. and 
Andrew, 472. 

Apocalypse (lost), 21: (extant), 
xxi, 525. 

Epistles, 288, 478. 

Preaching of, 297. 

Peter : 

Acts, xx, 22, 300, 470, 472, 474; 
of P. and Andrew, 458. 

Apocalypse, xxi, 23, 505. 

Doctrine, 18. 

Gospel, xix, 13, 22, 90: 89. 

Preaching 16: (Syriac), 18. 

Teaching, 19. 

Philip: 

Acts, 22, 439, 469. 

Apocalypse, 505. 

Gospel, 12. 

Pilate : 

Acts of, or Gospel of Nicodemus, 
xix, Pt. 15 9437 Pt ily 1172 

Arabic Life of, 152. 

Death of, 157. 

Ethiopic fragment about, 151. 

Letters to Claudius, 146; to Tibe- 
rius, 153; to Herod, 155. 

Paradosis of, i54; Reports of, 
xix, 153. 

Pistis Sophia, xxiii, 12, 31, 66. 
Priesthood of Jesus, xxv. 
Prochorus, Acts of John, 469. 
Protevangelium, 38. 


Sangermanensis, Codex, addition 
in, 33. 

Seneca, letters to Paul, 480, 

Septuagint, 29 n., 47 n. 

Sibylline Oracles II, 521. 

Simon and Jude, Acts, 464. 

Solomon, Testament of, 224, 

Stephen, Revelation of, 564, 


Strasburg papyrus, 30. 


Thaddaeus, Acts, 471. 

Thecla, see Acts. 

Thomas: 
Acts, xx, 23, 24, 8364: 468, 470. 
Apocalypse, xxi, 555. 
Gospel, 14, 22, 24, 49. 

Tiberius, letter, 156; Healing of, 158, 


582 


Titus: 
Acts by Zenas, 271, 272 n., 285, 
291, 471. 
Epistle of, 265-6, 303, 349. 
Twelve, Gospel of the, see Gospels. 


INDEX OF WRITERS CITED 


Xanthippe and Polyxena, Acts, 471, 
475. 


Zenais and Philonilla, Acts, 471. 
Zenas, Acts of Titus, see Titus. 


INDEX OF WRITERS CITED 
I. ANCIENT AND MEDIAEVAL 


Abercius, Life of, 300, 305 n., 321 n. 

Adamnan, Vision of, 505. 

Aelred of Rievaulx, 81 7. 

Apollinaris, 1. 

Apostolic Constitutions, 
Order, xxiii, xxiv, 35. 

Apostolic accu xxiii, 35. 

Athanasius (Ps.-), 2 

Augustine, 20, 250, 70, 301, 303. 
480, 525. 


Church 


Barnabas, Ep. of, xvii, 23, 24. 
Basilides, 13, 21. 


Cassianus, Jo., 241. 

Chrysostom, Jo. (Ps.-), 37. 

Clement of Alexandria, 2, 10, 11, 
12, 13, 16, 26, 35, 36, 38 7., 297, 
485, 506. 

Clement of Rome, Second Epistle, 
XVI, J, ll 30: 

Commodian, 298, 488 n. 

Cynewulf, 453. 

Cyprian (Ps.-), xviiin., 297. 

Cyril of Alexandria (Ps.-), 89. 

Cyril of Jerusalem (Ps.-), 8, 15, 87, 
197. 


Dante, 525. 

Demetrius of Antioch, 88. 
Didymus, 35. 

Dionysius (Ps.-), 162. 


Ephraem Syrus, 33, 288. 

Epiphanius, 3, 8, 12, 19, 20, 21, 88, 
228, 378 n., 525. 

Eusebius of Caesarea, 2, 13, 14, 464, 
469, 476. 

Eusebius of Emesa, 95. 

Evodius of Antioch (Ps.-), 147, 194. 

Evodius of Uzala, ao 


Gelasian Decree, 21, &c. 
Golden Legend, see Voragine. 
Gregory Nazianzen, 19. 
Gregory of Tours, 337. 
Grosseteste, Rob., xxvi. 


Haimo of Auxerre, 7. 
Hegesippus, 2, 20. 

(Ps.-), 462, 471. 
Heracleon, 17. 
Hermas, xvii, 23, 24, 512. 
Hippolytus, 11, 18, 15, 37, 291. 
Hrosvita, 70, 72. 


Ignatius, 4, 23, 24. 
Irenaeus, xxii, 1, 2, 15, 36, 187. 
Isidorus, 13. 


[70. 
Jerome, xiv, 1, 3, 34, 162, 299; (Ps.-), 
John of Damascus, 19. 
John of Salisbury, 299. 
John of Thessalonica, 194, 209. 
Julius Africanus, 438 n. 
Justin Martyr, 33, 35, 36. 


Lactantius, 298. 
Lucianus of Jerusalem, 565. 


Macarius Magnes, 507. 

Marcion, 14, 20. 

Melito (Ps.-), 194, 209. 

Methodius, 506. 

Moses of Chorene, 153 n. 

Muratorian fragment or Canon, xvii, 
478, 506. 


Nicephorus Callisti, 291, 571. 

Nicephorus, Stichometry of, 1, 3, 28, 
270, 300, 506. 

Nicetas of Thessalonica, 364, 411. 

Nicetas of Paphlagonia, 571. 


I. ANCIENT AND MEDIAEVAL 


Oecumenius, 19. 

Origen, 2, 10, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 
35, 38, 162, 297; (Ps.-), 6. 

Orosius, 21. 


Palladius, 81. 
Papias, 2, 36. 
Pelagia, 571. 
Photius, xxi, 228. 
Polycarp, 23, 24. 
Priscillian, 21, 250. 


Rainer, 187. 
Riga, Petrus de, 7. 
Rufinus, 464. 


583 


Serapion of Antioch, 13, 90. 
Serapion of Thmuis, 564. 
Sibylline Oracles, 521. 
Sixty Books, list of, 23. 
Sozomen, 506, 525. 


Tertullian, xx, 35, 153, 229, 270, 299. 
Theodoret, 14. 
Theodosius of Alexandria, 198. 


Valentinus, 21. 

Victor of Capua, 478. 

Victor Vitensis, 565 n. 

Vita Rhythmica, 70, 82, 117. 

Voragine, Jac de (Golden Legend), 
79, 157, 160. 


II. MODERN! 


Amann, A., 38, 70. 


Bardy, G., 485. 

Batiffol, P., 439. 

Baumstark, A., 152. 

Bell, H. I., 569. 

Benoist, J., 187. 

Bevan, A. A., 364. 

Bihlmeyer, Dom, 556, 559. 

Bonnet, M., 228, 337, 350, 357, 364, 
411, 439, 467, 470. 

Budge, Sir E., 8, 37, 68, 80, 83, 87, 
181, 194, 197, 219, 471, 504. 

Burkitt, F. C., 378, 


Ceriani, A., 66. 

Chaine, M., 150, 194, 226, 563. 
Conybeare, F’., 94, 114. 

Crum, W. E., 86, 181. 
Cumont, F., 378. 


De Bruyne, D., 266, 303, 480, 556. 
De Sacy, A., 152. 

Dionisi, D., 557. 

Dobschiitz, E. von, 94, 477, 555-6. 
Dollinger, E. von, 187, 188. 
Duensing, H., 510. 

Dulaurier, A., 147. 


Ebersolt, J., 470. 
Enger, M., 194, 226. 
Evelyn White, H., 25, 27. 


Fabricius, J. A., 228, 337, 565 n. 
Ficker, J., 310. 

Flamion, J., 337, 357, 453, 475. 
Forster, M., 556. 

Franko, J., 474, 565. 

Frick, H., 555. 


Grébaut, 8., 510. 

Greene, H. C., 89. 

Grenfell, B., and Hunt, A. S., 25. 
Guerrier, L., 485. 


Harnack, A., 90, 289. 
Hauler, E., 555. 
Hennecke, E., xxii, 30, 
Horstmann, C., 68. 
Hone, W., xiv, 79. 


Jacoby, A., 30. 
Jones, Jer., Xv. 


Kilpatrick, G. D., 571. 
Kugener, 378. 
Kurfess, A., 571. 


Lacau, P., 147, 181. 

Lagrange, R. P., 1, 27, 28. 

Lazius, W., 337. 

Lewis, Mrs. A.8., 194, 219, 364, 439, 
469. 

Lightfoot, J. B., 201. 

Lipsius, K. A., 470. 


1 See also the Bibliography, pp. xxix—xxxi. 


584, INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 


McHardy, W. D., 571, 578. 
McLean, N., 518. 

Maffei, Sc., 557. 

Malan, S. C., 471. 

Marsh, F., 162 n. 

Mendés, Cat., 89. 

Moricca, U., 166. 


Nau, F., xxv. 
Nisard, A., xxvi. 
Notovich, 90. 


Peeters, P., 80, 81, 83, 84. 
Planitz, E. E. v. d., 90. 
Postel, G., 38. 


Rage, L., xxvi. 

Rahmani, Mgr, 94. 

Ramsay, Sir W. M., 272. 

Rendel Harris, J., 504. 

Resch, A., 33. 

Revillout, E., 94, 147, 181, 200. 
Roberts, C. H., 571. 

Robinson, Forbes, 84, 87, 147, 195. 
Robinson, J. A., 90. 

Rustafjaell, 181. 


Saunders, H. A., 571. 

Schade, O., 82. 

Schmidt, C., 66, 94, 271, 485, 569, 570. 
Schmidtke, We Ge 

Sike, H., 80, 89. 

Sixtus Senensis, 564, 565 n. 

Skeat, T. C., 569. 

Suchier, H., 557. 

Swete, H. B., 29, 34. 

Seymour, St. J., 225 n., 505. 


Thilo, J. C., 187. 

Tischendorf, C., 39, 49, 66, 70, 94, 
118, 157, 161, 167, 216, 467, 504. 

Tisserant, E., 162. 


Vassiliev, A., xxvi, 187. 
Vetter, H., 226. 
Vogtlin, 82. 

Vouaux, L., 318, 336. 


Wilhelm, F., 555. 
Wilmart, Dom, 162, 507. 
Wright, W., 294, 219, 364, 439, 469. 


Zahn, Th., 8, 10, 13, 29, 298 n., 300, 
469, 479. 
Zoega, 147. 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 
I. PERSONS 


Abbanes, 365. 

Abbaton, 86, 183. 

Abdias, 465. 

Abel, 554. 

Abgarus, 153, 219, 471, 476. 
Abiathar, 74, 463. 

Abibas, 567. 

Abigea, 73, 216. 


Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, 455, 540, 


550. 
Abuthem, 113. (554. 
Adam, 126, 187, 169, 173, 184, 455, 
Addai, see Thaddaeus. 
Addas, 107, 119. 
Adonai, 122, 522. 
Aegeates (Hgeas), 848. 
Aeglippus, 466. 
Aeneas, 95, 115. 
Affrodosius, 75. 
Aggaeus, 107. 


Agrippa, 99, 326, 332. 

Agrippina, 332. 

Agrippinus, 318. 

Akrosina, 150, 

Albanus, 160. 

Albinus, 332. 

Albius, 193. 

Aleman, 348. 

Alexander, 96, 97, 116, 567. 
Syriarch, 278. 
and Rufus, 194, 458. 

Aline (?), 284. 

Alphaeus, 93. 

Amael, demon, 456. 

Aminadab, 87. 

Amnes, 99. 

Amphion, Apphia, 285. 

Ananias, 95 ; of Bethlehem, 182; high 

priest, 440; others, 451, 471, 476. 
Anchares, see Panchares. 


I. PERSONS 


Andrew, 93, 170, 337, 453, 458, 471, 
472, 488. 

Andronicus, 234, (239), 242, 264. 

Angels, lists of, 175, 522. 

Anna, 39, 78, 209, 221. 

Annas (and Caiaphas), 96, 121; 
death, 157. [76, 82. 

Annas the scribe, 44; son of, 50, 55, 

Anthimus, 344. 

Antiphanes, 347. 

Antonius, 99. 

Antulus, 318. 

Aphphia, 285. 

Apollo, 284, 439. 

Apollonius, 473. 

Apollophanes, 289. 

Apostles, lists of, 9, 184, 203, 217, 
365, 486. 

Aravistus, 474. 

Arcadius, 557. 

Archelaus, 154, 157, 159, 220, 440. 

Ares, 439. 

Arfaxat, see Zaroés. 

Aritaeus, 306. 

Aristarchus, 444. 

Aristippus, 242. 

Aristobula, 242. 

Aristodemus, 229, 232, 262. 

Ariston, 309. 

Artemela, 444, 446. 

Artemilla, 292, 572. 

Artemis, 236, 439. 

Artemon, 576. 

Asclepius, 96. 

Asia, 84. 

Asmodaeus, 461. 

Astaroth, 468. 

Asterius, 99. 

Astriges, 468. 

Atticus, 258. 

Azael, 522. 


Balbus, 306. 

Barabbas, 5, 103. 

Barakiel, 522. 

Baramus, 472. 

Barjesus, 83. 

Barnabas, 301. 

Barsabas Justus, 294. 

Bartholomew, 81, 149, 167, 184, 204, 
446, 457, 471. 

Baruch, 566. 


585 


Basilla = Veronica, 158. 
Beelzebub, 96. 

Beliar, 168, 183, 456. 
Beor, 467. 

Berenice, Bernice, 102, 183, 306. 
Berith, 468. 

Birrus, 197. 

Braudyn, 69. 

Bucolus, 239. 
Bulphamnus, 462. 
Bulphandrus, 462. 


Caiaphas (Joseph, 80, 96), 96, 121; 
death, 157. 

Cain, 183. 

Candida, 304. 

Calletha, 220. 

Callimachus, 246. 

Callisto, 346. 

Callistus, 339. 

Candacis, 466. 

Carius, 148. 

Castelius, 275. 

Castor, 332. 

Cato, 474. 

Cephas, 486. 

Cerinthus, 485, 487. 

Cestus, 295. 

Charinus, 284. 

Charisius, 402. 

Charitine, 442. 

Cherubim, 163, 173. 

Chrysa, 284. 

Chryse, 330. 

Chrysippus, 285. [146. 

Claudius, a Roman, 577; emperor, 

Cleanthes, 286. 

Clement, 471. 

Cleobius, 229, 232, 242, 288, 293, 
306, 576. 

Cleon, 284. 

Cleopatra, 229. 

Cleophas, 79, 81, 87. 

Cratinus, 338. 

Craton, 257, 465. 

Crispus, 99. 

Cynegius, 526. 


Damonicus, 229, 232. 
Daphnus, 289. 
Darius, 483. 
Dathaés, 96. 


586 


David: in Hades, 130, 133; in Para- 
dise, 541. 

Demas ( = Dysmas), 161. 

Demas and Hermogenes, 272, 275. 

Demetrius, 338. 

Dion, 282. 

Dionysius, xxv, 306, 483. 

Diophantus, 572. 

Dioscorus, 471. 

Domitian, 228. 

Doris, 332. 

Dothaim, 96. 

Drusiana, 242. 

Dumachus, 81. 

Dysmas (Demas), 103-4, 116, 161. 


Egeas = Aegeates. 

Egias, 119. 

Eleazar, 83. 

Eli, 564. 

Elias (and Eliseus, 108, 553); 111, 
191; and Enoch, 86, 140, 512, 
536; and Moses, 519. 

Elides, 442. 

Eliseus, Elisha, 291. 

Elizabeth, 43, 48, 209, 221. 

Elaxi, 19. 

Enoch, 86, 140, 168, 190, 536, 554. 

Ephigenia, 467. 

Epiphanius, 575. 

Erba, 460. 

Esdras, 145. 

Eubula, 292, 318, 572. 

Eubulus, 289. 

Euclia, 350. 

EKugenius (and Atticus), 258. 

Euphemia, 332. 

Euphenissa, 467. 

Euphranor, 467. 

Euphrosinus, 465. 

Eutychus, 288-9. 

Evodius, 194. 

Exoos, 340. 

Ezekiel, 452, 551. 

Ezrael, 515-17. 


Falconilla, 278. 
Festus, 294. 
Firmilla, 287. 
Fola, 564. 
Fortunatus, 246. 
Frontina, 287. 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 


Gad, 3738. 

Gaius Caesar, 483. 

Gamaliel, 83, 96, 121, 151, 220, 566. 
Gaspar, 83. 

Gemellus, 332. 

Gestas, 103-4, 161. 

Gundaphorus, 365, 371. 


Habakkuk, 129, 452. 
Heliseus = Elisha. 

Heloi, 122. 

Hermes, 439. 

Hermias, 280. 
Hermippus, 282. 
Hermocrates, 281. 
Hermogenes, 272, 275, 463. 
Herod, 148, 183, 460, 539. 
Herodias, 155. 
Hierocrates, 184. 
Hieronymus, 292, 571. 
Hiram, 84. 

Honorius, 557. 

Hyrtacus, 467. 


Iphidamia, 348. 

Iphitus, 306. 

Treiis, 443. 

Irmeél, 149. 

Isaac, 99, 113. 

Isachar. 79. 

Isaiah, 124, 129, 133, 452, 551. 
Israel (dyer), 83. 

Italicus, 318. 

Tuzanes, 425. 


Jacob, 99. 

Jairus, 96, 113. 

James, 3, 49, 65, 79, 82, 84, 204, 462. 

Jannes and Jambres, 101, 178, 465. 

Jebusaeans, 455. 

Jephonias, 208, (214), 221. 

Jeremiah, 130, 523, 551. 

Joachim, 39, 73, 79. 

Joanna, 183, 194. 

Job, 552. 

Jobel = Jubilee, 113. 

John Baptist, 48 ; in Hades, 125, 129, 
191; in Paradise, 555. 

John Evangelist, 164, 187, 201, 228, 
343, 446. 

Jonas, 291. 


I. PERSONS 


Joseph of Arimathaea, 105, 148, 
161, 216. 

Joseph = Caiaphas. 

Joseph the Carpenter, 42, 46, 50, 
52, 66, 84; others, 69, 78, 79. 

Joseph the Patriarch, 225. 

Josephus, 161, 177. 

Josetos, 84, 85. 

Joshua, 452. 

Josias, 464. 

Judas not Iscariot, 27. 

Judas Iscariot, 37, 82, 116, 148, 
149, 162, 183, 472. 

Judas = Thomas (q. v.). 
others, 79, 84, 96, 99, 116. 

Judith, 39. 

Julius, forum of, 320. 


Karinus, 119. 


Labdanes, 204. 

Lazarus, xxvi, 83, 99, 126, 131; and 
Dives, 259. 

Lectra, 272. 

Lentulus, 477. 

Lesbius, 345. 

Lesbonax, 156. 

Leucius, xx, 71, 119, 210, 442. 

Levi, 29, 77, 93, 111, 113, 116. 

Lia, 183. 

Licianus, 154. 

Lix, 286. 

Longinus, 113, 155, 287. 

Longus, 295. 

Lot, 552. 

Lucilius, 480. 

Luke, 293, 296. 

Lycomedes, 229, 242. 

Lydia, 84. 

Lysia, 84. 

Lysias, 463. 

Lysimachus, 306, 340. 


Magi, 47, 83. 
Malachias, 84. 
Mammon, 259. 
Mansemat, demon, 440. 
Marcellus, 229, 311, 470. 


Maries, list of, 183. 
Mark, 204, 554. 


587 


Mars, 469. 

Martha, 35, 488. 

Martinian, 470. 

Mary the Virgin, 38, &c., 170, 194; in 
Paradise, 222, 550, 563, et passim. 

Mary Cleophae, 79, 87. 

wie Magdalene, 36, 87, 93, 117, 

488. 


Matthew, 204, 460, 466. 

Matthias (= Zacchaeus, 13), 150, 
185, 458, 458. 

Maximianus, 217. 

Maximilla, 348. 

Medias, 341. 

Melkir, demon, 183. 

Melkon (Melchior), 83. 

Menelaus, 469. 

Michael, 178, 225, 474, 547 et passim. 

Micheas, 84, 140. 

Misdaeus, 393, 404, 405, &c., 419. 

Mnesara, 482. 

Moses (and Elias, 619), 225, 551. 

Mygdonia, 402. 

Myrte, 293, 576. 


Narcia, 417. 

Narcissus, 306, 310, 321. 

Nathan, 159; prophet, 566. 

Nathanael, Ap., 486; angel, 175. 

Nepthalim, 96, 116. 

Nereus, 445; and Achilleus, 471. 

Nerkela, 444, 446. 

Nero, 294, 336, 470, 482. 

Nerva, 229. 

Neshra, 220. 

Nicanora, 448. 

Nicaria, 332. 

Nicocleides, 442. 

Nicodemus, 96, 101, 121, 148, 217, 
220, 567; Roman toparch, ii5. 

Nicolaus, 341, 347. 

Nicostratus, 327, 331. 

Noah, 553 

Nympha, 282. 


Onesimus, 444. 
Onesiphorus, 272, 459. 
Orba, 462. 

Ouazanes (Iuzanes), 425 


Panchares, 271. 
Parchor, 19. 


588 


Parthenius, 295. 

Patriarchs, the Twelve, 455, 550. 

Patroclus, 294. 

Paul, 20, 150, 204, 212, 224, 270, 
800, 472, 490, 526, 566. 

Peter, 93, 173, 195, 199, 300, 458, 
510 et passim. 

Petronilla, 471. 

Petronius, 92. 

Pheres, 295. 

Phila, 271. 

Philemon, 471, 473. 

Philetus, 463. 

Philip, Ap., 32, 489, 459, 469; 
Herod’s brother, 147, 154, 

Philogenes, 183. 

Philomedes, 341. 

Philopator, 346. 

Philostrate, 306. 

Phineés, 99, 107, 119. 

Phulbanus, Phulbana, 460. 

Pilate, 90, 96, 565. 

Plato, 460. 

Plautilla, 470. 

Plegenes, 444. 

Polycarp, 239. 

Polymius, 468. 

Pompeius, 320. 

Processus and Martinian, 470. 

Procla, Pilate’s wife, 155. 

Prophets, list of, 523, 539. 

Ptolemaeus, 301. 


Quartus, 304. 


Raab (Rachaab), 116, 156. 
Ramiel, 522. 

Raphael, 175, 489; and see Angels. 
Rebecca, 73. 

Ruben, priest, 39, 73, 217. 

Rufina, 304. 

Rufus and Rubellio, 96. 


Sabinus, 219. 

Salem (dyer), 82. 

Sallust, 480. 

Salome, 11, 46, 74, 85, 88, 116, 183, 
194, 196. 

Salpsan, demon, 178. 

Samiel, 522. 

Samuel, 43, 99. 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 


Sarra, daughter of Caiaphas, 162; at 
sepulchre, 488. 

Satan and Hell dispute, 125, 168 ; 
his progress, 188. 

Satanael, 175. 

Schila, 86. 

Seleucus = Leucius, 72. 

Seneca, 480. 

Sennes, 466. 

Sephora, 73, 216. 

Seth, 83, 126-8. 

Sibylla, 86. 

Simeon (Symeon), 111, 120, 183. 

Simmias, 272. 

Simon Peter, 32, see Peter. 

Simon Zelotes, 82. 

Simon and Jude, 464. 

Simon of Clopas, 448. 

Simon (Magus), 288, 306, 470, 485, 
487. 

Simon, 79, 84. 

Siophanes, 185. 

Siphor (393), 428. 

Solgia, 443. 

Solomon, 224, 

Sommos, 113. 

Somne, 96. 

Sophia, 462. 

Sosias, 348. 

Sostratus, 346. 

Stachys, 448. 

Stacteus, 261. 

Stephanus, 289. 

Stephen, 565. 

Stratocles, 348. 

Stratonice, 289. 

Susanna, 73, 488. 

Symeon, 111, 120. 

Synesis, 462. 

Syrus, 116. 


Tabitha, 86, 220. 

Tartaruchus, 507, 534, 543. 

Temeluchus, 507, 534, 543, 645, 
564. 

Tertia, 423. 

Tertullus, 242. 

Thaddaeus, 471. 

Thamyris, 274. 

Thecla, 274. 

Theocleia, 274. 

Theocritus, 463. 


J. PERSONS 


Theodosius, 95, 326. 

Theon, 308. 

Theonoé, 289. 

Theophilus, 148, 289. 

Thomas, Ap., 26, 37, 148, 185, 204, 
217, 865, 468, 488, 556. 

Thomas the Israelite, 14 n., 49, 55, 
61, 65; others, 158. 

Thrasymachus, 284. 

Threptus, 288, 289. 

Tiberius, 96, 148, 153, 
158, 219. 

Timotheus, 307, 554. 

Titus, 272, 293, 296 ; emperor, 159 ; 
good thief, 81. 

Trajan, 448. 

Trophima, 345. 

Tryphaena, 272, 278. 


156, 157, 


Uriel, 175, 489, 512, 522. 
Urion, 294. 


Valentinian, 95. 
Varardach, 464. 
Varus, 346. 
Veronica, 102, 157. 
Verus, 234, 266, 268. 


Vespasian, 159. 
Virinus, 342. 

Volusian, Velosian, 151 
Vualdath, 468. 


Xanthippe, 332. 
Xanthippus, 395. 
Xanthus, 204. 
Xenophon, 242, 395. 
Xerxes, 464. 


Yophana = Jephonias. 


Zacchaeus (= 
60, 76, 82. 

Zacharias, 19, 42, 43, 48, 554. 

Zael, 73, 216. 

Zaroés and Arfaxat, 178, 464, 466. 

Zebeus, 465. 

Zelomi, 74. 

Zenas, 99. 

Zeno, 52, 57, 62, 77, 82; of Corinth, 
289; another, 272. 

Zeus, 439. 

Zeuxis, 265. 

Ziphagia, 462, 


Matthias, 13), 50, 56, 


II, PLACES 


Achaia, 345. 
Acherusian Lake, see Index of Sub- 


jects. 
Alexandria, 204. 
Amalech, Mt., 121. 
Amasea, 338. 
Amente, 85, 182, 195, 472. 
Ameria, 159. 
Andrapolis, 366. 
Antioch, 272, 277. 
Aquitaine, 159. 
Aricia, 332. 
Arimathaea, 109, 121, 148. 
Athens, 299, 439. 
Azotus, 442. 


Babylon, 442, 465. 

Babel, 451. 

Beroea = Aleppo, 4. 

Bethlehem, 43, "81, 838, 182, 201, 
220. 


Bithynians, 307. 
Bordeaux, 159. 
Byzantium, 339, 


Caesarea, 4, 308. 
Cana, 147. 

Candaci, 442. 
Capernaum, 59, 74, 79. 
Carthage, 450. 
Chanaan, 558. 

Cilicia, 496. 

Corinth, 288, 346, 575. 
Crete, 157. 

Cyprus, 470. 

Cyrene, 286. 


Dalmatia, 293. 
Damascus, 496. 
Daphne, 277. 


590 


Edessa, 219, 471, 476. 

Egypt, 58, 80, 83, 411. 

Ellaeans, 411. 

Elysium, 518, 524. 

Ephesus, 203, 204, 211, 216, 219, 220. 
228-38, 242, 258, 292, 469, 571. 

Ethiopia, 466, 565. 


Galatia, 293. 
Gazzak, 411. 
Gennesaret, 252. 
Gilaeans, 411. 


Hadria, the Adriatic, 308 
Hellespont, 339. 
Hermopolis, 75. 
Hierapolis, 448, 469. 
Hyrcania, Warkan, 414. 


Iconium, 272. 

India, 203, 204, 218, 865, 468. 

Jehoshaphat, Josaphat, field or 
valley of, 196 

Jericho, 78, 161. 

Jerusalem, passim. 

Jesitites, 566. 

Jordan, 9, 74, 78, 119, 450, 570. 

Judaea, passim. 


Kapartasala, 568. 
Kapogemala, 567. 
Kushan, Kosani, 411. 


Labyrinthus (Sarbug), 413. 
Lacedaemon, 347. 
Laodicea, 242, 478. 

Libia, 159. 

Lydia, 448. 


Macedonia, 307, 339, 574. 
Magdalia, 87. 

Maishan, Mosani, 412. 
Mamilch (Mambre), Mt., 107. 
Matarieh, 81. 

Mauretania, 565. 

Mauria (Mambre) Mt., 172. 
Megara, 347. 

Mermidona, 337. 
Mesopotamia, 437. 
Miletus, 229. 

Myra, 280, 281. 


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES 


Naddaver, 466. 

Nazareth, 55, 59, 77, 84, 85. 
Neapolis, 318, 

Nicaea, 339. 

Nicatera, 443. 

Nicomedia, 339. 

Nile, 225. 


Olives, Mt. of, 84, 173, 184, 185, 
198, 218, 222, 511, 563. 

Ophiani, 446. 

Ophioryme, 448. 


Pamphylia, 284. 
Parthia, 442. 
Patmos, 229. 
Patrae, 345. 
Pella, 161. 
Peraea, 566. 
Perga, 284. 
Pergamum, 258. 
Perinthus, 339. 
Persia, 464. 
Philippi, 288, 289, 340, 575. 
Pisidia, 284. 
Puteoli, 309. 


Rhossus, 13. 
Rome, 154, 157, 158, 160, 203, 298, 
298, 804, 474, 480, 577. 


Samaria, 451. 
Sarbug, 412. 
Scythia, 469, 471. 
Seleucia, 281. 
Serasima, 567. 
Sidon, 284. 
Sinope, 338. 
Sion, Mt., 217. 
Smyrna, 239. 
Sodom and Gomorrha, 284, 
Sotinen, 75. 
Spain, 304. 
Suanir, 465. 
Syria, 286, 496. 


Tarsus, 525, 526. 
Tartarus, 174, 546. 
Terracina, 332. 
Thabor, Mt., 2, 
Thebes, 204. 


II. 


Thessalonica, 340. 
Thrace, 339. 
Tiber, 306. 
Tiberia, 203, 204, 
Tiberias, lake, 9. 


INDEX OF 


Acherusian Lake, 185, 518, 524, 
537-8. 

Agape, 490. 

Alleluia, 461; interpreted, 541. 

Angelology, 175. 

Angels adore God at sunset, 528; 
report deeds of men, 528; meet 
souls at death, 531. 

Angels of punishment, 529. 

Animals : 
men changed into, 68, 81. 
miracles with, 75, 451, 452, &c. 
speaking, 298, 313, 383, 398, 446, 

452, 473. 

Apocrypha : 
the word, xiii. 
lists of, 22. 

Apostles : 
at death of Virgin, 194. 
call of, 9. 
dispersion, 365. 

Archangel baptized, 474. 

Architect, 372. 

Ascension of our Lord, 503, 519. 

Assumption cf the Virgin, 194. 

Ass: 
form of Jewish god, 19. 
speaking, 383. 
wild asses, 396 


Baptism: [572. 
described, 375, 388, 418, 423, 474, 
of our Lord, 5, 6, 9, 191. 
of the Fathers in Hades, 494. 

Beasts, fights with, 278, 292, 313,572. 

Beetle, speaking, 473. 

Bible, a great, 144. 
of Esdras, 145. 

Birds of Hell, 517. 

Bishop, priest, deacon, reader, 
punished, 543. 

Bugs, 242. 


PLACES 


591 


Tiberias, 566. 
Tyre, 284. 


Vienne, 158. 
Warkan, 414. 


SUBJECTS 


Camel and needle’s eye, 459. 
Cannibals, 453. 
Canon, Canonicity, xvii. 
Carpenter’s craft described, 366. 
Children, slayers and exposers of, 
punished, 391, 473, 506, 515, 545, 
564. 
Chronology of world’s history, 145. 
Church building, 446, 450, 466, 
467. 
Clay birds, miracle of, 49, 55, 76, 
82; 171. 
Commandments, ‘Ten, 
charm, 111. 
Creation : 
complaint against man, 527. 
silence of, at Nativity, 46. 
Cross : 
set up in Hell, 139. 
sign of, 123, 139, 339, 390, 496. 
the true cross, 221, &c. 
visions of, and explanation of, 92, 
254, 334, 344, 359, 450. 


used a4 


Death personified, 85, 182. 196. 
terrors of, 85, 269, 429, 450. 

Deaths of righteous and sinners, 
530 


Demoniacs, 81, 82, 285, 314, 338 sq. 
and see Devil. 

Descent into Hell, 117, 167, 183, 
4.94. 

Devil, described, 149, 174, 451, 468. 
creator, the world, 189. 
his fall, 178, 189. 
his progress through the universe, 


describes his functions, 177, 379. 
Devil : 

appears as soldier, 264, 461. 

as old man, 456. 

as serpent, 81, 82, 379. 


592 


Devils : 
as black men, 323, 345, 399. 
as dogs, 82, 339. 
haunt baths, 347, (385). 
stories of possession, 385, 393. 
Devils meet souls, 532. 
Docetae, 14. 
Docetic account of our Lord, 251. 
Dog speaks, 298, 313, 473. 
Dog-headed man, 471. 
Dolphin, 452. 
Domine quo vadis ? 297, 333. 
Dropsy cured, 281. 
Dyer, miracle of, 67, 83. 


Ebionites, 8, 469. 

Elysium, 518, 524. 

Eucharist described, 185, 259, 268, 
293, 304, 376, 388, 418, 422, 433, 
461, 490. 


Fall, the, 173, 178, 189. 

Fifteen Signs, 562. 

Fire, destroys the world, 295, 518, 
522; see River. 

Firmament, evil spirits in, 529. 

Fish, dried, revived, 58, 316; on 
dry land, 474. 

Forgeries, modern, 89. 

Free will discussed, 499. 

Fruits of Paradise, 37, 537. 


Gardener’s daughter, the, 303. 

Gospel, read, 321; worn as charm, 
345, 347. 

Greeks, religion of, described, 16. 


Harrowing of Hell, see Descent. 

Heaven (Paradise), description of, 
508, 518, 524, 535, 549. 

‘Hebrew’ formulae, 97, 171, 183, 
184, 441, 448, 449, 461, 541. 

Hell, description of, 173, 176, 183, 
192, 890, 472, 508, 514, 523, 542, 
563, 564; repose granted in, 548, 
563. 


Heresies, described, 288, 464, 489. 
Holy Spirit : 
“my mother the Holy Spirit’, 2. 
invocation of, 376, 


INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


Hymn: 
bridal, of Thomas, 367. 
of our Lord at the Last Supper, 
253. 
of the Soul, 411. 


Idols and Idolaters, their punish- 
ment, 516. 

Indian legends, 14 n. 

Infant speaks, 298, 317, 465. 

Innocents, the, 460, 539. 


James the brother of the Lord, 
Jesus appears to, 3. 
Jerusalem, New (city of Christ), 538. 
Jesus Christ (Infancy and Passion 
Gospels not included) : 
appears in various forms, 251, 
308, 321, 369, 455, 461, 474. 
Ascension, 503, 519; description 
of, 477. 
Baptism, 5, 6, 9, 191. 
dialogue with Apostles, 225, 489. 
dialogue with Pharisee, 29. 
dialogue with Salome, 10. 
docetic account of, 251. 
heals withered hand, 2. 
himself makes the annunciation, 
489. 
incident of Rich Man, 6. 
incident of the schoolmaster, 13, 
486, and see Schoolmaster. 
made like angels, 489. 
ministry, incidents of, 147, 454. 
portrait of, 158, 
resurrection, 33; 
after, 3, 488. 
Second Coming, see Last Judge- 
ment. 
the miracles, 487. 
the parables, see Parables. 
Transfiguration, 252, 321, 519, 520. 
Jewels broken and mended, 257. 
Jews, their religion, 17. 


appearances 


Kid, speaking, 447. 


Land of Promise, 536. 

Last Judgement, 191, 511, 522, 561, 
565; date of, 490, 508, 555; 
signs of, 497 558, 560. 


INDEX OF 


Leopard speaking, 446. 

Leper healed, 571. 

Leucius and the Leucian Acts, xx, 
95, 300. 

Lion, baptized by Paul, meets him 
at Ephesus, 291, 572. 

Lions and leopards tamed, 75. 

Liturgical details, 461. 


Magic illusions, 307, 331, 470. 

Magicians, 463, 464, 465; in Hell, 
517, 523. 

Manichaeans, xx, 15, 20, 228, 303, 
464. 

Marcionites, 21. 

Marcosians, 15. 

Marriage, 181; discouraged or for- 
bidden, 266, (269), (273), 340, 349, 
351, 369, 404, 419. 

Mastic, 336. 

Meek, land of the, 536. 

Michael, intercedes for the lost, 547. 

Milk flows instead of blood, 296. 

Mines, condemnation to, 287. 


Naasgsenes, 15. 
Nazarenes, 1. 


Ocean river, 536. 
Ogdoad, 253, 491. 
Oil: 
consecrated, 433. 
of mercy, 126, 
Ointment, 366. 
Omen, 405. 
Ox speaking, 452. 


Painter, 234. 
Palm, 75, 210. 
Parables: 
a number alluded to, 322, 428. 
Dives and Lazarus, 259. 
Fig tree, 371. 
Talents, 3. 
Ten Virgins, 501. 
Unjust Steward, 188. 
Paradise, see Heaven. 
Parricide, 239, 338. 
Partridge: 
and John, 241. 
as food, 405. 
Passover = Easter, 489. 


SUBJECTS 593 


Patriarchs, 21 ; in Paradise, 540, 550. 

Paul, personal appearance, 273; 
conversion and career predicted, 
496. 

Pearl, the one, 411. 

Pentecost, repose of the lost, 563. 

Peter, imprisonment predicted, 489. 

Phalangia (venomous spider), 263. 

Philosophers, 342, 439. 

Poison, 228, 262. 

Portrait of Christ, 158 (477); of 
John, 233; (of Paul, 273). 

Priscillianists, 21, 253. 

Prophecies quoted, 325, 445, 463, 
492, 496. 

Proud, punished in Paradise, 538. 

Psalms, singing of, 541. 

Purification of a house, 320. 


Resurrection of Christ and appear- 
ances, 3, 33, 488. 

Resurrection of the flesh, 290, 484, 
512, 522, 561. 

Rich man, incident of, 6. 

River of fire, 85, 195, 199, 514, 522; 
in Hell, 542. 

Rivers of Paradise, 179, 587, 549. 

Rome, burning of, 483. 


Sale of slave, 365. 
Satan, see Devil. 
Satyr of gold, 318. 
Scarab, speaking, 473. 
Schoolmaster and Jesus, 15, 50, 56, 
60, 64, 77, 78, 486. 
Serpents: 
monstrous, 245, 343, 379, 447, 466, 
469. 
venomous, 54, 65, 79, 82, 343, 447, 
465. 
Serpent, origin of, 449. 
Seven Days, the last, 558, 560. 
Silence of creation at the Nativity, 46. 
Sinners, righteous intercede for, 500, 
521. 
Sins, relative gravity of, 180; re- 
corded by angels, 534. 
Slaves freed, 329, 445; sale of, 365. 
Soul, hymn of the, 411. 
Soul, trial of before God, 534. 
Sphinx, 454, 
Statue, miracles, 313, 315, 457, 466. 


594 INDEX OF SUBJECTS 


Suicide, 265, 363. Tunic, the seamless, 158. 
Sunday, day of rest in Hell, 548; its | Unjust steward, 188. 
excellence, 206. Usury, punishment, 510, 516, 544. 


Supersubstantial bread, 4. 


Talents, parable of, 3. Wasps in Vespasian’s nose, 160. 


Water of conviction (of jealousy), 45. 
ee ae a Wedding feast described, 366. 
veil rent, 91, 169, 195. Li oie ees. 
Temples destroyed, 237, 284. Wild 2 386 ? : 
heathen temples, 454, 466, 469. SEIS Cheb 


Ten Virgins, parable of, 501. 
Tigers, 465. Zodiac, signs of, 21 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, OXFORD 
BY VIVIAN RIDLER 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY 


ee 


a 


* 


- mu , iA 
_ iene 4 vay & 


ae 


oe 


i Pah 
GK oat Re 


