Il 


| 


| 
| 


0 
N 
ice) 
om 
ΙΩ 
0 
© 
4 
© 
TT 
fe) 
™ 
f= 
00 


ااا 





Univ. 6! 
ΠῚ ΠΝ 

















ee tee 


> - 























AROCRYPHA ARABICA 


Hondon: C. J. CLAY anv SONS, 
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, 


AVE MARIA LANE. 
Glasgow: so, WELLINGTON STREET. 











Leipsig: F. A. BROCKHAUS. 
few Work: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY. 
Bombay: E. SEYMOUR HALE. 





Pirate. 1 





leo! Cis 


507 fi 958 
frontispiece 


STUDIA SINAITICA No. VIII 





APOCRYPHA ARABICA 


t KITAB AL MAGALIL, OR THE BOOK OF 
THE ROLLS 


2. THE STORY OF APHIKIA 
3. CYPRIAN AND JUSTA, IN ARABIC 


4. CYPRIAN AND JUSTA, IN GREEK 


EDITED AND TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH 


BY 


MARGARET DUNLOP GIBSON ML.R.AS. 
LL.D. (St ANDREws) 


LONDON 
C. J. CLAY AND SONS 
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE 
AVE MARIA LANE 


1901 


[AW Rights reserved] 


Cambridge: 
PRINTED BY J. AND ©. F. CLAY, 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS. 


CON TEN ES. 


| : : 1 , : : كناب المجال 
oA‏ : : : : ححذ τώ....5..«‏ 
ἱ : .‏ : : ; قصة افيقيا 
oe‏ ᾿ شبادة كبريانوس ويوستينة 
لد 0 1 1 : : 1 : INTRODUCTION‏ 
NOTES : : ; : : : ᾿ XV‏ 
x‏ : كناب THE CAMBRIDGE MS. OF THE Jem!‏ 
TRANSLATIONS :‏ 
The Book of the Rolls. I‏ 
The Story of Aphikia : ; : : : 000‏ 
Κυπριανὸς καὶ ᾿Ιουστίνα ὁ. : : 1 ὶ ᾿ OA‏ 
CORRIGENDA ; : Ὁ‏ 
PLATES‏ 
Frontispiece‏ . : : : ; : : : 1 
ἘΠ" : 1 : : . between pp. ὃ Ἵ and ὃν‏ 
IV. to face p. Ne‏ 


V. : : : : : 1 to face 2. 2 


Vill 


of the passages, the Sinai MS. will be 


INTRODUCTION. 


advantage. 
51141 

Pot kot bo 
22 الحيوانى‎ 
2522-6 ؤرونيقون‎ - 
15 منبوبة‎ 
2 المسبدة‎ 
20 AS) pom’ 

شطن 23 
الشامخة 5001 
وهو 15 
البماهرم 18 

نبعة 19 

A, Nig ris 
8 بالتشمسة‎ 
12 us! النعية‎ 

13 Ley) gee 

ساطعة 21 
تشوف 23 
فيلتقفها ee‏ 
فى ساعة 2 
بمتابعتها 6 
مذاقنها 7 

7, 8 رغبها‎ bond 

فاعطيته 10 
وجوازه Fe,‏ 
هذا العالم 213 مدل 
ما كان اعلنه الى 4,5 رما 
محك 16 

ماية واثنا عشر 22083 
مرضه LSM)‏ 23 

ΕἸ, 1: doa! درل‎ oy! 


δ“.‏ كل 


Γ᾿ 


Eo; 


ΓΝ, 


ΓΉ; 
ΕἼ; 
ae 
Γ ὃ, 


ἕν, 


considered to have the 


BEZOLD 
3 ,يحضن‎ V. يحك‎ 
4 الحيوان‎ 
11 ,داروبيطون‎ P. دروبيقون‎ 
5 منبويه‎ 
13 ἄθεον 
7 بالجراوه‎ 
9 اسطاه‎ 
3 الشاهقه‎ 
6 وهى‎ 
6 ak} 
7 ,بيعة‎ Ῥ. ضيعة‎ 
11 ببيعتك‎ 
6 بالتشميسه‎ 
ΤΣ .459}...5.} 
13 Loom 
شاطعة‎ 
6 تشوق‎ 
8 فيلقها‎ sec 
9 فى سرعة‎ 
13 بما بغتها‎ 
1 مداقها‎ 
2 فمارعها‎ 
5 فاعطته‎ 
13 وجواره‎ 
8,9 هذه العالم‎ 
10 ما كان على آل‎ 
8 محل‎ 
I ΤΙ 
I, 2 cs} Bnd pod 
Cod. (od) 
4 dol لا ينزل‎ 


Cod. lust JS لان‎ 


INTRODUCTION. ix 


Sinai MS. BEZOLD 

ΠΥ. 2 ἐμῶν. 0. 3 وخمسون‎ 
2I And pro 4 مرضمه‎ 

Dey ὦ التسمسه 12 التشمسة‎ 
6 تشرين‎ 14 τυ ΟΝ 

ΓΚ, 36 ذراع‎ passim Vo es رباع‎ V. leh, Ρ. دراع‎ 
10 بباعك 6 بذراعه‎ 
wa. 6x8 تسع ماية‎ Vie 12 سبعمائه‎ 
050 تسع ماية‎ AV, 6 AS Le Raw 
PA, 2 وارسل‎ Pets Ὁ Ὁ ثم انيا ب‎ 
[2 المعموذيه 7 ءا المعموديه‎ 
ΞΡ 4 ,صلبوت‎ Cod. صلبوث 6 ,1-4 صبوت‎ 
سطرولوخيا ا اصطرولوجيا ست‎ 
Pe Ay Ὁ} الساعة‎ io 0 الشاعه‎ 
وار جليلة مر‎ eae الحليله‎ 
εἴς. ὴ التماسح‎ Sic Cry 9 المساحه‎ 
Sho ἃ كنف‎ | vv, 1 ثلثة واربعين‎ 
ἦν. 5 ابيسالوم‎ Ιλ ὃ» 8 PW عبد‎ 
Be, 10 لجنا‎ ν; 12 Oy | 
Sa الفلسفين‎ sic ety 5 الفلشتايين‎ 
200001 فاولدها ابنا‎ Pet ots Lol لبا‎ Nos 
δ. 13 gad dim يواقيم تزوج‎ PPV, 11,12 ويوياقيم... تزوج‎ 

بجانه ابنة فقود الى بيت العازر. 
ابن لاعازر 


Dr de Lagarde says of this treatise, in reviewing Prof. Bezold’s 
book (Mzttheilungen, Vol. 111. pp. 50—51), that it is important, even 
though it may be worthless in itself, because of the influence it has 
exercised. It is the source from which many authors have drawn; 
it runs in Syriac, Arabic and Ethiopic through the churches of Asia 
and Africa, and it serves as a leading line of ancient history, as well 
as of the philosophy of religion. 

Dr Noldeke thinks that the story dates from the sixth century, 
which Lagarde doubts. The latter relates that, according to Nicoll 
and Tischendorf, there is a letter from Jacques de Vitry, Bishop of 


St Jean d’Acre, dated A.D. 1219, to Pope Honorius III, telling him 
G. b 


x INTRODUCTION. 


that the Revelations of Peter to Clement will soon be put before him 
in one volume*. The Paris MSS. 77 and 78 say that the Apocalypse 
of Peter has been found at Nicosia, therefore de Lagarde thinks 
that the book has some connection with the history of the first 
crusades. The Cambridge MS. makes a similar statement. 

Duval ) 471616111165 Littératures Chrétiennes, pp. 9O—96) says that 
our tale belongs to the Look of /ubilees, said to have been composed 
by St Ephraim ; the author however cannot be Ephraim, but rather 
one of his disciples, as the work is not earlier than the sixth century. 

It is evidently written by a Christian, who has been hurt by 
the conduct of certain Jews in reviling the Mother of our Lord, 
and its object is to prove her descent from David, which these 
Jews were impudently calling in question. The proper names in the 
Sinai MS. have been much spoiled, probably by repeated copyings, 
but they are not difficult to identify with those in the books of 
Genesis, Judges, and Kings. It would be curious to know where the 
names of some of the ladies come from. Several of them are those 
given in Kings, but even these are not all correct. The names of 
towns are still more difficult to recognize. 

There is no date discoverable in our MS., No. 508 in my 
catalogue of the Arabic MSS. (Studia Sinaitica, No. 111.(, the same 
from which I have already edited the Anaphora Pilati and the 
Recognitions of Clement (Studza Sinattica, No. V.). The codex 
consists of 156 leaves, all paper, with the exception of five, which 
are vellum, measuring 20x 15 centimetres. The hand-writing, as 
may be seen from the frontispiece is very like that of Plate XX. 
of the Paleographic Society’s Facsimiles of Ancient MSS. Oriental 
Series Part II. the date of whose original is A.D. 885. I may there- 
fore claim that this Sinai MS. is at least older than the four Paris 
MSS. 76, 77, 78 and 79, of which No. 76 is dated A.D. 1336-7, and 
copied from a MS. of A.D, 1176-7 

We have so little original Christian Arabic literature of the period 
before or shortly after the Mohammedan conquests, that we ought to 
welcome any light on the ideas, or scriptural and historical know- 


* 1 have found this statement in a footnote to Tischendorf, Prolegomena to Apocalypses 
Apocryphae, page xx. Our story corresponds with the first part of the description which 


Tischendorf gives of the Apocalypse of Peter, from Nicoll’s Catalogue of the Bodleian 
Library, A.D. 1821. 


INTRODUCTION. ΧΙ 


ledge of these long-forgotten Arabs, whose lamp was so effectually 
extinguished, perhaps because it was burning smokily. We cannot 
avoid noticing that they had some heathen notions mingled with 
their Christian doctrine; notably the perpetual service before the 
body of Adam, and the idea of carrying it to the centre of the-earth 
(Jerusalem) is truly pagan, and yet the latter persists in the Holy 
City at the present day. The same may be said of the keeping of 
Adam’s body in the Ark by Noah, and one cannot help feeling that 
the accumulation of patriarchal bodies, as time went on, must have 
become somewhat embarrassing. See translation, page 22, line 33. 

I believe this treatise to be copied from an older MS. because 
of its obvious mistakes, such as εν for يغتام‎ , f. 130: نبرشافاط‎ 
for وارفحصام :2 133 1 ,يبوشاقاط‎ for ,وارفحصاد‎ f. 114 جانا :ط‎ for. 
Wyle, 1. 130 2: Sond! for ,السبى‎ f. 138 b; ستسان‎ for ὅν, f 132 5: 
اوقير‎ for ,أوفير‎ f. 132 b; يوشيمع‎ for يوشبع‎ , and دو راع‎ for #وداع‎ 1 
rely for ,يبواعدان‎ ἢ 1342: and الايواريين‎ for ,الاتواريين‎ f. 134 b. 
There is a possibility of its having been originally translated from the 
Greek, since we find such words as ذرونيقون‎ = δίπατον, f. 91 b; and 
اكرسطلس‎ = κρύσταλλος, 1. 93 a. 

The punctuation is carried on by means of the signs © and “, 
excepting on ff. 112 Ὁ and 113 a, where a simple period is used. All 
the lines on f. 131 b are stroked out, except two at the top, but the 
matter is repeated. f. 133 b is blank. 

I have made no further changes in orthography than I have done 
in former numbers of this series; viz. the alteration of final J to ες 
where the latter is now customary. 


APHIKIA. 


This tale is purely apocryphal, and its very plan is an ana- 
chronism. The utmost ingenuity cannot reconcile its discordance. 
Jesus ben Sira, the author of Ecclesiasticus, lived towards the end 
of the second century B.c. and his grandson translated his work 
in the days of Ptolemy Euergetes, King of Egypt; therefore he 
could not have been vizier to a monarch who preceded him by 
eight centuries. If he were a vizier at all, it must have been 
to one of the successors of Antiochus, and a legend true or 


ΧΙ INTRODUCTION. 


false, may have arisen about his wife, the name of Solomon being 
substituted at a later period for that of a Greek king. This 
would be all the more likely to happen as Jesus ben Sira wrote 
the book of Ecclesiasticus in conscious imitation of the literature 
ascribed to Solomon. If this legend has any foundation in fact, it 
would account for the extraordinary statement in Ecclus. xlii. 14, 
“ Better is the wickedness of a man than the goodness of a woman” 
(see the lately discovered Hebrew Text (ed. Cowley-Neubauer, 
Oxford, 1897), a reflection which he might well make during the 
two years of sulkiness here attributed to him. Another solution 
of the difficulty may be found in the possibility that Jesus ben 
Sira is confused with another. Dr Nestle, of Maulbronn, has 
found in the pre-Lutheran Bible, in the Prologue to Fcclesiasticus, 
after the words ὁ πάππος μου ᾿Ιησοῦς “Mein anherr Jesus ein sun 
josedech, der do einer ist von den tulmetzschungen der LXX, des 
enckeln ist gewest diser Jesus ein sun syrach, dornach als er sich 
mer gab zu dem fleiss der letzen [ Lection] der schrifft in dem gesetze 
und der propheten und ander biicher, die von unsern eltern und vor- 
farenden seint gegeben; dornach wolt er auch schreiben etwas.” 
These words must have been in the Latin MS. from which the 
translation was made. 

Isidore of Seville also confuses Jesus b. Sira with Jesus b. Josedek. 
Dr Nestle thinks the genealogy was thus: Josedek-Jesus-Sira-Jesus 
(see Zeitschrift fiir die alttest. Wissenschaft, 1897, Ὁ. 123 f.). 

The Karshuni text which I now publish is from a Paris paper 
MS. Fonds Syriaque 179, and of it alone I have given a translation. 
The Arabic text differs from it only slightly as regards the sense, 
but too much as regards the words to make a collation desirable. 
I have therefore printed them side by side. The Arabic is from 
another Paris MS. (Fonds Arabe 50) which is paper, probably of the 
beginning of the 16th century. This MS. contains a number of 
treatises which clearly prove that the heroine’s husband is really 
intended both to be the author of Ecclesiasticus, and to have lived 


in the time of Solomon, not another individual of the same name. 
I subjoin a list of these. 


I. L’Ecclésiastique. 
2. La Sagesse de Salomon. 
3. Une Introduction ἃ la Sagesse de Salomon. 


INTRODUCTION. ΧΙ 


Les Proverbes. 
L’Ecclésiaste. 
Le Cantique des Cantiques. 
7. L/’Histoire du roi Salomon et de la femme de Jésus fils de 
Sirach. 
L’ Eccléstastiqgue has a rubric which says 


Ὄπ ν 


كتاب يشوع بن سيراخ 

كاتب سليمان بن داوود 

ملك اسرايل باورشليم 

Moreover L’Lecléstaste has a rubric which says, 
خطاب جامع الحكيم ابن داود الملك‎ 

فى مدينة السلام فى هبا الاهبيه 


Since this book was printed, I have visited the Coptic Monasteries 
in the Nitrian desert. At Deir Abou Macar I saw an Arabic copy 
of the story of Aphikia, which I photographed, and on reading 
it at home, I find only slight verbal differences from that in the 
Paris MS. As the style is rather more diffuse, I suppose it to be 
later. A peculiarity of the scribe is his occasionally writing & for ض‎ 
as page 11, 1. 14 .م ,الظان‎ 1, 1. 20, and .م‎ Yo, 1. 10 .اعظايبا‎ On page 
11, 1. 20, it has leew Y for lea. 

At Deir es-Suriani I also saw a paper Arabic volume which con- 
tains the Proverbs and the Song of Solomon, the Wisdom of Jesus 
ben Sira, and the story of Aphikia. It does not look very ancient, 
but it is interesting to find these subjects together. 


CYPRIAN AND JUSTA. 


I have taken the story of Cyprian and Justa in Arabic from the 
Sinai MS. No. 445, a paper codex of the twelfth century. 

The Greek is taken from the MS. No. 497 in Gardthausen’s 
Catalogue, which belongs to the tenth or eleventh century. As my 
sister is giving a translation of this story from the Syriac of the 
upper script of the Palimpsest of the Four Gospels, in No. X. of the 
present series, I did not think it necessary to translate the Arabic 
here. Codex 497 is one of a series of ponderous vellum MSS. 
containing the lives of the Saints, in two columns of 37 lines; their 


XiV INTRODUCTION. 


measurements being 31 x 25 centimetres; the letters are hanging 
from the line. I found many blunders on the part of the scribe, 
especially itacisms; the 2016 subscriptum is never written, but I 
have supplied it where necessary. One of the most curious mistakes 
is ᾿Αστηρίου for ᾿Ασκητηρίου, f. 112 v, p. 71, 1. 19. As I first read 
this at Sinai, far from any reference library or anything with which to 
compare my text, I took it as correct, and it gave me considerable 
amusement to think that a Christian Bishop had power to alter 
human relationships. It was not till I read Zahn’s text afterwards 
that I found that Justina was not made the mother of a deacon, but 
of a religious community. It will be observed that the facsimile we 
give of f. 109 r shews the same peculiarity in the placing of accents 
on the first letter of diphthongs which a reviewer in the Guardian of 
August 22nd, 1900, considered to be a mistake in Professor Guidi’s 
transcript from the much older Codex Chisianus. 

The first part of the story of Cyprian and Justa has been 
exhaustively edited by Dr Zahn, with variants from the two Paris 
MSS. 1468 and 1454, as well as from Eudoxia and Symeon 
Metaphrastes, and two Latin recensions. I have therefore not 
thought it worth while to encumber my book with any collation 
of this portion, but the second portion, containing the Martyrdom, 
has not been thus treated, so far as I know, and I have therefore 
given a collation of it with the account given in the Acta Sanctorum. 
Whatever the origin of these legends may be, it is unquestionable 
that they have taken a powerful hold of the popular imagination, 
and served as fuel to the flame of the loftiest poetical inspiration. 
Cyprian the wizard has been transformed by Calderon into £/ 
Méagico Prodigioso, by Marlowe and Goethe into the immortal Fazst. 
Whether or not he had power while on earth to make demons do his 
bidding, he has contrived after death to summon men of genius for 
his honour. 

In conclusion, I have to thank Professor Seybold of Tiibingen, 
for kindly looking over my Arabic proof sheets, and for several 
valuable suggestions; my sister, Mrs Lewis, for much help of the 
same kind; Mr J. F. Stenning, M.A. of Wadham College, Oxford, 
for taking 24 photographs for me at Sinai, in 1894; and the printers 
and readers of the University Press for the patient and intelligent 
care they have bestowed upon the work. 


NOTES. 


). goa. Dr de Lagarde has pointed out in AMitthetlungen IV. p. 16 
that the names of Clement’s brothers ought really to be Constans and 
Constantinus. I regret that I did not observe this before my first sheet 
was printed, as the MS. has undoubtedly .قسطس وقسطينا‎ In the Cambridge 
MS. they are written .فسطس وقسطينا‎ 


f. 928, 2. 6,1. 5. Professor Seybold suggests بوالحشرات وهوام الزحاف‎ 
and as I have lost the photograph of this page, I have thought it best to 
adopt this suggestion in the translation. 


f.94b. The quotation from Moses may be a free paraphrase of Deut. 
x. 20: 


f.97b. Our author’s arithmetic is unfortunately weak. If he had said 
that Adam lived to the time that Mahlaleel was 535 years old, he would have 
been nearer the mark. But perhaps a “five” has dropped out. 


f. 98a. The centre of the earth. Those of us who have visited Jerusalem 
will remember the stone in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre which is 
pointed out as the centre of the earth, and where it is said, Adam’s skull was 
found. 


f. 1oob. After five days and a half (of my days) 7 will have pity on thee 
in my mercy. 

In the Acta Pilati, ch. 11. (Tischendorf, Evangelia Apocrypha, pp. 325, 
326, Seth is made to say καὶ μετὰ τὴν εὐχὴν ἐλθὼν ἄγγελος κυρίου λέγει pou τί 
Σὴθ αἰτεῖς ;...... ἄπιθι οὖν καὶ εἰπὲ τῷ πατρί σου ὅτι μετὰ τὸ συντελεσθῆναι ἀπὸ 
κτίσεως κόσμου ἔτη πεντακιςχίλια πεντακόσια, τότε κατέλθῃ ἐν τῇ γῇ ὃ μονογενὴς 
υἱὸς τοῦ θεοῦ ἐνανθρωπήσας. κοτ.λ. 

One day, we learn from 2 Peter iii. 8, is with the Lord as a thousand 
years, and a thousand years as one day. Our author makes the fifth thousand 
terminate (f. 138 a) in the second year of Cyrus the Persian. As Cyrus gained 
possession of the Persian throne between B.c. 549 and B.C. 546, the date 
fixed is at least 44 years too early. 


Xvi NOTES. 


f. 202 2. The author is of course wrong in saying that Adam was the 
first mortal who died on the earth. 

For بين اهل قايين‎ Bezold has ربين اهل شيث واهل قايين‎ which is 
much better (p. 221 


f. 104 Ὁ. Again the chronology is wrong. Methuselah must have reached 
the mature age of 453 years when Enos died. Cainan’s life lasted for 910, 
not 920 years. 


f. 106 3. Jared also has got ten years too many. 


f. 106 Ὁ. Still more hopelessly wrong. Methuselah would be 735 years 
of age when he lost his grandfather. One begins to suspect that our author, 
in working out the sum, thought of Seth instead of Jared. 


f. 108 3. Lamech was 782 years of age when Methuselah died, and this 
would be about the time of the flood. 


f. 112a, b. The first half of this quotation is from Psalm ]xxxil. 6, 7. It 
is not easy to say where the second half comes from. 


f. 113a. I must confess that I cannot tell what the author means by 
nations accepting Christian baptism at the end of 600 years of Noah’s life. 
One would have thought the whole earth was immersed at that period. 


f.114b. The quotation is from Psalm Ixxvill. 65. 


f. 115a. For ¢he centre of the earth, see note on f. 98a. 


f. 116 3, 2. Zhe father and mother of Melchizedek. The Fpistle to the 
Hebrews speaks of Melchizedek as being “without father, without mother.” 
One of the tablets found at Tell el Amarna has thrown a curious light on this 
expression. It is a letter from Ebed-Tob, the priest king of Uru-Salim to the 
King of Egypt (B.c. 1400), and in it he thrice affirms that he has not got the 
crown “from his father or his mother but from the Mighty King.” This 
looks as if the expression in Hebrews vii. 3 alludes to a conventional 
phrase connected with the office. 


f. 116a. Zhe centre of the earth, see note on f. 98 a. 


f. 116b. The falsehood here attributed to Shem receives no apology, 
and gives us some notion of the ideas of the age about the connection 
between religion and ethics. 


1. 117a. Shem was 100 years younger at the time of his death, and 
Arphaxad five years older at the birth of his son. Salah’s age should have 


NOTES. XVil 


been given as 433 not 430. Eber was 34 years old when he begat Peleg. 
These are errors which suggest mistakes in copying. 

It is otherwise with Eber’s 430 years, which ought to be 464, a mistake 
evidently due to miscalculation. 


f.117b. The preference given to Syriac is curious. Hebrew and Arabic 
have surely an equal right to confer a place at the Lord’s right hand on their 
votaries if the direction of the script can entitle them to do so. ‘The author 
deduces from the name of Peleg and from Genesis x. 25, that in his day the 
earth was divided between tribes. ‘The view that division of land by canals 
is referred to appears to me to be much more probable. 


f.118a. Reu’s life was 239 years, as f. 118 Ὁ says. 


f. 120a, b. It is interesting to see how the Arabs account for images 
being buried under mounds. 


f. 1228. Terah’s comparatively short life is here cut shorter by two years. 


f.123a. Moriah is at Jerusalem, but has no claim to be the spot where 
the Lord was crucified. The tendency to crowd all the Holy places under 
one roof and even to make them identical is very strong. 


f. 124. Melchizedek. See note on f. 116 3, b. 

I have no clue to the identity of Karmos or any of his cities. The Syriac 
MSS. give for قاران‎ — A443, _ 04943, and 145 ركذحهة‎ according to Professor 
Bezold, and the name of his sister as صلمد‎ and of his brother as a\ssax. 


f.125a. The Syriac calls Nimroda لصو ركم‎ = Tammuz. 
Five years too few are assigned to the life of Abraham. 


f. 125 b. ‘The addition to Gen. xxv. 23 is due to invention either of the 
author or of the scribe. 


f.126a. Our author really requires an apology for his feeble arithmetic. 
He has subtracted 60 from 130 and has made the result 77 ! 


f.127b. It 15 an amusing anachronism to speak of the children of Israel 
being prevented by a veil from looking on the beauty of Leah. We need not 
be too hard on the author, however, as even Sir Walter Scott trips on the 
other side of the stone, when in /vanfoe he makes Rebecca sing “ And Zion’s 
daughters poured their lays,” of maidens to whom Zion was as yet only in the 
promised land. 

Our author, too, gets tripped up by his metaphors. He does not seem 
sure which of the sisters was veiled. 


G. 2 


XVill NOTES. 


f, 128a. When he reached 120 years his father Isaac died. ‘The calcula- 
tion is correct this time, as is also the statement that Isaac was alive at 
the time of the sale of Joseph. I must apologize for some grammatical 
confusion of pronouns, this fault being in the Arabic, and the chronology of 
Jacob’s journey from Haran to Shechem is puzzling. 


f. 129 3. The priesthood was from Aminadab. Aaron’s wife was Elisheba, 
daughter of Aminadab, Exodus vi. 23, but our author is wrong in supposing, 
as he evidently does, that this gave the Virgin a priestly ancestry. Bezold’s 
MSS. both Syriac and Arabic, introduce a woman named Aminadab, daughter 
or sister of Nahson, who was wedded to Eleazar son of Aaron and was the 
mother of Phinehas. See Exodus vi. 25. 

Bezold has lw! = Asa for .سلمون‎ 


f. 129 b. I cannot find any trace of a son of Moses named Eleazar. 


ff. 130a,b. With the exception of Joshua’s 31 years, which are doubt- 
ful, the chronology of the Judges goes on with sufficient accuracy till 
it comes to the son of Puah, whose years should be 23, not 20, and why 
Jair a Gileadite should have been a woman is a mystery. Neither the other 
Arabic MSS. nor the Syriac give any support to this idea. The length of 
Jephthah’s rule is not mentioned, and Ibzan’s time ought to be 7 years instead 
of 6. The 12 years’ interregnum, and the 22 years of Samuel’s rule are 
conjectural. The same may be said of Saul’s 4o years, unless it is from a 
desire to make him equal to David and Solomon. 


f.131a. The Paris MS. says that Sabad was the place known as Mount 
Sinai. See Bezold, p. {νὴ note f. All the Arabic MSS. except this Sinai 
one, as well as the Syriac, make Solomon call a city which he built there 
Heliopolis. That Aradus was built by Solomon also requires confirmation. 


f.132a. It is amusing to find Nebuchadnezzar alive in the days of 
Hiram. There must have been three centuries between them, but there may 
have been several Phcenician kings of the name. 


f.132b. It is a mere assumption that Abijah was 20 years old at his 
accession. 


f.133a. This page is written in a different hand from the rest, and 
contains all that is stroked out in f. 131 b. 

Our author is wrong about Athaliah, who seems to have been the daughter 
of Ahab, and granddaughter of Omri, in every way worthy of her parentage. 
Ahaziah was 22 not 20, at his accession: 

Why the author has chosen to slip over the manner of Athaliah’s death it 
is hard to say. He had not the dramatic feeling of Racine or Metastasio. 


NOTES. ΧΙΧ 


[ 1348. This is an amusing conjecture about there being no record of 
Isaiah’s having reproved Uzziah. The length of Isaiah’s time of prophecy 
has led to the theory that there were two prophets of the name, yet our 
author thinks he should have begun earlier! He has got his inference from 
Isaiah vi. 1. 


f. 134b. Ahaz has to be provided with a mother, to make him equal to 
his predecessors. 


? 


f.135a. “Jerusalem” must be a mistake for “Samaria,” against which 
Shalmanezer came, II. Kings xviii. 9; and it was in Hezekiah’s 14th year, not 
his 26th, that Sennacherib came. 

The author is indebted to his imagination in his account of Hezekiah’s 
prayer. 

Hezekiah reigned for 29, not 26 years. 


f. 135 b. Amon’s maternal grandfather was Haruz, not Hasoun, and 
Amon reigned for two, not for 12 years, II. Kings xxi. 19. 

Josiah has had 60 years unaccountably added to his age at his accession. 
His mother’s name has got so far corrupted as to sound quite wrong, a 
process which is not difficult in Arabic, owing to the similarity of certain 
letters. 

A mistake of a year is noticeable both in the length of Josiah’s reign, and 
in Jehoahaz’ age at his accession. 


f. 136b. Daniel was no doubt of royal descent, but we have no Scriptural 
authority for his being a son of Jehoiakim. 
Hiram and Nebuchadnezzar. See note, f. 132 


f.138a. The fifth thousand from the beginning. See note on f. roo b. 


ff. 138b, 139 a. The names of the ladies are probably conjectural, and 
the same may be said (f. 1404, ,رط‎ f. 141 a, b) of most of the wives of the 
patriarchs. Bathsheba’s parentage is decidedly wrong. Naheer should be 
Michaiah II. Chron. xiii. 2, or Maachah I. Kings xv. 2. 


f.141a. ‘Tala‘ia daughter of Amon is no doubt Athaliah daughter of 
Omri, II. Kings viii. 26. After her the only accurate names are Jerousa 
daughter of Zadok, II. Kings xv. 33, Ahaz, ze. Abi daughter of Zachariah, 
II. Kings xviii. 2, Hephzibah, II. Kings xxi. 1, and Hamoutal daughter of 
Jeremiah, II. Kings xxii. 31. 


THE CAMBRIDGE MANUSCRIPT OF THE 
KITAB م‎ 1 


AFTER completing this work down to the last note, I learned from 
Professor Seybold that there is a copy of the Aztab al-Magall in 
the Cambridge University Library, and I therefore append a descrip- 
tion of it. It is numbered g15 in Mr E. G. Browne’s Hand-List of 
Muhammadan MSS. and its library number is 306. It is a codex of 
134 paper leaves, measuring 30 x 20 centimetres with 20 lines to the 
page, written in a fine bold hand. Ff. 1—6 and 132—134 have been 
lost, and are replaced by leaves written in a small and apparently 
modern hand, with 29 lines to the page. Mr Browne thinks these 
the work of a European, and he considers the original to be prob- 
ably of the 13th century. | 

It begins with the following Introduction: 


بسم الاب والابن cols‏ القدس اله oly‏ نبتدى بعون الله تعالى 
بنسخ كتاب القديس الفاضل اقليمس تلميذ السليح بطرس all‏ ابن 
يونا راس ὦ dee‏ والهنا ومخلصنا. يسوع المسيح ابن الله الحى 
αν τυ τ‏ من السراير اليكدونة الى اعلير يا 
ربنا يسوع المسيح لبطرس لما ساله وكتببا اقليمس تلميق هذا ولرينا 
المجد امين © 

كال اقل هذا iS!‏ ان كنك μεν‏ وطلبت هذا الكناب من ple‏ 
اهل مصر واساقفتها ومن الاسكندرية stg‏ ودمياط وديارات القدس ومن 
ابو مقار ومن الديارات ومن الصعيى فلم [يكن] بالديارات المصرية له اثرا . 


cee! سوم‎ (AMS به رب‎ et مرك فرص‎ tet إل‎ Soe 


THE CAMBRIDGE MS. OF THE KITAB AL-MAGALL. ΧΧΙ 
وجدته ايضا يتضمن‎ OY ولم اكن وقفت عليه قط فلما وقفت عليه‎ 
ρῶς الشف عن‎ ἢ فرك‎ ΤᾺΣ lacy Laks Ste pl 
احتاج الى ان افتش الكتاب. جميعه ان اجد المعنى الذى اطلبه ولكن‎ 
بعد تعب كثير وتفتيش فعملت له عردا مشتملة على معانيه من اوله‎ 
ديت‎ iy Tales اليه واكشفه فتيموه.‎ ply ὦ πὰ! الى )6 يبون‎ 
مبشرا فى دين المسيح ومفيضا بمحبة جزيلة وشكر كثير اذ حفظنى‎ 
على دينه من جيل الى جيل ولما وقفت على هذا الكتاب ازدادت‎ 
المسيح ان لا يدخلنى التجربة وهذا‎ same امانتى قوة وانا اسال الرب‎ 
الكتاب الاخر فيه من التوبة كثير لمن يكتبه ولمن يقرا فيه ولمن يقنيه‎ 
ولمن يبيعه ولمن يشتريه ويجب على كل ذصرانى ان يكون نسدته‎ 


عنده © 


“In the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy 
Ghost, one God. We begin by the help of God, may He be 
exalted! the transcription of the holy Book of the gracious Clement, 
disciple of the Apostle Peter Cepha, son of Jona, chief of the 
disciples of our Lord and God and Saviour Jesus the Christ, Son 
of the living and everlasting and eternal God. Amen. This is 
among the hidden secrets which our Lord Jesus the Christ taught 
to Peter when he asked him, and Clement wrote them, the disciple 
of the latter, and to our Lord be the glory. Amen. 

“The copyist of this book said, I was in Egypt and sought this 
book from all the Egyptians, and their Bishops, and at Alexandria, 
and Tanis, and Damietta, and the holy monasteries, and from Abu 
Macarius and from the monasteries, and from Upper Egypt, and 
there was no trace of it in the Egyptian monasteries. But when I 
came to Nicosia, a city of Cyprus, my Lord and God Jesus the Christ 
opened it up to me, and I had never discovered it ; and when I dis- 
covered it now, I found it also containing many enigmatical secrets 
and various meanings; and when I wished to uncover its wonders, 
I was obliged to examine the whole book that I might find the 
meaning which I seek for; but yet after much labour and examination 


XXii THE CAMBRIDGE MS. OF THE KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


I made a complete list of its meanings from its beginning to its end, 
that it might be’ easy to take out of it what one needs, and I unveil 
it, and thou wilt find it quickly ; and I was already an Evangelist in 
the religion of the Christ, and overflowing with abundant love, and 
much gratitude that he has kept me in his religion from generation 
to generation. When I discovered this book, my faith was strongly 
increased, and I entreat the Lord Jesus the Christ not to lead me 
into temptation ; and as for this book, the last thing in it is about 
repentance!, which is much to him who writes it, and to him who 
reads in it, and to him who possesses it, and to him who sells it, 
and to him who buys it, and every Christian ought to have a copy 
of it beside him.” 


The text is nearly the same as that of the Sinai MS. up to 
the rubric on f. 34b, 1. 14. Of course there are many variants; Arab 
copyists seem to glory in their power to express the same idea in 
different words. I give a list only of the variants which are of any 
importance, or which throw light on obscure places in the Sinai MS. 
It will be observed that the proper names are quite as corrupt in the 
one text as in the other. 


Camb..f.. 2b. 
S. f. 890. .م‎ |, IL 8, و‎ from وهو السادس‎ to وهو الكتاب |الهوارييتن‎ 
المستور المخزون فى مدينة الاسقفية بجزيرة قبرص منف زمان‎ 
| امين‎ eI الحواريين بركاتيم تكون معنا الى‎ 
5.1.908. 2. Γ,1. 1 Gay عبثًا [عنيا 1.5 بطور الزيتون [على طور‎ | 
rs Fas αν ες وهما كتابين زكنابى المدعيين بالسابع‎ 
| مترجمين السابع والثامن‎ 
ΕΓ 5.8 
5. Εἴ 91 2. p.m 1. 21 beg] الحيوان [الحيوانى 22 1 || يحضن‎ || 


|| حضن [حط 23 .! 





‘ Probably a mistake for الطوبى‎ = blessedness. 


C 


THE CAMBRIDGE MS. OF THE KITAB AL-MAGALL. XXill 


£4 Ds 
5.2 91. ملتبابات [ممتليتان : .5,1 .م‎ || 1. 15 om. منبوبة‎ | 


| والاجناس والبوام والزحاف [والحساس وهوام الرجاف 5 .1 ره Ρ.‏ .2922 .5 


ie مه‎ 
5. ἢ 938. pe Ἵ,]. 5 بالاكرسطلين [بالاكرسطلس‎ | 
Ney er 


5.64 94322 .م‎ Vy 1. 19 المتردمة [المتوجه‎ | 
51 O48. oD A, Ils, 2 Ome [بنعمتك التى 2 .1 | الشجرة ارس‎ 
شعبك الذى‎ | 
5 f. δ' 11م .نم‎ 5 Steg) Styles [1 9, 10 Om. Cana... الفاخرة‎ 
ولس"‎ yy حون‎ |b 17 el] لجا‎ 
iis. 5a. 
5. 695 2. .م‎ 4, ١. 2 dels رشن إرسم 65 1 | فى سرعة [فى‎ Ste || LG 
[بمتابعتها‎ ary bey | Ile 7, 8 اللعين فيه‎ Udy ed] ἱμῶ فيبا‎ 
| فيبا اللعين‎ 
S.£95b. p. 9,1 12 teAS3] lets! || 1. 20 معدو عب‎ 
ἘΠ &D; 
S.f 96a. p. [o, 1. 14 edom] Gow || 
5.2 972. p. (1,1 11 3924] ولهودا‎ | 
10.4. 
S.f.97b. p. 1| IL 23,24 Ὁ] ales] الشاء‎ Nos || 
S.f.97b. p. dl, 1. 7 وقذف إوقيم‎ | 
5. 2-98 8. وخمسة وثلاثين سنة [وثلاثين سنة 14 .1 ," | .م‎ | 1]. 14, 15 om. 
الى لاصنة‎ | 1١. 22 bets] وليعمل‎ | 
S ١ 2و‎ δ | 1 5 lees) Joey | 


571055 001510 cast] 9505 

وتبجيا Spat‏ [وتبيجها للتصويت بالتسبحة 12 .1 ,:| .م .5.599 
وينمى الشجر والثمار + [الارض 17 .1 | لا تبعى ['تبدى τά‏ .1 | التسبيح 
تعالى ]26 وجل 20 .1 | وفيبا تسبحات ودعوات [ويستجاب دعا و1 .! 
lads |‏ يكون نزول النعمة والموهيه من الله + 


XXIV THE CAMBRIDGE MS. OF THE KITAB AL-MAGALL. 
5. 2 roob. 2. | رة‎ 1. 21 ff وابنى ينزل [انزل‎ the verbs are in the third 
person instead of in the first as in the Sinai MS. 
Con 4 
5.1. 2:00. pot, 1. + بالسوت إبالسوط‎ sic | 
5.1. 1513. .م‎ (4, lL 4 اهرب [ارهب‎ where the verbs assume the first 
person | 1. 7 [انيبض‎ Gapy || the third person being resumed until 
..لاهوته 11-14 .11 || 8 .1 واجلسه‎ Udy DI ويكون كلما كنت عليه [الى‎ | 
S.f. τοῦ Ὁ. رب الازباب . وهذه وصية + [الخرض 21 .1,1" | .م‎ Lite ويمشى‎ 
| لشيث‎ 
1 7 b; 
51 TOLD. p.{V, ll, 2-4 om. بادنى أده‎ | 
Dif το ΙΝ ἢ كبتك‎ us?! شيث [من حساب‎ al فى. حياة‎ | 
!. 15 وقت صلبه + [ابيه‎ | 
ες 8a. | 
5. 2 1022. .م‎ UV, 1. 21 وقوف القديس بطرس إوقوفى يا بنى اقليمس‎ || 
51 τὰ ل وان‎ ca το νυν. Gres GIs | 
1. 6 عوض الطغيمة إيبدلوا الطغية‎ | Il. 7-13 وسقطت ......ابدانبم‎ | 
متوقرين على العبادة والاخلاص فى التسبيح والتبليل والتمجيد‎ 
من غير تغير ولا التفات الى شى من اشغال الادمين سوى ما‎ 
| يقتاتونه لقوام اجنادهم من‎ 
Cf Ss 
S. f. toga. p. (A, L 18 بذكا ادم ودم كابيل إبزكا ذه شابيل‎ τῷ || 
1. 18 عادلبم [عادتهم‎ || 
6-1 
5.1.1042. p. (9, 1. 21 ايضا واخذه: الارض بثْارة هابيل من دم-+ [فقمّله‎ 
| بمثل*‎ he? قاين‎ 








' Cod. واحهدة‎ * Cod. gky * Cod. بيهل‎ io 


THE CAMBRIDGE MS. OF THE KITAB AL-MAGALL., XXV 

09 1 © 
[وخمس سنين 1.6 || وذكرهم.....وفاتى Peo, 11. 1-3 om.‏ .2 .2 ,1048 .5.1 
[لذلث ليال خلون من تشرين الاول || الاربعا [السبت || وعشرون di‏ 
om.‏ 9-11 .11 || مبلاليل [قينان 7 .1 | TSI‏ عشر من خزيران 


S fi sosa. p. fo, 1 16 يوفيل إتوفيل 18 !| | وبعهوا إونيقوا‎ | 


| يوتلفيل [|توبلقين 
{τοῦ‏ 
| وستون [وسبعين 1 S.f. 1062. p. ΓΓ,}.‏ 
ΕΓ Tea:‏ 


Bet τσ pity fT. 59:9] + per من الدنيا بحزن‎ gts 
تنحدر من عينيه وزفير الحسرات من قلبه لاجل الذين خرجوا‎ ἀρ 9.059 


عن يده فى ايامه | 
Ct 24 a.‏ 


لاجتماع الصناع Cpt!‏ تستاجرهرم + [الصبم 17 .1 PI,‏ .م .1088 S.f.‏ 
| لانصرافيم [للاصراف 8: 1 || للعمل. 
24 65 
من الانس بكم والقرب منكم. [النظر. σον...‏ لي iti dit De Oy‏ 
وها نحن منصرفون الى الارض الغريبة لنسكن فيبا مع الوحوش 
| الحشايش [الحساس τὸ‏ || والحيوان. 
ومن ope‏ اربعة [ومن الحيوان النجس زوجان 19 .1 PV,‏ .2 .1128 26 .5 
| ازواج 
Cloth a.‏ 
|| السابيع |العاشر 18 S.f.r1g3a. p. fA, lL‏ 
Θὲ. ἘΦ  Ν νὰ‏ 
فاستبارك بها وعلم [فمن... بالمسيح }01 .10 api Ad: a2‏ ع 5 
ان الشجرة قى انكشفت | 





Od. Gael 


xxvi THE CAMBRIDGE MS. OF THE KITAB AL-MAGALL. 
5. 811383. p. PY, 1 3 وستة وسئين + إستماية‎ || 
CATs 
Sf 212052 p.l 1,2 24 10. ΓΓ, 15 Om. ee (59 || 
GE hea) 5s 
Sif try bp. boy. 24to pl, See Lad by paw] باللسان العريض‎ 
ادم وبه كان ادم وبنوه يتكلمون . وتنقل‎ GOI الله‎ UNS الذى‎ 
سورية . وغلب عليه اسمها فصار‎ SY من الراصان: والكلدان والى‎ 
prong اختاره الله ومنه‎ (GH url يعرف بالسريانى وهو الاصل‎ 
ابطل من عبرانى‎ οὐδ غير هذا‎ Lest ساير اللغات وهو اوسعبا فمن‎ 
ويونانى وغيرهما غير ان يضحه قليل واضحه واصلدته ما دونه اهل‎ 
حران والرها وسروج والرقا ووجدناه بخطوطبم فى الاناجيل المقدسة‎ 
امد‎ Jal الازلية ثم‎ ΤΠ الالبية‎ GEO فغيزها امن‎ Spall 
ومنافارقين ونصيبين* وطور عبدين وماردين” والى بعد ادوا‎ 
| العراقين‎ 
Ca, 1S, 
S.f 18a. p. (1, το Gad dyh yar] تحر كنود سفلين‎ | 
Get 18h, 
S. 12 118 0. ختول [حيول + .1 || فرنون [فرعون 2 1 ,5 .م‎ | 1. 7 
باورغان [باوعنان‎ || 
|| τοῦ. 
5. 2 119 0. [|السحر 1 .1 رةه .م‎ + gay وكان‎ IWS ومشا على الارض‎ 
| ذلك من قرية تدعا اورام كان اورون بن عابر بناها‎ 
C.£19b. 
5. 6 12082. p.[%d,l το الفال والزجر [الرجز والافك‎ | 
Sf r2ta, 0-1 ],1 6 ازريجان |اذوربيهان‎ | 


2 42018 
|| بافروتون إماريون 4,18 p.‏ 2-0 14121 .5 





* Cod, الراصات‎ * Cod. ونصين‎ * Cod. وماروين‎ 


THE CAMBRIDGE MS. OF THE KITAB AL-MAGALL. XXVii 
© f. 20 b. 
5. 1215. الا"قسام والفال والزجر |الرجز والافك  23 .1 ,4 .م‎ | 1. 24 
الكلدانين [الكذابون‎ | 
5.1.1223. .م‎ Mv, 1.6 وفسطفون [وقطسفيون | حدارينون إحدانيون‎ | 
وثلاثون [وثلث 8 .1 || ازريجان [ادربيجان‎ | 
5 ] 122102 0.71 14 إغانوس‎ φῦ | 


ΕΣ 4.8. 
S τῆν ٠ تقرف :1 1م‎ Ws ||| 
Cr at Ὁ, 


Ol, 21105 Pe Ay τὸς. δὴ ΠῚ. واآتها 0 اليشيسر‎ || 1. 21 ghee! 
ويسه [دلاسر | الجندر [الجيرر | اسمالاخ‎ | 

| ومرغسل [وتدعيل | ودكراالعمر [وكردالييم 22 .1 p. TA,‏ .11243 .5 
[لملكيسداق 25 .1 | وحنان [وخيار 24 .1 | وشنفار [سمعان 23 ١‏ 
passim |‏ لملشيساداق 


Cerf 288. 
S.f.124b. p. 9,1. 14 om. يوزاذق‎ ἀπ | 1.17 قذوديا إهرذنا‎ | 


oe] soy πῆ county [| Il 22, 23‏ 21 ,20 ل S.f raga.‏ 
else ei ed‏ 
|| بغطون إيقطوو 1 .26,1 p.‏ 12584 5.1 
Cet. 22 b.‏ 
coaiUage! |‏ ا Sf tagb. p. £0114 cedlee!l] celal‏ 
ς 1 23 4.‏ 
وتركبا ومضى [وكان......المسيح 12-19 .1 ,£4 .م .8 127 fl 126b,‏ .5 
at |‏ عن ا على !ا 
وكانت [وكذلك τάν...‏ دن 0( 22 Ὁ 845 ptt.‏ 
وحشة العينين . فامتنع منبا فاشرط عليه ان يخدمه سبعة سنين 
اخرى rol) els‏ . فالتزم له بذلك ويحكى موسى انه اصابه 
مع حموه “Uno‏ هذه القضية سوا. | 





' Cod. وياخف‎ > Cod. ro 


XXVill THE CAMBRIDGE MS. OF THE KITAB AL-MAGALL. 
6 2 22, 
S. f. 2253 p, 218 مبيع [يباع‎ ΠῚ 22 اسحق .+ إقبر 23 .1 | سبع [تسع‎ 
| ثم توفت ليا امراة يعقوب ودفنت بقرب قبر‎ 
Cat 244. 
Ὁ 0128). p 4 τ 7 لاه‎ eos | 1. 10 حصرون‎ Nola] وحصرون ملك‎ || 
Lt Jem!) Se! | 
Cf 245. 
1ت‎ 2082 ΡΟΣ bb το [τυ ιν ا‎ usr] 
ومن المسماة يغما العمريية التى من نسل لوط ايضا . فانبا كانت‎ 
MA ولى يوربعام ابنه الذى‎ bic زوجة سليمان ابن داوود . التى‎ 
| الملك بعل سليمان‎ 
5. δ 1298. وسبعماية [واربع ماية || ثلثماية' [ستماية .55,1 .م‎ || !. 2 
Ig} + الا من يغما العمريية التى كانت من نسل لوط وكان‎ 
‘2 سبب حرمان سليمان الاولاد من الالف امراة اللواتى من‎ 


كنعان الملعون الا من يغما. | 
,}6126 


5.1 136 به‎ p. 0,1 5. Syays] νὰ | 
8 χ2Ὁ 3; 
5 152131 2. p. £0, 1. 22 Kym] ning || 


|| واترغان [فابو نجاف 1 24,1 .م .1312 .5.1 


ΘΕῸΣ 0. 
1ت‎ 132322 po, 1 15 إقض‎ (pens | 
Caf 273: 


There is the same mistake in both MSS. of Jeroboam for Rehoboam. 
Ὁ, ΤῚΣ Ὁ. π᾿ ΣΟῚ τὸ ارادخ [اناراخ‎ | 

Cf 254.‏ 
|| تسعة عشر [عشرين و 1 tA,‏ .2 .1343 © .5 





1 Cod. δι νον * Cod. زرع‎ 


THE CAMBRIDGE MS. OF THE KITAB AL-MAGALL. X XIX 


C. f. 28 b. 
S45. 34D. “Ὁ, 
| للشياطين‎ 
S.f. tage. ΝΜ 
C. f. 298, 
=. i568: |p. 
S35, 335 0. ἢ 
{ΠῚ 10. 
Sek τὰ 0 
Sf 1308: Ὁ; 
ا‎ 5. 
Ort τάγ ἢ} 
1. 18 [بارما‎ 
02 418. 
51127 
Bh 15523 | 0; 
Cut 414; Ὁ: 
ΓΕΘ 8. ΤΡ’ 


ليكونوا فيبا مكان بنى أسرايل |ليقيموا فيه 22 .1 ZA,‏ 
فسلط الله السباع تقتلبم لعبادتهم الاصنام وذبايحهم قربانا 
| الموصل [الموضع 1.9 ,£4 


59,1. 13 [ست 15 .1 | ايامه [ايامى‎ ὅσ ἢ 

وكان عمره وقت ملكه ]929 ابن ثمان وستين 3 Desh‏ 
ثمان | 

lez I] PAO ||‏ 1.7 | يعيده [يعبدون 1.4,.ه 


| يوشيا إيبواخز 1.9 d+,‏ 


| فى ارض تلى bee]‏ يلى 11 .1 || ot‏ [بين 14 1١‏ ,اه 
|| مبخره 


|| يواقيم [الياقيم 5 1 OM,‏ 
فاجاببا الى ما سالته . ولم [ففعل قله 9-10 | or,‏ 
δ»‏ عن شبوتها ay)‏ كان على غاية المحبة لها. | 


Sr. ll. τι 14 ote Jay) ΩΣ sie sis] على يد زربابل عظيم‎ 


اليبود ومن اجل ذلك قال الكتاب انت عبدى ومسيم الرب تدع . 


فانى مستجيب اخت زربابل من 9 داوود . واخلط ذرع' كورش 
مع زرع داوود منبا . ولما sho‏ زربابل بنى اسرايل الى يروشليم 
ale jlo‏ ريسا . وصار يشوع ابن يوزاداق ريس الكبنة . وتم ما 


الرب ومعه 


اورى ملاك الرب لزخريا النبى . فانه كان راى ملاك 


all (gon بد‎ τῶν اللى‎ τ ον οἴ كان تقال له‎ 





a, Bia Fe زرع‎ 


XXX THE CAMBRIDGE MS. OF THE KITAB AL-MAGALL. 
لكورش تم الالف‎ ἀρῶ! العالم . فلما طلع النبى من بابل فى السنة‎ 
| 2 الخامس‎ 
Ct. 32a. 
5. 21392. Ρ. ”اه‎ L 14 اليود [اتين | ابنين }399 وتوم [اتين‎ | 
{1 ل‎ 
5.1 139 a ἢ. Of, 1. 15 إسلسين‎ Ip! | τὸ jG] Gl | 1 17 
. والمسمى باسمين . فانه كان [المسمى باسمين يواقيم بن يرتاح‎ 
πῆ Leng |] Lt لسار لسرن‎ | 
012 
5-1-1462. p. 0%, 1. 12 إصبيوما‎ booed | sla] le اوس‎ |] 1 13 
[كرجلان 115 || لصحت قاطر [تصحب فاطر +1 .1 || كوتيم [كرشر‎ 
كوطان‎ 11. τό [قيفار || راخوت [راحوب 17 .1 || طوياخح [طرباح‎ 
فيعازر‎ || 1١ 158 يوتان [يوتاب‎ | 1 τὸ بابيانوش [ماشاموس‎ || 1. 20 


|| لاوى [سلوى 
{τὺ}‏ 
انحا مد دا | το: ΡικὸΣ,} 22 Noy | 132 | ak] πὰς‏ 1 5 
wl |‏ 


3 1 || امراة يقال لبا عاقوس بنت باروغ [فيل 1 .1 ,هه .م .140 S.f‏ 
μὸν ||‏ [عاتان 13 .1 || بيلنت [سليب rr‏ .1 || يونا [يوتا 


Cd 24.3:‏ 
οι]  ὥν |‏ 14 ,60 ار 51140601 
[زتلعيا Ji] us! | 1 τὸ‏ | فلك S.f. 8312 p. 00, 1 Τὸ tow] εἶν‏ 
وياعوس تزوج موعادين بنت فزمى + ياعوس [اموص 20 1 | My‏ 
Sl]‏ 22 .1 || يوتام [يريام 21 .1 || كاخا [كاما || واولدها اموص 


| اربيف [ارتيد! 24 .! | ρὸν‏ [يارمون 23 .1 || ارمين καὶ]‏ | هالى 


|| بارت بنت باريون [تارب بنت مورقا 


THE CAMBRIDGE MS. OF THE KITAB AL-MAGALL. ἐφ Φ 


| يواحين إيواهز ἢ τὰ, p. d4, μι‏ 5 
| لوبيف S.f. 141 b. p. 04,1. 5 Aegoyl]‏ 
Oe Fer Fg‏ 
| انتى [افى || روتيم [زورنيم 7 .1 || حسبى [حلى 6 1 O04,‏ .2 .2 141 .1 .8 
| يوبيى [يوتيى 9 ,8 IN‏ || فيلين بنت دوربب [فلةير. بنت دورتيب 8 .! 
[فعود......العازر 13 ١.‏ || شيرات [سيراب 1.11 || تولى [يولى || اسهم OM.‏ و .1 
| سابق plo]‏ 1.17 | بنت فتقودال بنت بيت العازر 


The contents of the remaining 100 folios 35 ἃ to 134 Ὁ are nota 
necessary continuation of the genealogy, but partake more decidedly 
of the nature of an Apocalypse. To give an adequate description 
of this would take an undue amount of space in the present volume ; 
I therefore reserve it for translation at a future period. 


M. D. G. 


0 
ἜΝ, 
Niger 

0 





KITAB AL-MAGALL 
OR 


PHP BOOK OF THE -ROELS: 


ONE OF THE BOOKS OF CLEMENT. 


IN the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy © 89b 
Ghost, one God, the merciful Lord. 

This book is one of the hidden books of Saint Clement the 
Apostle, disciple of Simon Cepha, which Saint Clement com- 
manded to be kept secret from the laity. Some of them were 
called “ The Book of the Rolls,’ and there are the glorious gene- 
alogies and mysteries which our God and Saviour Jesus the 
Christ committed to his disciples Simon and James, and what 
things will happen at the end of time, and how the second 
coming of our Lord the Christ from heaven to the world will 
happen, and what will become of sinners and such like. This 
is the sixth of Clement’s books, treasured up in the city of 
Rome since the time of the Apostles. 

Saint Clement said, When our God Jesus the Christ went 
up to heaven, and the disciples were scattered in the regions of 
the world to evangelize, and to call mankind to the faith and to 
immersion by baptism, they took disciples, whom they chose and 
selected to be with them, and to travel about to the countries 
in the faith of the Christ. Wherefore Simon Cepha took me for 
a disciple to himself; I believed in him, and in Him that sent 
him, with a true faith; I recognized that he was chief of the 
Apostles, to whom were given the keys of heaven and earth, 
on whom was built the Catholic Apostolic Church of God, which 


G. A 


f.9goa 


f. gob 


2 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


the gates of Hell shall not destroy, as our God Jesus the Christ 
said in the holy Gospel. After a long time he took also my 
brothers Constans* and Constantinus’ to be his disciples. 
Twenty years after he had taken me as his disciple, he brought 
me together with my father and my mother, who was called 
Metrodora, and committed to me all the mysteries which had 
been given him by our Lord Jesus the Christ on the Mount 
of Olives. At that time the rest of the Apostles and all the 
believers had a struggle with the unbelieving Jews because the 
Jews were killing every one of the believers whose murder was 
possible to them. I and my gracious Teacher Simon encom- 
passed some of the countries, and we met with great trouble 
from the controversy of the Jews, and their questioning about 
the genealogy of the pure Mary, for their saying about her 
was that she was not of the children of Judah that they might 
invalidate by this the coming of our Lord the Christ into the 
world, and His Incarnation from her. They were increasing 
[their] bribe of money and other things to the Greeks and 
the Romans that they might help them in the destruction of 
the believers and the bringing to nought of their business, 
and hinder the Apostles from the reading of the Law, lest 
they should teach out of it about the state of mankind, and 
how it was in the beginning. When I saw in what misery we 
were with the Jews, I sought from my gracious Teacher that 
he would make known to me how mankind were at the be- 
ginning, and that he would make me perfect about the reasons, 
for he had learned everything from the Lord Jesus the Christ, 
and I was acquainted with the tongue of the Greeks and their 
books, and was learned in their mysteries, and I had deposited 
their secrets which had been entrusted to me, [in] my two books 
called the seventh and the eighth. I informed my Teacher what 
I conjectured about the envy towards the Lady Mary, and my 
anxiety at the reproach of the Jews to me that I did not 
understand the Torah, and their much questioning of me 
about the creation of our father Adam, and what I had heard 
with my ears of their insult to the Lady Mary and their 


+ pee NOL; Di XV. 2 Tit; oil. 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 3 


fiction about her without any resource being possible for me 
[how] I should refute them in regard to their hateful saying. 
The Teacher was moved by my excitement, and zeal entered 
him when I told him about it. He said, “I will put it in order 
for thee, O my son, as thou hast asked me about it, and will 
initiate thee in things since the beginning of the creation, and 
will teach thee the genealogy of the Mother of Mercy, Mary the 
pure, and its authenticity, and that without doubt she is of the 
lineage of Judah the son of Jacob and his tribe, and I will relate 
to thee mysteries, and what reason there was for the fall of the 
Devil, the prince, from heaven. Know, O my son, that the Lord 
is the beginning and before the beginning, He who is Infinite, 
raised above the height, equal with the Highest, there is nothing 
lower about Him, nothing inward, nothing outward, He is before 
the beginning, the ancient substance, He who is boundless, 
whom no intelligence can reach, and no discernment nor quality 
can comprehend. He was above Being, and with Being, and 
below Being, the creative Substance, the glorious Light, which 
darkness reacheth not, Light dwelling in the Light which eyes 
cannot reach, before creation He was; and He is the Former of 
forms, whose glory is from Himself and in Himself, and in His 
Essence. [He is] the Creator of what glorifies Him, that thou 
mayest learn His divinity and His power, He made the heaven 
and the earth, He created before harmony the division of things. 
Angels worship Him, ten homogeneous choirs, I mean by 
this ten ranks. The highest rank, some of whom are nearest to 
the throne of the Lord God, pouring out praises in abundance, is 
the rank of Satanaeel, who was the prince, and praises rose up 
to God from all the Angels; that was the beginning in the first 
day which was the holy first day (Sunday), chief of days; early 
in it God created the upper heaven and the worlds, and the 
highest rank of Angels, which is the rank of Satanaeel, and the 
Archangels, and powers, and chiefs, and thrones, and dignities 
and governors, and cherubim and seraphim, and light, and day 
and night, and wind and water, and air, and fire and what is 
like these elements. Verily the Lord formed all this, may His 
names be sanctified! by the completion of His eternal Word 


Gt a 


f. 91 b 


02:8 


4 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


without speech, and in the first day in which these things were 
created, the Holy Spirit hovered over the waters, and in its 
hovering over them they were blessed and sanctified, and heat 
was formed in them by which the watery beings are born, and 
with this were mixed yeasts of the creatures, such as the bird 
which lays! the egg by its wings, and from this is formed the 
living bird, for by reason of the nature of the heat of flaming 
fire, it verily reneweth heat in the wings of the bird, and lo! 
with them it lays an egg in which chickens are formed. Verily 
the reason why the holy Paraclete hovered over the waters 
in the form of a bird, was that every winged fowl should 
be formed in this shape. On the second day God created the 
lower heaven, which is called the firmament, on which the gaze 
of men falls, that thou mayest know that the beings of the 
highest heavens which the heaven of the visible firmament 
covers are like the nature of the heaven of the firmament, 
except that the heaven which the eyes reach is separated from 
the highest heavens. All the heavens are three heavens. The 
visible firmament, and what is above it; it is called Δίπατον 
and above it there is flaming fire; and a heaven which is 
above the fire; and the two heavens are filled with light and 
fire which created eyes cannot look at. On the second day 
which is the second of the days (Monday) the Lord, to Whom 
be praise! separated between the higher water and the lower 
water. Verily the rising up of the water which was formed in the 
height that day was like gathered clouds clinging together, and 


the waters remained resting in the air, none of them inclining to 


any one district. On the third day (Tuesday) God commanded 
the waters which were below the firmament that they should be 
gathered together to one place, that the dry land might be seen. 
When this happened, the veil was removed which was above the 
earth and the earth was disclosed. He looked upon it, and it 
was barren of verdure, [it was] dust and water mixed together. 
The water was in it and below it and above it, and it was 
shaken to the blowing of the winds through it. The air went 
up from the bosom of the earth, and rested in the bosom of its 


1 bay. Bezold يحضنل‎ - 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 5 


crevices and passages that in these caves might arise heat and 
cold for the service and consolidation of the earth, because the 
earth was created like a sponge standing above the water. On 
this day God commanded the earth to bring forth grass and 
reeds and trees and seeds and roots and other things. On the 
fourth day (Wednesday) God formed the sun and the moon 
and the stars that the heat of the sun might be spread over 
the earth and it should be strengthened by its mellowness and 
that the moisture communicated to it by the water high above 
it should be dried up. On the fifth day God commanded the 
waters to bring forth animals of various colours and forms, 
some of which should fly in the bosom of the water, and others 
should fly above the water, and from them should spring the 
whales and Leviathan, and Behemoth, so terrible in their 
appearance, and air-fowl and water-fowl. On the sixth day 
God created from the earth all the beasts, and animals and 
insects and creeping reptiles’. This day is Friday, and on 
it God created Adam of dust, and formed Eve from his 
rib. On the seventh day God had completed all creation, 
and He called it Sabbath. God had created Adam in the 
third hour of Friday the sixth day. Iblis had laid claim 
to Godhead which had entered him in the second hour 
of that day, and God had hurled him down from heaven 
to earth. Before God the Lord created Adam, rest fell upon 
all the powers ; and God said, ‘ Come, let us create a Man in our 
likeness and form and image. When the Angels heard this 
saying from the Lord they became frightened and much terrified, 
and they said to one another, ‘What is this great wonder which 
we hear, and how is it possible that the form of our God and 
Creator can appear to us?’ Then all the Angels looked to- 
wards the right hand of the Lord, which was stretched out 
above all creation, and all of it was in His right hand. Then 
they looked towards the right hand of the Lord, and it took 
from all the earth a little handful of dust, and from all the 
waters a drop of water, and from the air a soul and a spirit, and 
from fire the force of heat, and it became in the grasp of the 


1 See note, p. xv. 


f.g3a 


f. 93b 


6 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


Lord portions of the four elements, heat and cold, moisture 
and drought. Verily God, the glorious and strong, created 
Adam from these four weak elements, which have no power, 
that all creatures created from them might hear and obey him: 
dust, that man might obey him; water, that all that is born 
of it and in it might obey him; air, that it might be possible 
for him to breathe it and to feel its breezes, and that its 
birds might obey him; and fire, that the heat of forces created 
from it should be a powerful helper to his sense. The reason 
why God, may His holy names be sanctified! created Adam 
with His holy hand in His form and image was that he 
should receive wisdom and speech and animal motion, and 
for the knowledge concerning things. When the glorious and 
illustrious Angels saw one like Him in Adam, they were 
affrighted. The wondrous glory upon his face terrified them, 
his form appeared shining with divine light greater than the 
light of the sun, and his body was bright and brilliant like the 
well-known stars in the crystal. When the figure of Adam 
drew itself up, he leapt standing; he was in the centre of the 
earth, he stretched out his right hand and his left hand and 
put his feet in order upon Golgotha, which is the place where 
was put the wood (cross) of our Saviour Jesus the Christ. He 
was dressed with a royal robe, he wore upon his head a diadem 
of glory and praise and honour and dignity, he was crowned 
with a royal crown, and there he was made king and priest 
and prophet. God set him upon a throne of honour, and 
gathered to what was there all the animals and beasts and 
birds and all that God had created, and made them stand before? 
Adam. They bent their heads and did obeisance to him, and 
he called each of them by its name. He made all the creatures 
obey him and they responded to his command. The Angels 
and the Powers heard the voice of God, may He be glorified 
and exalted! saying to Adam, ‘O Adam, I have made thee 
king and priest and prophet and ruler and chief and governor 
over all creatures that are made. All creation shall obey thee 


١ between the hands of, fassim. 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 7 


and follow thy voice. Under thy grasp they shall be. To thee 
alone I have given this power; I have placed thee in possession 
of all that I have created.’ When the Angels heard this saying 
from the Lord they redoubled honour and respect to Adam. 
When the Devil saw the gift that was given to Adam from 
the Lord, he envied him from that day and the schis- 
matic from God set his mind in cunning towards him to 
seduce him by his boldness and his curse; and when he denied 
the grace of the Lord towards him, he became shameless and 
warlike. God, may His names be sanctified! deprived the 
Devil of the robe of praise and dignity and called his name 
Devil, he is a rebel against God, and Satan, because he opposes 
himself to the ways of the Lord, and Iblis, because He took his 
dignity from him. While Adam was listening to the speech of 
his Lord to him, and standing upon the place of Golgotha, all 
the creatures being gathered together that they might hear the 
conversation of God with him, lo! a cloud of light carried him 
and went with him to Paradise and the choirs of Angels sang 
before him, the cherubim among them blessing and the sera- 
phim crying ‘Holy!’ until Adam came into Paradise. He 
entered it at the third hour on Friday, and the Lord, to Him be 
praise! gave him the commandment, and warned him against 
disobedience to it. Then the Lord, to Him be praise! threw 
upon Adam a form of sleep, and he slept a sweet sleep in 
Paradise. And God took a rib from his left side, and from 
it He created Eve. When he awoke and saw Eve he rejoiced 
over her and lived with her, and she was in the pleasant garden 
of Paradise. God clothed them with glory and splendour. They 
outvied one another in the glory with which they were clothed, 
and the Lord crowned them for marriage, the Angels congratu- 
lated them, and there was joy there such as never has been the 
like and never will be till the day in which the people at the 
right hand shall hear the glorious voice from the Lord. Adam 
and Eve remained in Paradise for three hours. The site of 
Paradise was high up in the air, its ground was heavenly, raised 
above all mountains and hills, that were thirty spans high, that 
is fifteen cubits, according to the cubit of the Holy Ghost. This 


[. 94 ἃ 


f.94b 


οἵα 


ὃ KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


Paradise stretches round from the east by a wall from the hollow 
to the southern place of darkness where the cursed Prince was 
thrown, it is the place of sorrows. Eden is a fountain of God 
lying eastwards, to a height of eight degrees of the rising of the 
sun, and this is the mercy of God on which the children of men 
put their trust, that they shall have a Saviour from thence, 
because God, may He be exalted and glorified! knew in His fore- 
knowledge what the Devil would do to Adam. Adam lived in 
the treasury of His mercy, as David the prophet said, ‘Thou 
hast been a fortress to us, O Lord, throughout all ages; cause 
us to live in Thy mercy.’ The blessed David said also in his 
prayer about the salvation of men, ‘Remember, Lord’ (the tree 
was the Cross which was planted in the middle of the earth), 
‘Thy grace which thou hast wrought from all eternity’; I mean 
by this the mercy which God loved to extend to all men and to 
our weak race. Eden is the Church of God, and the Paradise in 
which is the altar of rest, and the length of life which God has 
prepared for all the saints. Because Adam was king, priest 
and prophet, God caused him to enter Paradise that he might 
minister in Eden, the Church of God the holy Lord, as Moses 
the holy Prophet testifies about this, saying, ‘ That thou shouldest 
minister and declare by noble and glorious service, and keep 
the commandment by which Adam and Eve were brought into 
the Church of God. Then God planted the tree of life in the 
middle of Paradise and it was the form of the cross which was 
stretched upon it, and it was the tree of life and salvation. 
Satan remained in his envy to Adam and Eve for the favour 
which the Lord shewed them, and he contrived to enter into 
the serpent, which was the most beautiful of the animals, and its 
nature was above the nature of the camel. He carried it till he 
went with it in the air to the lower parts of Paradise. The 
reason for Iblis the cursed hiding himself in the serpent was his 
ugliness, for when he was deprived of his honour he got into the 
acme of ugliness, till none of the creatures could have borne the 
sight of him uncovered, and if Eve had seen him unveiled in 
the serpent, when she spoke to him, she would have run away 
from him, and neither cunning nor deceit would have availed 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 9 


him with her; but he contrived to hide himself in the serpent, 
the cunning creature, to teach the birds with round tongues 
the speech of men in Greek and such like. He would bring 
a broad mirror with much light sending out rays; he would put 
it between himself and a bird, and speak what he wished that 
the bird should know, and when the bird heard this speech, 
it would glance around and look in the mirror, and see the form 
of a bird like itself and rejoice at it, and not doubting that it was 
a bird of its species that was speaking to it would listen to 
it and attend to its language. And it would comprehend it in a 
moment and talk to it. But the cursed Devil, when he entered 
the serpent, came towards Eve, when she was alone in Paradise 
away from Adam, and called her by her name. She turned to 
him, and looked at her likeness behind a veil, and he talked to 
her, and she talked to him, and he led her astray by his speech, 
for woman’s nature is weak, and she trusts in every word, and 
he lectured her about the forbidden tree in obedience to her 
desire, and described to her the goodness of its taste, and that 
when she should eat of it she should become a god; and she 
longed for what the cursed one made her long for, and she would 
not hear from the Lord, may His names be sanctified! what He 
had commanded Adam about the tree. She hastened eagerly 
towards it, and seized some of its fruit in her mouth. Then she 
called Adam, and he hastened to her, and she gave him of the 
fruit, telling him that if he ate of it he would become a god. 
He listened to her advice because he should become a god as 
she said. When he and she ate the deadly fruit they were 
bereft of their glory, and their splendour was taken from them, 
and they were stripped of the light with which they had been 
clothed. When they looked at themselves, they were naked of 
the grace which they had worn, and their shame was manifest 
to them; they made to themselves aprons of fig-leaves, and 
covered themselves therewith, and they were in great sadness 
for three hours. They did not manage to continue in the grace and 
the power with which the Lord had endued them before their 
rebellion for three hours, till it was taken from them and they 
were made to slip and fall down at the time of sunset on that 


σ. Β 


f.95b 


f. 96a 


19 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


day, and they received the sentence of God in punishment. 
After the clothing of fig-leaves they put on clothing of skins, 
and that is the skin of which our bodies are made, being of the 
family of man, and it is a clothing of pain. The entrance of 
Adam into Paradise was at the third hour. He and Eve passed 
through great power in three hours, they were naked for three 
hours, and in the ninth hour they went out from Paradise, 
unwillingly, with much grief, great weeping, mourning and 
sighing. They slept towards the East of it near the altar. 
When they awoke from their sleep, God spoke to Adam and 
comforted him, saying to him, blessed be His names! ‘O 
Adam! do not grieve, for I will restore thee to thine inheritance, 
out of which thy rebellion has brought thee. Know that 
because of my love to thee I have cursed the earth, and 
I will not have pity upon it, on account of thy sin. I have 
cursed also the serpent by whom thou hast been led astray, 
and I have made its feet go within its belly. I have made 
dust its food. I have not cursed thee. I have decreed against 
Eve that she shall be at thy service. Know certainly that 
when thou hast accomplished the time that I have decreed 
for thee to dwell outside, in the accursed land, for thy trans- 
gression of my commandment, I will send my dear Son; He 
will come down to the earth, He will be clothed with a body 
from a Virgin of thy race, named Mary. I will purify her and 
choose her, and bring her into power generation after generation 
until the time that the Son comes down from Heaven. In that 
time shall be the beginning of thy salvation and restoration to 
thine inheritance. Command thy sons when thy death ap- 
proaches which I have decreed for thee that when thou diest 
they keep thy body in myrrh and cassia, and put it in the cave 
where thou art dwelling to-day till the time of the exit of thy 
children from the bosom of paradise and their passage to the 
dusty land. When that time comes, instruct the one of thy 
children who lives until then to carry thy body with him and put 
it in the place where I shall make him halt. This place where 
he shall put thy body is the centre of the earth; from it and in 
it salvation shall come to thee and to all thy children.’ God 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. II 


disclosed to him all the griefs and pains that should happen to 
him, and commanded him to have patience about this. When 
He put Adam and Eve out of Paradise, He shut its gate, and 
put in charge a fiery Angel. He caused Adam and Eve to dwell 
in the holy mountain on which is the foundation of Paradise, in 
the place known as Matarimén. They lived there in a cave 
at the top of the hill, hidden in it, and despairing of mercy, 
and they were then pure virgins. Then Adam thought of the 
wedding of Eve, and he found in the foundation of Paradise gold 
and myrrh and incense. He left this together, and consecrated 
it in the interior of the cave, which he had already made his 
house of prayer. The gold which he got from the foundation 
of Paradise was like in quantity to seventy-two images. He 
paid this with the myrrh and the incense to Eve, saying, 
‘This is thy dowry, keep it. This must be all offered together 
to the Son of God at the time of His coming into the world. 
The gold is the symbol of His royalty; the incense is to 
burn before Him; and the myrrh is to anoint His body 
which He will take from us. This shall be a witness between 
me and thee with our Saviour that He shall come to the 
world.’ Adam called this cave the Cave of Treasures. When 
a hundred years had passed over him after his exit from 
Paradise, and he and Eve were grieved and weeping, they 
went down from the holy hill to its foot, and there Adam knew 
Eve, and she conceived, and her time was fulfilled, and she 
bare Cain, and Lusia his twin-sister. He knew her again, 
and she conceived, and her time was fulfilled, and she bare 
Abel and also his twin-sister Aclima. The boys and the 
girls grew, and attained to discretion. Adam said to Eve, ‘If 
God lets these lads and lasses grow up, let Cain marry Aclima 
the sister of Abel, and let Abel marry Lusia the sister of Cain.’ 
And they did thus. But Cain said to Eve, ‘O Mother, I 
have a greater right to my sister who was born with me. Let her 
be given to me as a wife, and let Abel’s sister who was born with 
him be given to him as a wife.’ For Lusia was more beautiful 
than Aclima, being like her mother Eve. Adam heard of his 
speech, and it made him angry and annoyed him. He said to 


f. 96b 


2507 a 


f.97b 


f. 98a 


12 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


Cain his son, ‘Thy request, O my son, is unlawful, for it is not 
allowed to thee to marry thy sister who was born with thee.’ 
From that time Cain envied his brother Abel and thought of 
killing him. Then Adam said to him and to Abel, ‘Choose 
some of the fruits of the earth and of the young of the flock and 
go up this holy hill, and go into the Cave of Treasures, and pray 
there before the Lord. Offer to Him what you have brought, fruit, 
and any young animals as an offering. When you have done 
this, let each of you take his wife.’ And they did so. While 
they were going up the hill, behold! the Devil entered into Cain, 
and incited him to the murder of Abel. Then they brought their 
offerings before the Lord; the Lord accepted the offering of 
Abel and rejected the offering of Cain, because God, may He 
be praised and exalted! knew the purpose of Cain, and how 
he was preparing the murder of his brother. When Cain saw 
that the Lord, may His name be praised! had accepted the 
offering of Abel instead of his offering, his envy of Abel 
increased and his wrath against him. When they came down 
from the hill, Cain attacked Abel and slew him with a sharp 
stone. God cursed Cain, and his decree came down against him. 
He did not cease to be in fear and terror all the days of his life. 
God led him with his wife from the holy hill, outside to the 
cursed land, and they lived there. Adam and Eve grieved 
much about Abel for a hundred years. Then Adam came near 
to Eve, and she conceived, and her time was fulfilled, and she 
bare Seth, the handsome man, the complete and perfect giant. 
In his perfection he was like his father Adam, and God 
protected him when he grew up, making him the father of 
the other giants of the earth. The first who was born to 
Seth was Enos. And Enos begat Cainan, and Cainan begat 
Mahlaleel; these were born during the life of Adam. Adam 
lived nine hundred and thirty years, to the time that Mahlaleel 
was a hundred and thirty-five years old. When the time of his 
death came, he summoned Seth, and Enos, and Cainan and 
Mahlaleel; he prayed over them and blessed them, and com- 
manded to his son Seth this Testament. 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 13 


The Testament of Adam. 


Hear, O my son Seth! what I command thee. Keep it, and 
thou shalt understand it. Command it at thy death to thy son 
Enos, that Enos may command this to Cainan, and Cainan may 
command [it] to Mahlaleel, that he may act according to this 
testament, and that the rest of your generations may learn, 
generation after generation, and tribe after tribe. This is the 
first thing that I command thee. When I die, embalm my body 
with myrrh and cassia, and put it in the Cave of Treasures of 
the holy hill, that thou mayest tell whosoever of thy posterity 15 
alive at the time when your exit shall take place from this holy 
Paradise-encircled hill, to carry my body with him, and go with 
it to the centre of the earth, and put it there, and in that place 
Salvation shall come to me and to all my children. Thou, O 
my son Seth, shalt after my death be governor of thy people in 
the fear of God. Remove thyself and all thy children, and keep 
them apart from the children of the murderer Cain. Understand, 
O my son, the state of the hours of the night and of the day, 
and their names, and what praises God in them, wherewith you 
must call on God at their approach, and at what hour prayer and 
supplication is due. My Creator has taught me this, and made 
me understand the names of all the beasts of the earth, and 
birds of the air; and the Lord has initiated me into the number 
of the hours of the night and of the day, and the affairs of the 
Angels and their powers and how they are. Know’ that in the 
first hour of the day is the raising of the praise of my children 
to God. In the second hour there are the prayers of the Angels 
and their cry. In the third hour the birds give praise. In the 
fourth hour is the worship of spiritual beings. In the fifth hour is 
the worship of the other living creatures. In the sixth hour is the 
entreaty of the cherubim and their supplication. In the seventh 
hour is the entrance to God and the exit from His presence, 
for in it the prayers of every living thing rise to the Lord. In 


1 Perhaps [Ls] should be omitted. 


f. 98b 


f.9ga 


f. 99 


14 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


the eighth hour is the worship of all heavenly beings and fiery 
creatures. In the ninth hour is the service of the Angels of 
God who stand before Him, and the throne of His majesty. 
The tenth hour is for the water, and in it the Holy Ghost hovers 
and goes up over the other waters and chases the devils from 
them. - Were it not for the Holy Spirit hovering every day 
over the waters and descending in that hour, when any one 
drank water, would there not be destruction to him from the 
corrupting devils in it? If any one took the water in that 
hour, and one of the priests of God mixed it with holy oil and 
anointed with it the sick and those in whom were unclean 
spirits, they were cured of their diseases. In the eleventh hour 
there is joy and rejoicing to the righteous. In the twelfth hour 
the supplication and cry of men is accepted before God. 

The hours of the night. In the first hour there is the 
worship of the devils. In this hour, the hour of their worship, 
they do not hurt any one, and no one fears them until the time 
of their return from their worship. In the second hour there is 
the worship of the great fishes and all that is upon the water, and 
the creeping things that are therein. In the third hour is the 
worship of the fire which is below the abyss, about this hour it 
is not possible for any one to speak. In the fourth hour is the 
consecration of the seraphim. I heard that in this hour during 
the time of my stay in Paradise, before my rebellion against 
the commandment. When I transgressed the command, | could 
no longer hear the voices nor their movement and agitation 
as I used to hear them, and I could not see anything holy 
as I used to see it before [my] sin. In the fifth hour there is 
the worship of the water which is above the heaven. Verily 
I and the Angels used in that hour to hear voices from the 
water which is in the height, and a tumult as if of chariots 
and great wheels and the sounding amongst the waves, and 
commotion among the echoes in praise to the Lord. In the 
sixth hour is the supplication of the clouds to God when they 
are fearful and trembling. In the seventh hour the powers of the 
earth are led forth, and they sing praise, whilst the waters sleep 
and are stilled. If a man takes anything from the water in 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 15 


that hour and the priest mixes holy oil with it and anoints with 
it the sick and those who cannot sleep at night, verily the sick 
are cured and the wakeful sleep. In the eighth hour the grass 
comes forth from the earth. In the ninth hour is the service of 
the Angels and the entrance of prayers before God. In the 
tenth hour the gates of heaven are opened, and the cry of 
my believing children is heard, and they receive what they have 
asked from God, may He be exalted and praised! and the 
seraphim rub their wings, and by the force of their rubbing the 
cock crows in praise to the Lord. In the eleventh hour there is 
joy and delight over all the earth, for the Sun enters the Paradise 
of God, and its light arises in the regions of the earth. All 
creatures are illumined by the falling of the sun’s rays upon 
them. In the twelfth hour my children must burn jasmine 
before the Lord, for by it there is much repose in heaven for 
all its inhabitants. Know, O my son Seth, and attend to my 
saying. Be sure that God will come down to the earth as He 
said to me, and made me understand and know when He 
comforted me at my exit from Paradise. Praise to His names! 
He spoke to me, saying [that] at the end of time He will be 
incarnate of a Virgin girl named Mary and will be veiled in me. 
He will put on my skin, and will be born like the birth of man 
by a force and direction that none can understand but Himself 
and those to whom He reveals it; He will run with the children, 
boys and girls of that period; He will do wonders and signs 
openly ; He will walk on the waves of the sea as if walking on 
the dry land; He will rebuke the winds in a manifest way, and 
they will be led by His command. He will call to the waves 
of the sea, and they will answer Him obediently. At His 
command the blind shall see, the lepers shall be cleansed, the 
deaf shall hear, the dumb shall speak, the deformed shall be 
straightened, the lame shall spring up, the palsied shall rise 
and walk. Many rebels shall be led to God, those who have 
wandered shall be led aright, and devils shall be driven away. 
When the Lord comforted me with this, He said to me, “Ὁ Adam, 
grieve not, for thou art a god, as thou thoughtest to become 
by thy transgression of my commandment, and I will make 


f. 100a 


f. τοὸ Ὁ 


21013 


16 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


thee a god, not at this time, but after the lapse of years.’ The 
Lord said to me also, ‘I have verily brought thee out of the 
land of Paradise, to the land which brings forth thorns and 
briers, that thou mayest inhabit it; I will bend thy loins, and 
make thy knees tremble from age and senility. O thou dust! 
to death I will deliver thee, and thy body I will make to be food 
for maggots, and the fodder of the worm. After five days and a 
half! (of my days) I will have pity on thee in my mercy. I will 
come down to thee, and in thy house will I dwell and with thy 
body will I be clothed. For thy sake, O Adam, I will become a 
child; for thy sake, O Adam, I will appear in the market-places; 
for thy sake, O Adam, I will fast for forty days; for thy sake, O 
Adam, I will receive baptism; for thy sake, O Adam, I will be 
lifted up on the cross; for thy sake, O Adam, I will endure lies ; 
for thy sake, O Adam, I will be beaten with the whip; for thy 
sake, O Adam, I will taste vinegar; for thy sake, Ὁ Adam, my 
hands will be nailed; for thy sake, O Adam, I will be pierced 
with a spear; for thy sake, O Adam, I will thunder in the 
height ; for thy sake, O Adam, I will darken the sun; for thy 
sake, O Adam, I will cleave the rocks; for thy sake, O Adam, 
I will frighten the powers of heaven; for thy sake, O Adam, I 
will cause heaven to rain on the desert; for thy sake, O Adam, 
I will open the graves; for thy sake, O Adam, I will cause all 
creation to tremble; for thy sake, O Adam, I will make a 
new earth, and after three days, which I have spent in the grave, 
I will raise up the body which I took from thee, and will make 
it go up with me without any separation from me, and cause it 
to sit at the right hand of my Godhead. I will make thee a 
god as thou hast desired.’ Keep, O my son Seth, the command- 
ments of God, and do not despise my word to thyself, and learn 
that the Lord must come down to earth, and godless people will 
take Him, and stretch Him on the wood of the cross, and strip 
Him of His raiment, and raise Him between wicked thieves. 
He will go up upon the cross in the substance of His humanity, 
He will be killed, and the body which He took from us will be 
buried. Then after three days He will raise it and take it up 


1 See note, p. xv. 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 17 


with Him to heaven, and will set it with Him at the right hand 
of His divinity. Τὸ Him be the glory and the dignity and the 
praise and the greatness and the worship and the reverence and 
the hallelujah and the song, and to His Son, and to the Holy Ghost 
from now and always, and throughout all ages and times, Amen. 

Know, O my son, that there must come a Flood to wash all 
the earth on account of the children of Cain, the wicked man 
who slew thy brother for his envy about his sister Lusia. After 
the Flood through the wickedness of many congregations there 
shall be the end of the world, the conditions will be fulfilled, 
things will be perfected, the time will be cut short which I have 
fixed for the creatures, fire will consume whatever it reaches 
before’ the Lord, and the earth shall be consecrated. 

Seth wrote this Testament, and sealed it with the seal of his 
father Adam, which he had from Paradise, and the seal of 
Eve, and his own seal. And Adam died, and the hosts of 
the Angels assembled to put him on his bier, for his honour 
with God, and Seth embalmed him, and swathed him, and he 
and his sons bare rule. And he put him eastwards of Paradise 
where he slept at his exit from it, near the town that was 
built before all building, called Enoch in the inhabited world. 
When Adam died, the sun was darkened, and the moon for 
seven days and seven nights, with a gross darkness. 

Seth took the scroll in which he wrote the Testament of his 
father Adam into the Cave of Treasures along with the offerings 
which Adam had carried with him from the land of Paradise, 
that is to say, gold, myrrh, and incense, [about] which Adam 
taught Seth and his children that they should belong to three 
Magian kings, and that they should travel with these things to 
the Saviour of the world, to be born in a city called Bethlehem, 
a territory of Judah. 

There was not one of the children born to Adam before his 
death who did not gather to him; they bade him adieu, he 
prayed over them and wished them health. Then he died, 
in the nine hundred and thirtieth year by the reckoning of 
Abu-Seth. That is the beginning. The exit of our father 


1 Between the hands of, passim. 


f. 1011 


[1028 


f. 102b 


f. 103a 


18 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


Adam from this world was at three o’clock in the day, on 
Friday the sixth of Nisan, fourteen nights after the new moon. 
On a similar day our Lord the Christ gave up His spirit to His 
Father’s hand. Adam’s children and children’s children grieved 
for him a hundred and forty days, for he was the first mortal 
who died on the earth, and the tribes were divided among 
the people of Cain the murderer after the death of Adam. Seth 
took his children and his children’s children and their wives, 
and made them go up to the glorious and holy hill, the place in 
which Adam was buried. Cain and his people and his children 
stayed below the hill, in the place where he killed Abel. Seth 
became governor of the people of his time in godliness and 
purity and holiness. My initiation, O my son Clement, into the 
story of Adam and this his testament was from the Magi who 
travelled to the Lady Saint Mary with offerings at the time of 
the birth of Jesus Christ our God the Saviour. Verily we found 
that they had a scroll with all this in it, and it was put by for 
safe keeping. I and the other Jews believed in this, and there 
were many things in it besides what I have shewn to thee, which 
it is not proper to make known at this time, and I must tell 
thee about them afterwards, I will disclose to thee all the secrets 
with which I have been entrusted. The reason of God’s calling 
the children of Seth Ben-Adam, “the sons of God,” was as the 
book says what He had revealed to Seth about godliness and 
purity. The Lord appropriated them to Himself by this name ; 
it is the most famous of names on account of their favour with 
Him. He appointed them to replace the choir of Angels which 
had rebelled and fallen from Heaven. He put Seth and his 
race in the lower parts of Paradise, and around it on the holy 
hill, they praising the Lord and sanctifying His name in all 
peace, no thought intruding on them about the affairs of the 
world, their greatest work being praise and hallelujah with the 
Angels, for they heard their voices in praise and hallelujah in 
Paradise, for it was raised thirteen spans above them, by the 
span of the Holy Ghost. They did not undergo the least 
labour. The food with which they sustained their bodies 
was the fruit of trees growing at the summits of the Mount 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. I9 


of Paradise. The zephyr of Paradise, which reached these 
trees, ripened their fruits. This tribe was godly and holy; 
there was no anger in any one of them nor envy nor quar- 
relling nor pride nor hatred, and they held no shameless con- 
versations nor falsehood nor slander nor calumny, and they 
do not swear untruthfully nor in vain. Their oaths were among 
themselves by the purity of the blood of pure Abel. Their 
custom was to rise early, all of them, the old and the young, the 
male and the female; to go up to the top of the hill and to 
worship there before God and be blessed by the body of their 
father Adam. Then they would lift up their eyes to Paradise 
and praising and sanctifying God they would return to their 
place. 

Seth Ben-Adam the godly lived nine hundred and twelve 
years. Then he fell sick of his disease of which he died. 
There gathered to him Enos and Cainan and Mahlaleel and 
Jared and Enoch, their wives, their sons and their daughters. He 
prayed over them, and made vows for them, and blessed them, 
and said to them, “ By the truth of the blood of pure Abel, let 
not one of you descend from this holy hill! Do not mix with 
the children of Cain the murderer. You know the enmity 
between us since the murder of Abel the pure.” Then his son 
Enos came near him, and he said to him, “ Thou art lord of thy 
people. Behold, I die. Devote thyself to service before the 
Lord and before the consecrated body of our father Adam.” 
He made him swear by the blood of Abel the pure that he 
would govern his people well, and rule them in godliness and 
purity, and never cease the service before the body of Adam. 
Seth died !at the age of! nine hundred and twelve years, on 
Tuesday the twenty-fourth night of Ab, the twentieth year 
of the life of Enoch the righteous. He was embalmed with 
myrrh and frankincense and cassia, and put in the Cave of 
Treasures with the body of his father Adam. His people 
mourned for him forty days. 

Enos governed his tribe after the death of his father 
in purity and godliness; he did to them what his father 


1 Being the son of, passim. 


f. 103 b 


f. loga 


f. 104b 


20 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


commanded. When Enos had lived eight hundred and twenty 
years, Lamech the Blind, of the tribe of Cain the murderer, 
killed [some one] in the thicket known as Nod. This was the 
cause of it. Lamech was passing the thicket, leaning upon one 
of his youthful sons. He heard a movement in the thicket, it 
was the movement of Cain, for it was not possible for him to 
stay in one place since he had killed his brother. Lamech 
thought that this movement was that of some wild beasts. He 
took up a stone from the ground and threw it towards the 
moving thing. The stone hit Cain between the eyes and killed 
him. His son said, “ By God, thou hast killed our father Cain 
with thy shot.” Then Lamech the Blind lifted up his hands to 
give [him] a blow on the ear out of grief for the death of Cain. 
He hit the head of his son and killed him. When Enos had 
reached nine hundred and five years he fell sick of his disease of 
which he died, and there gathered to him the rest of the fathers ; 
amongst them were Jared, and Enoch, and Methuselah, and 
Cainan the son of Methuselah, and Mahlaleel, and their wives 
and their sons and their daughters. He blessed them and made 
vows for them and prayed over them and confirmed them in 
the oaths by the blood of Abel—“oh do not mix yourselves with 
the children of Cain, and oh do not go down from the holy 
mountain.” He reminded them of the enmity betwixt them on 
account of the murder of Abel. Then Cainan his son came near 
him. He said to him, “O my son, be to thy people and family 
as I have been to them, and govern them after my death.” He 
commanded his son Mahlaleel about the care of his tribe in god- 
liness and purity, and that he should not cease from the service 
before the body of our father Adam during his life. And Enos 
died when he had reached nine hundred and five years, on the 
sabbath day, when the third night of October had passed, in the 
fifty-third year of the life of Methuselah. His eldest son Cainan 
embalmed him, and swathed him, and put him in the Cave of 
Treasures. 

Cainan governed his people in godliness and holiness, and 
kept the commandments of his father. He lived for nine 


1 49°, probably for 8 90. 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 21 


hundred and twenty years and died on Wednesday, the 
thirteenth night of June. Mahlaleel looked after his burial, 
and put him in the Cave of Treasures with his fathers. Mah- 
laleel lived for eight hundred and ninety-five years. When 
death came near to him, he commanded his people like the 
commands of his fathers who had preceded him. He appointed 
Jared his son over the tribe. His death was on Sunday after 
two nights of Nisan had passed. Jared looked after him, and 
put him in the cave with his fathers. When Jared was of the 
age of five hundred years, some of the sons of Seth disobeyed 
the commands of their fathers, and threw away their faith 
behind their backs. One by one they began to go down from 
the holy hill to the tribes of the children of Cain. This was the 
reason, that Lamech the Blind was followed by two sons, one 
being called Tufeel (Jubal) and the other Tubalcain. They 
made lyres, that is, harps, flutes, drums, and other musical 
instruments. The Devils awoke harmonious tones in them, and 
there was not one among the sons of Cain to command good 
behaviour or to restrain from what was forbidden. Every one 
of them did according to his lust. They busied themselves 
with musical instruments, and with eating and drinking, and 
immorality. * * * * * * The Devil hunted the sons of Seth that 
he might mingle them with the children of Cain, by means of 
these musical instruments, for they heard the tones of them; he 
brought them down from the holy hill to the cursed land, and he 
removed them from the protection of God and His angels to 
the protection of the Devils; they chose death rather than life, 
and renounced the name which God had bestowed on them, 
because, may His name be sanctified! He called them the sons 
of the Lord, according to His gracious saying in the prophecy of 
David, where he says, “ Verily, ye are all gods, and ye shall 
be called the sons of the Most High. When ye do evil and 
defile your bodies with the idolatrous daughters of Cain, like 
them ye shall die in sin.” They longed for unclean amuse- 
ments. * * * They had no shame about this and thought no 
harm of it. The earth was contaminated; children were con- 
fused ; no one knew his child from the child of another. The 


Ε 105a 


f. 105b 


f. 106 a 


f. 106b 


22 PRITAB AlL-MAGALL. 


Devil incited them and he goaded them on and appropriated 
them to every misery. They rejoiced in their works. You 
could hear from them hateful laughter like the neighing of 
steeds, Their noise was heard in the holy mountain, and there 
assembled of the children of Seth a hundred powerful strong 
giants, for the descent. This came to [the knowledge of] Jared, 
and he was much troubled. He called them to his presence, 
and adjured them by the blood of Abel the Pure not to go 
down; he reminded them of the oaths which their fathers who 
had gone before had received for them. Enoch the Righteous 
was there and said to them, “Know, O sons of Seth, that 
whosoever rejects the commandment of the Father and opposes 
the oaths by which he has been adjured and puts them behind his 
back, and goes down from this holy mount, that he shall never 
come back to it.” But they did not turn at the warning of 
Jared and at the prohibitions of Enoch, and they went down. 
When they saw the daughters of Cain and their beauty, and 
that they uncovered their bodies without shame, they committed 
fornication with them, and destroyed their souls. When they 
had done this, they aimed at a return to the hill, but its stones 
became burning fire, and they could not do it. Another tribe 
wished for an alliance with them, not knowing about the affair 
of the stones. They went down to them, and defiled themselves 
with their defilement. 

When Jared reached the age of nine hundred and seventy-two 
years, Death came near to him. There gathered to him Enoch 
and Methuselah, and Lamech, and Noah. He prayed over them 
and made vows for them and said, “But as for you, go not down 
from this holy mountain ; yet your sons and your posterity shall 
be removed from it, because God will not allow them upon it on ac- 
count of their transgression of the commandments of the fathers.” 
Then he said to the rest of their children, “You shall journey to 
the dusty land which brings forth thorns and briers. Whosoever 
of you goes out from this holy land, let him take with him the 
body of our father Adam, and if he can take all the bodies of 
the fathers, let him do it, and take with him the books of the 
Testaments, and the gifts of gold and myrrh and frankincense, 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 23 


and put this with the body of our father Adam where God shall 
command him.” Then said he to Enoch, “ But thou, O my son, 
do not separate thyself from the service and praise before the 
body of our father Adam and serve before God in godliness 
and holiness all the days of thy life.” He died in the third hour 
of Friday when the twelfth night of May had passed, in the 360th 
year of the life of Methuselah. His son embalmed him and 
swathed him, and put him in the Cave of Treasures. God rejected 
the other children of Seth on account of their love of sin. Seventy 
assembled, and were inclined to descend. When Enoch and 
Methuselah and Lamech and Noah saw this, they were much 
grieved. When Enoch had finished his service before the Lord 
for fifty years, this being the 365th year of his life, he presided 
over his house with his God. He called for Methuselah and 
Lamech and Noah, and said, “I know that the Lord will be 
angry with this people, and will surely judge them without 
mercy. But you, the rest of the fathers and of the holy races, 
do not leave off the service before the Lord, and be pure 
and godly. Know that there shall not be born in this holy 
mountain after you any man who shall be father and chief to 
his people.” When Enoch had finished this testament, God 
took him up to the land of life, and made him dwell round 
about Paradise in the country where there is no death. Then 
the children of Seth removed from the holy mountain to the 
quarters of Cain and his children. None of them remained on 
the mountain save the three fathers, Methuselah, Lamech and 
Noah. Noah the just kept his virgin soul for 500 years. After 
that, the merciful God revealed to him about the people who 
were subject to him, and commanded him to marry a woman 
named Haikal the daughter of Namousa, the son of Enoch, 
the brother of Methuselah. God disclosed to him about the 
Deluge which He was about to send upon the earth, and 
taught him that this would be after a hundred years, and 
commanded him to prepare the ark, that is, the ship for his 
salvation and that of his children, and that he should cut 
the wood from the holy mountain and make it in the quarters 
of the sons of Cain. He commanded him to make its length 


f.107a 


f. 108 a 


f. 108 Ὁ 


24 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


300 cubits, according to [the length of] his arm; its breadth 
50 cubits, and its height 30 cubits, by [the length of] his 
arm; and the breadth of its top above should be one cubit, 
and that he should make three stories to it. The lowest should 
be for the tame and the wild animals and the cattle, the middle 
one for the birds and their like, and the highest one for him and 
his children and his wife and his sons’ wives. And that he 
should make in it storehouses for water and for food and for 
fodder. Also that he should prepare a gong of the cedar tree, 
its length to be three cubits, and its breadth one cubit, and 
that its hammer should be [made] of the same. ‘“ When thou 
beginnest to make the ship, thou shalt beat three strokes on it 
every day, one in the morning, the second in the middle of 
the day, that they may bring the workmen food; and the 
third at sunset for [their] departure. If they ask thee about 
thy work, tell them that God is sending a flood of water to 
cleanse the earth and that thou art making the ship to save 
thyself and thy children.” Noah received the commandment 
of the Lord, and married her. In the course of the hundred 
years she bare him three male children, Shem, Ham and Japhet. 
They also married some of the daughters of Methuselah. When 
Noah had finished the building of the ship, and entered it with 
those whom God commanded should enter it with him, the 
second thousand of the years of the time of Adam was finished, 
as the 70 interpreters expound. They said, From Adam till 
the Deluge was 2000 years. | 
When Lamech had lived 777 years, Methuselah his father 
died; this was four years before the Flood. Then Lamech 
died after him, and his death was on the twenty-first [day] of 
September, in the 68th year of the life of Shem, the first-born 
of Noah. His son Noah swathed him, and embalmed him, and 
put him in the Cave of Treasures. He mourned for him 40 days 
and remained with all the holy fathers, Noah and his children. 
The daughters of Cain conceived by the sons of Seth, and 
brought forth giant-sons. It was certainly supposed by some 
that the Book relates and says that the Angels came down 
to earth and mingled with the children of men, that those 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 25 


who came down and mingled with the children of men were 
really angels. This was only said on account of the sons of 
Seth and their union with the daughters of Cain, for God, may 
His name be glorified! had already out of His love to them, 
called them, as we said before, Sons of God and Angels of God. 
So he errs who thinks this; for union, that is, marriage, was not 
in the substance of spiritual beings, and not in their nature, and 
if it had been in them as it is in men, the Devils would not 
have left any one in the world alone without corrupting them, 
till not a virgin would have been left on the earth, for the 
foul Devils love corruption and fornication. As they cannot 
do this, they change their nature on account of it; they 
recommend it to men and make them love it. 

Methuselah lived for 969 years. When Death came to him, 
there gathered to him Lamech, and Noah, and Shem, and Ham, 
and Japhet and their wives, for none but they were left on 
the holy hill. Methuselah blessed them, and called to them ; 
he was weeping and sorrowful. He said to them, “ There 
remaineth none but you on this mountain out of all the tribes 
who once were on it. The Lord God of our fathers who formed 
our father Adam and our mother Eve and blessed them till 
the earth was filled with their progeny, may He bless you and 
multiply you and cause your fruit to grow. May He be to you 
a keeper and a shepherd. I ask of Him to fill the earth with 
your progeny, and to help you and strengthen you and save you 
from the fearful punishment that is coming upon this hill, and 
that He may give you a share of the gift which He gave to our 
father Adam, that He may bring blessings into your dwellings, 
and bestow upon you prophecy, power, and priesthood.” Then 
he said to Noah, “O thou blessed of the Lord, hear my speech 
and do my commandment. Know that I go out of this world 
as the saintly fathers went out of it. Verily the Lord shall send 
a Deluge to drown the earth for the many sins of men, but thou 
and thy children shall be saved. When I am dead, embalm my 
body like as were embalmed the bodies of the fathers who have 
gone before. Bury me in the Cave of Treasures. Take thy wife, 
and thy sons, and thy sons’ wives; go down from this mountain, 


G. D 


52 


f. 1091 


1 2102 


f. 110b 


26 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


and bear with thee the body of our father Adam, and the offer- 
ings which thou didst bring out with him from Paradise, namely, 
gold and myrrh and frankincense. Put the body of our father 
Adam within the Ark which God commanded me to prepare; and 
the other bodies separately from it, so that the body of Adam 
may be like a dyke ever in the midst. Put the offerings on his 
breast. Dwell thou and thy sons in the east of the ark, thy 
wife and thy sons’ wives in the west, so that the body of our 
father Adam may be a barrier to hinder the men from sinning 
with regard to the women, and to hinder them from sinning 
with regard to the men; let them not gather together for food 
or drink till ye come out of the Ark. When the water of the 
Deluge departs from the earth, and ye come out of the Ark, and 
dwell upon the earth, then gather ye together for food and 
drink, and cease not the service before the body of our father 
Adam nor the ministration before God in godliness and holiness 
within the Ark. When your exit from it takes place, then put 
the offerings which thou didst bring out from Paradise in the 
east of the land in which thou dwellest. When Death comes to 
thee, make thy Testament to thy son Shem. Command him to 
carry the body of our father Adam, and to bury it in the middle 
of the earth. Verily (it is) the place in which there shall be 
salvation to him and to his children. Where he burieth the 
body, let him appoint a man from among his children to serve 
before the body and to minister. Let him be pure all the days 
of his life, and let him command him that he dwell not in any 
house, that he shed no blood, that he shave not his hair, nor 
pare his nails, nor bring there any offering of beasts, but let his 
offering before the Lord be of fine bread, pure and white, and 
the best drink, pressed from the fruit of the vine, until the time 
that God shall certainly command him. Verily the Angel of 
the Lord shall go before the man chosen to officiate as a priest 
before the body of Adam till he shall put it in the middle of 
the earth, and where the body ought to be buried. Let this 
chosen one be commanded that his raiment be of the skins of 
beasts, and that he be unique as it is unique. Verily he is 
the priest of the glorious God.” When Methuselah had finished 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 27 


this testament, and tears were coming down from his eyes, on 
account of the grief that was in his heart, he died. Then nine 
hundred and sixty-nine years were completed, it was in Adar 
(March) on a Sunday. Noah and Shem and Japhet and 
their wives laid him out with weeping and groaning. They 
held a mourning for him for 40 days; he was swathed and 
embalmed and laid with the fathers in the Cave of Treasures. 
They were blessed by the other bodies that were there. Then 
Noah bore the body of Adam and the bodies of the fathers from 
the Cave, and put them into holy coffins. Of the offerings Shem 
carried the gold, Ham carried the myrrh, and Japhet carried the 
frankincense. They left the Cave of Treasures with weeping 
and groaning. A noise was raised by them which was heard 
from Paradise, sorrow and mourning on account of [their] 
departure from the mountain, when they knew that they 
were leaving it for good. They lifted up their heads towards 
Paradise, they sobbed, and wept, and said: “ Peace be to thee, 
O holy Paradise! dwelling-place of our father Adam; we are 
deprived of thy shelter, which is denied to us then, on our return 
to the cursed land in which we suffer pains and endure labours. 
Peace be to thee, O Cave of Treasures! from us and from 
all the bodies of the fathers. Peace be to thee, O glorious 
dwelling-place and inheritance of the saintly fathers for ever. 
Peace be to you, O ye Fathers, beloved friends of God. Pray 
for us and bless us, and entreat for our salvation, O holy 
ones of God, who are well-pleasing unto Him. Peace be to 
Seth, chief of the fathers. Peace be to Enos, governor of 
his people, and righteous judge amongst them. Peace be to 
Cainan and Mahlaleel, those who govern their people in purity. 
Peace be to Methuselah and Jared and Lamech and Enoch, 
servants of God. We entreat you all to mediate for our salva- 
tion lest we be prevented looking for our inheritance from this 
time forth for evermore.’ Then they came down from the 
mountain, kissing its stones and embracing its trees with 
weeping and great grief, and they travelled towards the land. 
When Noah had finished building the ship, he entered it, and 


12 1115 


f. 11 1 


{119 


11120 


28 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


brought in the body of Adam and put it in the middle 
of it, with the offerings upon its breast. This was on 
a Friday, on the 17th day of March, it is also said, of 
May. Early the next day he brought in the beasts and 
the cattle, and made them dwell in the lowest deck. In 
the middle of the day he brought in the birds and all the 
sentient beings, and made them dwell in the middle deck. 
At sunset Noah and his sons and his sons’ wives entered, and 
dwelt in the topmost deck. The Ark was built in the form 
of a Church, in which the men are prevented from mingling 
with the women; as there is peace and love betwixt man 
and woman, and between the elders amongst them and the 
youths, thus there was love betwixt the rest of the beasts 
and the birds and the sentient beings in the ship; and as wise 
men are at peace with their inferiors, thus were the lions and 
the ewes at peace in the Ark. All that were in it were seven 
pairs of all the clean beasts, and two pairs of the unclean ones. 
When Noah and his people had arrived, the Lord shut the Ark. 
Then the doors of heaven were opened, and the doors of the 
abyss, and the waters came down in torrents, and the imprisoned 
sea appeared, which is called Oceanus, which encircles the whole 
earth. Raging winds were sent out from all directions. When 
the sons of Seth saw this, they came near to the place of the Ark, 
and entreated Noah to carry them; but he gave them no answer 
about it, because the Ark was bolted and sealed by command of 
the Lord, and the Angel of the Lord was standing directing it. 
Repentance encompassed them, sorrow came upon them, and 
they had no refuge from destruction, as they were also hindered 
from going up to the holy mountain. They were all destroyed 
by drowning and suffocation, in the thick waters and the raging 
winds, as David the Prophet sang about their state where he 
said, “I said, All ye are gods, and children of the Most High 
ye shall be called; by this great sign ye are marked; but 
sin hath overthrown you, and ye have rebelled against the com- 
mandment; ye have defiled your bodies with the idolatrous 
daughters of Cain, and ye shall die the death like them. Ye 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 29 


shall be tormented with the Prince who fell from the heavenly 
rank.” The Ark was lifted up from the earth to the height 
of the waters, and all that was on the earth perished in the 
deluge; the waters rose above the tops of the mountains fifteen 
cubits, by the holy cubit. The waves bore the ship till they 
brought it to the lower parts of Paradise. It was blessed from 
Paradise; the tops of the waves were rolled back, and they did 
obeisance before it, then returning from it were poured out to 
the destruction of those who remained on the earth. The ship 
flew on the wings of the wind above the waters from the east to 
the west, and from the south to the sea, like the sign of the 
Cross. It stood above the waters 150 days; the waves were 
stilled and laid to rest at the end of the seventh month from the 
beginning of the Deluge. The Ark stood upon the mountains, 
the Kurdish mountains, and the waters were divided from one 
another. They all returned to their places, and did not cease 
diminishing gradually, till the tenth month, which was February. 
He looked at the tops of the mountains from the Ark. On the 
tenth of March Noah opened the Ark from the eastern side, and 
sent the Raven, that at its return he might learn the news of the 
earth. It did not return to him. He sent the Dove; it circled 
round, and found no place for its foot. It returned at sunset. 
After a week Noah sent another Dove. It returned to him with 
an olive-branch in its mouth. About the Dove there are holy 
mysteries. The first dove resembles the first covenant, to which 
there was no rest among the rejected nations; the second 
dove the second covenant, which found rest with the nations 
that accepted the mysteries of baptism and preached the Christ 
at the end of 600 years of the life of righteous Noah. One day 
of Nisan (April) had passed, and the water was removed from 
the earth. On this day Noah and his wife and his sons and his 
sons’ wives went out of the ship. Their entrance to the ship 
had been in separation, their exit from it was in unity. At 
their exit came out all the beasts and the cattle and the birds 
and the creeping things which were in the ship. Noah built a 
town, and called it Thamanut, which remains to this day. The 
number of those who were in the ship with Noah was eight 


15112 


15110 


f.114a 


f. 114b 


30 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


persons. Noah built an altar to the Lord and offered upon 
it an offering of the beasts and the clean birds that were slain. 
God accepted his offering, and gave a covenant that He would 
not send a deluge of water on the earth to all eternity. May 
His names be sanctified! He took off wrath from them in 
regard to the bow in the clouds. By it He put away the bow- 
string of anger, for before the Deluge men saw in heaven the 
bowstring of anger and the arrow of wrath. The sons of Noah 
planted in the town the fruit of the vine, and pressed from it a 
new drink; they gave their father Noah to drink, and he got 
drunk, for he was not accustomed to drink. While he was 
drunk he slept, and his nakedness was uncovered. Ham looked 
at him, and laughed and mocked at him, and fetched his 
brothers to mock with him. When Shem and Japhet knew the 
reason was about the uncovering of their father, they were 
grieved at it; they took a garment, threw it upon their hands, 
and went backwards, lest they should see their father uncovered ; 
then they threw the garment upon him. When Noah awoke 
from his drunken sleep, his wife told him what had happened 
about his sons, and he was angry with Ham, and said, “Let him 
and Canaan be cursed, and let him be a slave to his brethren.” 
But Noah cursed Canaan, who was not guilty, and the guilt was 
Ham’s; for he knew that when Canaan should arrive at man’s 
estate, he should renew what had already been blotted out 
of the works of the children of Cain, the music-halls and such 
like. When he came to man’s estate, he did all this, and Noah 
knew it, was concerned about him and grieved at his work, that 
according to the example of the works of Canaan, the sons 
of Seth fell into sin, he increased in his curse of Canaan, 
wherefore his sons became slaves. They are the Copts, the 
Abyssinians, the Hindoos, the Mysians and other negroes. 
Ham was a hypocrite, a lover of unclean desire all the days of 
his life. This was in his mockery of his father. The sleep of 
Noah in his drunkenness was a type of the crucifixion of the 
Christ and His slumber in the tomb for three days, as David the 
prophet says about it, “The Lord awoke from his sleep like 
a man who recovers from strong drink.” When Noah awoke 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 21 


from his drunken sleep, he cursed Canaan and made his 
posterity slaves. Likewise when the Christ arose from the 
grave He cursed the Devil and destroyed those who had 
crucified Him, and scattered them among the nations. The 
sons of Canaan became slaves for ever, carrying burdens upon 
their necks. Every proprietor negotiates riding about on his 
business, but the children of Canaan negotiate about the affairs 
of their masters, as poor men on foot, and they are called the 
slaves of slaves. 

Noah lived after going out of the ship 350 years. When his 
death came near, there gathered to him Shem, and Ham, and 
Japhet, and Arphaxad, and Salah. He made vows for them, and 
desired the presence of Shem his firstborn, and commanded him 
secretly, saying to him, “When I die, bury me. Go into the 
Ark of safety, and take out of it the body of our father Adam 
secretly, let no one with thee know. Make for it a large chest, 
and put it within. Prepare for thyself a store of bread and drink, 
and carry the chest in which is the body of our father. Take 
with thee Melchizedek, the son of Malih. Verily the Lord hath 
chosen him from the rest of your sons to minister before our 
father Adam. When thou reachest the centre of the earth, bury 
the body there, and set Melchizedek in the place for the service 
of the body and the praise before it. Verily the Angel of the 
Lord will go before you to guide you two to the place for the 
body, which is the centre of the earth. From it shall be seen 
the power of God. The four pillars of the world are joined 
together and have become one pillar, and from it shall be 
salvation to Adam and to all his children.” Thus it was written 
in the tables which Moses received from the hand of the Lord 
and broke at the time of his anger against his people. Noah 
strengthened Shem in receiving the testament, and told him 
that it was the Testament of Adam to Seth, and of Seth to 
Enos, and of Enos to Cainan, and of Cainan to Mahlaleel, and 
of Mahlaleel to Jared, and of Jared to Enoch, of Enoch to 
Methuselah, and of Methuselah to Lamech, and of Lamech to 
Noah; he made him swear that no one [else] should attend to 


f.115a 


f. 115 b 


f. 116a 


32 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


vy 


what he commanded in regard to the body of Adam. When he 
had finished his testament, he died, being 950 years old, 
on a Wednesday. Shem embalmed him, and with him his 
other children put him on a bier and buried him. They 
raised a wail over him for forty days. Then Shem went secretly 
into the ship, and took out the body of Adam. He sealed the 
ship with his father’s seal. Then he desired the presence of 
Ham and Japhet and said to them, “Know that Noah my 
father commanded me to journey after his death to the elevated 
land and to go round it to the place of the sea, that I may attend 
to the state of its trees, and fruits and rivers. I have already 
resolved on this, and have left my wife and children with you; 
take heed to them till the time of my return.” They said to 
him, “Take with thee a man since thou hast resolved on this, for 
the land which thou hast described has wild beasts and hunting 
lions.” He said to them, “ Verily, the Angel of God is with me, 
he is my Saviour.” His brethren called to him and said, “ The 
Lord be with thee wherever thou dwellest.” Then he said to 
them, “ Verily, our father at his death made me swear not to 
enter the ship nor allow any one [else] to enter it. I have 
received his testament, and sealed it with his seal, and beware 
that -~ye-enter it not! ye, nor: any of your. children: ὦ J hey 
pledged themselves to him concerning this. Then he approached 
the father and mother of Melchizedek and said to them, “1 wish 
that you would give me Melchizedek that I may journey with 
him in my way.” They said to him, “He is before thee, as thou 
wouldest journey, take him with thee.” Then Shem called Melchi- 
zedek by night, and bore with him the body of Adam secretly. 
They went out, the Angel going before them, till he brought 
them to the place with the utmost speed. He said to them, 
“Set him down, for this is the centre of the earth.” And they 
put him down from their hands. When he came to the ground, 
the earth was cleft for him as a door, and the body was let down 
into it, and they put him in it. When the body rested in its 
place, the earth returned and covered it over. The place was 
called Gumgumah, “of a skull,” because in it was placed the 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 33 


skull of the Father of mankind, and Gulgulah, because it was 
conspicuous in the earth, and was despised by its sons, for in 
it was the head of the hateful Dragon which seduced Adam. 
It was called also Otaria, which is, being interpreted, “the 
families of the world,” because to it is the gathering together of 
mankind. Shem said to Melchizedek son of Malih, “Know 
that thou art the priest of the Everlasting God, who hath chosen 
thee from the rest of men to minister before Him before the 
body of our father Adam. Accept the Lord’s choice of thee, 
and never leave this place. Do not marry any woman, do not 
shave thy hair, nor pare thy nails. Shed no blood for thyself, and 
sacrifice no beast. Do not build a building over this place. 
Let thine offerings before the Lord be of fine pure bread, and 
[let the] drink be of the juice of the vine. The Angel of the 
Lord is with thee for ever.” He wished him peace, and bade him 
farewell and embraced him, and returned to his dwelling. Then 
came to him Jozadak and Malih, the parents of Melchizedek. 
They asked him about him, and he told them that he had died 
on the road, and that he had looked after him and buried him. 
His father and his people sorrowed over him with a great 
sorrow. When Shem the righteous was 700 years old, he died, 
and his son Arphaxad looked after him, and Salah and Eber, 
and they buried him. When Arphaxad was thirty years old, 
he begat Salah his son, and when he was 465 years old, he died, 
and Salah and Eber looked after him. They buried him in the 
town that Arphaxad had built, known as Arphaxad (cod. 
Arbalsarbat). When Salah was thirty years old, he begat Eber, 
and when he had completed 430 years, he died. Eber and 
Peleg looked after him; he was buried in the town that Salah 
had built, known as Salhadib. When Eber was thirty years 
old, he begat Peleg, and when he had completed 434 years, he 
died ; his son Peleg buried him, and Reu and Serug in the town 
which Eber had built and had called by his name. When Peleg 
attained 239 years, all the tribes of the sons of Shem, and Ham 
and Japhet gathered themselves together and journeyed to the 
elevated land; they found in the place known as Shinar a 
beautiful plain. They dwelt in it, and their speech was altogether 


G. E 


f. 116b 


1: ΤΙ a 


f-1175 


f.118a 


f. 118b 


34 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


Syriac, and it is called Resany’, and Chaldaean ; it is the tongue 
and speech of Adam. Verily the Syriac language is the Queen 
of languages and the most comprehensive; from it all other 
tongues are derived; Adam isa Syriac name. Whoever asserts 
that it is Hebrew tells a falsehood. Speakers of Syriac will 
not stand on the left of the Lord but on His right, for the 
writing of Syriac runs from right to left, and of others the way 
of the Persian from left to right. In the days of Peleg the 
nations built the tower at Babel, upon which their tongues were 
diversified and confounded and divided; because of their con- 
fusion the town was called Babel. Peleg was very much grieved 
about this when he saw the scattering of the nations in the 
regions of the earth. He died, and his son Reu, and Serug and 
Nahor buried him in the town which he had built and had 
called by his name. The earth became two portions among 
two chiefs of tribes; they allowed to every tribe and tongue 
a kine. and a: Chiet, they appointed im. the’ race of Japhet 
thirty-seven kings, and in the race of Ham sixteen kings. The 
kingdom of the sons of Japhet was from the border ot the holy 
mountain and Mount Nod (8 99 ἢ), which is in the borders of the 
Fast, to the Tigris and the side of Algauf, and from Bactria to 
the island town (or Gades = Cadix). The kingdom of the sons 
of Shem was from the land of Persia, that is from the borders 
of the East to the Hardasalgs sea among the borders of the 
West. They had authority also in the centre of the earth. 
When Reu was thirty-two years old, Serug was born to him; 
the length of his life being 232 years. At the end of 163 years 
of the life of Reu, Nimrod the giant reigned over the whole 
earth. The beginning of his kingdom was from Babel. It was 
he who saw in the sky a piece of black cloth and a crown; he 
called Sasan the weaver to his presence, and commanded him to 
make him a crown like it; and he set jewels in it and wore it. 
He was the first king who wore a crown. For this reason 
people who knew nothing about it, said that a crown came down 
to him from heaven. The length of his reign was sixty-nine 
years. He died in the days of Reu, and the third thousand 


1 Perhaps from Resen, Gen. x. 12. 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 35 


since Adam was completed. In his days the people of Egypt 
set up a king over them called Firnifs. He reigned over them 
for sixty-eight years. In his days also a king reigned over the 
town of Saba and annexed to his kingdom the cities of 
Ophir and Havilah, his name was Pharaoh. He built Ophir 
with stones of gold, for the stones of its mountains are pure 
gold. After him there reigned over Havilah a king called 
Hayul. He built it and cemented it, and after the death of 
Pharaoh women reigned over Saba until the time of Solomon 
son of David. When he (Reu) was 239 years old, he died. 
Serug his son and Nahor buried him in the town called 
Oa‘nan, which Reu had built for himself. When Serug was 
thirty years old, his son Nahor was born to him. In the days 
of Serug idols were worshipped, and they were adored instead 
of God, and the people in that day were scattered in the earth; 
there was not among them a teacher nor a lawgiver, nor a guide 
to the way of truth, nor even a right way. They wandered and 
were rebellious and became a sect. Some of them worshipped 
the Sun and the Moon, some of them worshipped the sky, some 
_ of them worshipped images, some of them worshipped the stars, 
some of them worshipped the earth, some of them worshipped 
beasts, some of them worshipped trees, and some of them 
worshipped waters and winds and such like, for the Devil 
blinded their hearts and left them in darkness without light. 
No one among them believed in the Last Day and the Resur- 
rection. When one of them died, his people made an image 
in his likeness, and put it upon his tomb, lest his memory 
should be cut off. The earth was filled with sins, and idols 
were multiplied in it, made in the likenesses of males and 
females. 

When Serug was 230 years old he died. His son Nahor, 
and Terah and Abraham buried him in the town which Serug 
had built and called it Serug. Terah was born to Nahor when 
he was twenty-nine years old. In the third year of the life of 
Nahor, God looked up through His remembrance at His 
creatures, and they were worshipping idols. He sent upon 
them earthquakes which destroyed all the idols. Their 


f. l1ga 


f. 119b 


1 20a 


f. 120b 


36 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


worshippers did not turn from their error, but persevered in 
their godlessness. In the twenty-sixth year of the rule of 
Terah appeared witchcraft. The beginning of it was that 
a rich man died; his son made a golden image of him and 
placed it upon his tomb as a mark [to] the people of 
his age, and appointed a young man to guard it. The 
Devil entered into the image, and spoke to its guardian 
from the tongue of the deceased and [with] his voice. The 
guardian told the son of the deceased about it. After some 
days robbers entered the dwelling of the deceased, and took 
all that belonged to his son, and his grief was greater at this, 
and they bewailed him beside the grave of his father. The 
Devil called to him from the image with a voice like the voice 
of his father, and said, “O my son, weep not. Bring me thy 
little son, to sacrifice him to me, and I will restore to thee all 
that has been taken from thee.” He brought his son to the 
tomb and sacrificed him to the Devil. When he had done this, 
the Devil entered him and taught him witchcraft, unveiled his 
mysteries, and taught him omens and auguries. Since that 
time people offer their children to Devils. At the completion 
of a hundred years of the life of Nahor, God, may His name be 
exalted! looked on the godlessness of men, and their sacrificing 
of their children to the Devils, and their adoration of images. 
God, may His names be sanctified, sent them raging winds which 
tore away the images and their worshippers, and buried them in 
the earth and strewed over them great mounds and towering 
hills, and they are below these unto this day. Some assert on this 
account that in the time of Terah there was a Deluge of wind. 
Wise men of India say that these mounds came into existence in 
the days of the Deluge. That is nonsense, for image-worship was 
after the Deluge of water, and the Deluge was not sent upon 
them for the worship of images; verily that was done because 
there was so much corruption on the earth among the children 
of Cain, and the musical instruments which they invented. 
There was no people inhabiting this rough wild land, but when 


1 Professor Seybold suggests that this may have been originally, as also on 


page 38, line 6, .النجر واافال‎ 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 37 


our fathers were not found worthy of the neighbourhood of 
Paradise they were thrust away to it. Then they came out of 
the ship to this land, and were scattered amongst its regions. He 
talks nonsense who asserts that these elevated mounds have 
never ceased in the earth, for they have been formed since the 
time of the anger of God about idol-worship. They were turned 
topsy-turvy, and there is no mound on the earth beneath which 
a Devil with an image appeareth not. In the days of Nimrod the 
giant, he looked at fire from heaven, and fire came up from the 
earth. When Nimrod saw it he adored it, and appointed in the 
place where he saw it people to worship it, and to throw incense 
into it. Since that time magicians adore fire when they see it 
coming up from the heaven and from the earth, and they worship 
it to this day. A chief magician named Sasir found a spring 
of bountiful water at a place in the country of Atropatene. 
He erected upon it a white horse. Whoever bathed in that 
fountain worshipped this horse. The Magi honour the horse, 
and there is a sect of them who worship it to this day. 
Nimrod travelled till he arrived at the land of Maritin. When 
he entered the city of Altiras he found there Bouniter the 
fourth son of Noah. Nimrod’s army was on a lake, and he 
went down there one day to bathe in it. When Nimrod saw 
Bouniter the son of Noah, he did obeisance to him. Bouniter 
said to him, “O giant king, why do you adore me?” Nimrod 
said to him, “I did thee homage because thou didst meet me.” 
Nimrod stayed with him three years that he might teach him 
wisdom and strategy, then he wandered away from him. He 
said to Nimrod, “ Thou shalt not return a second time.” When 
Nimrod was passing through the East, he deposited books 
making known what Bouniter the son of Noah had taught him. 
The people were astonished at his wisdom. ‘There was among 
the people entrusted with the worship of fire a man called 
Ardashir. When Ardashir saw the wisdom of Nimrod and the 
excellency of his star-gazing (Nimrod had a perfect genius), he 
envied him for this, and implored a Devil who had appeared to 
him beside the fire to teach him the wisdom of Nimrod. The 
Devil said to him, “Thou canst not do this until thou have 


5 12123 


f. I122a 


f.. 1225 


38 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


fulfilled the magic rite, and its perfection is the marriage 
of mothers, daughters and sisters.’ Ardashir answered him 
concerning this, and did what he commanded him about it. 
Since that time the Magi allow the wedlock of mothers, sisters 
and daughters. The Devil also taught Ardashir the knowledge 
of omens and auguries!, and physiognomy, and fortune-telling, 
and divining and witchcraft, which were doctrines of the Devil, 
and the Chaldeans? gave one another this doctrine; these were 
the Syrians, and some people say that it is the tongue of the 
Nabataeans. Every one who uses aught of these doctrines, his 
guilt before God is great. But the knowledge which Nimrod 
learned from Bounitar, verily Bounitar the son of Noah learned 
it from God, the great and glorious, for it is the counting of the 
stars, and the years and the months; the Greeks call this 
science Astronomy, and the Persians call it Astrology. Nimrod 
built great towns in the East, namely, Hadanitin, Ellasar, 
Seleucia, Ctesiphon, Ruthin, and the towns of Atrapatene, and 
Telalén, and others that he chose for himself. 

When Terah, father of Abraham, reached two hundred and 
three years he died. Abraham and Lot buried him in the city 
of Haran. [God] commanded him that he should travel to the 
Holy Land. Abraham took with him Sarah his wife, and Lot 
his brother’s son, and journeyed to the land of the Amorites. 
Abraham the Just was then seventy-five years old. When 
he reached eighty years, he fought with the nations and put 
them to flight and delivered Lot from them, and he had no 
child at that time, for Sarah was barren. When he returned 
from the war with the nations, God commanded him to 
journey and pass over to Mount Yabits. When he got 
there he met Melchizedek, priest of God. When Abraham 
saw him, he did homage to him and was blessed by him. He 
offered before him fine pure bread and drink. Melchizedek 
blessed Abraham and made vows for him. Thereupon God com- 
manded Melchizedek to pare his nails. Melchizedek consecrated 
an offering of fine bread and drink. Abraham offered some 


1 See note, page 36. 
2 Probably .الكلدانيون‎ 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 39 


of it, and paid to Melchizedek the tenth of his goods. Then 
God, may His names be sanctified, discoursed with Abraham 
the second time and said to him, “ Thy reward? shall be great 
with Me. Since thou hast received the blessing of Melchizedek 
and thou art worthy to receive from his hand the gift of bread 
and wine, I will bless thee, and will multiply thy seed.” 

When Abraham reached eighty-six years, Ishmael was born 
to him of Hagar the Egyptian bond-maid. Pharaoh of Egypt 
had given her to Sarah, the wife of Abraham, who was his sister 
by his father but not by his mother, for Terah married two 
wives; the name of the one was Yuta, she was the mother of 
Abraham, and she died when she gave birth to him; the name 
of the other was Nahdeef, and she was the mother of Sarah. 
Therefore Abraham answered as he said to the king of Egypt 
when he wished to do violence to Sarah, that “she is my sister.” 
When Abraham reached ninety-nine years, God came down to 
his house, and gave to Sarah a son. When he reached a hundred 
years, Isaac was born to him, the son whom God gave him of 
barren Sarah. When Isaac reached twelve years, Abraham 
offered him to God as an offering upon the hill Yabts, which is 
the place in which the Christ was crucified, and which is known 
as Golgolah. In it Adam was created ; in it Abraham looked at 
the tree which bore the lamb by which Isaac was redeemed from 
sacrifice, and in it the body of Adam was laid. In it was the 
altar of Melchizedek, and in it David looked at the Angel of the 
Lord bearing a sword for the destruction of Jerusalem. Verily 
Abraham's carrying up there of Isaac to the altar is a type of 
the crucifixion of the Christ for the salvation of Adam and his 
children. The proof of this is the saying of the Christ in the 
holy Gospel to the children of Israel, that “ your father Abraham 
did not cease to long to look on my days, and when he saw them, 
he rejoiced in them.” The lamb which Abraham saw hanging 
on the tree was a type of the slaying of the Christ in the body, 
which He had taken from us, and of His crucifixion also, 
because the lamb was not the child of a ewe and was worthy 
of being sacrificed. In that place Abraham saw what pertained 

Probably .اجرتك‎ 


f. 1218 


[1270 


Ἐ 1578 


f. 124b 


40 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


to the salvation of Adam through the crucifixion of the Christ. 
In the hour that Abraham took up Isaac to the altar, Jerusalem 
began to be built, and the reason was this. When Melchizedek, 
priest of God, appeared to men, his fame reached the kings 
of the nations, and they came to him from every region to be 
blessed. Among those that came to him were Abimelech king 
of Gerar, Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Delassar 
(Ellasar), Kedarlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of men, 
Bera king of Sodom, Birsha king of Gomorrah, or Simeon king 
of the Amorites, and Simair king of Saba, Bislah king of Bela, 
Hiar king of Damascus, and Yaftar king of the deserts. When 
these kings, O my son Clement, saw Melchizedek king of Peace 
and priest of God, and heard his word, they honoured and 
applauded him and asked him to journey with them to their 
lands. He told them that he was not allowed to leave his place, 
in which God had appointed him to an office. Their unanimous 
counsel was that a city should be built for him at their expense, 
and that they should rule it. They built for him the Holy City, 
and delivered it to him, and Melchizedek called it Jerusalem. 
Then Maoalon king of Teman journeyed to Melchizedek 
when his fame reached him, and gave him noble and glorious 
presents. He honoured him when he saw him and heard his 


word. All kings and nations honoured him and called him the 


Father of Kings. Some people think that Melchizedek will not 
die, and bring as proof the saying of David the Prophet in 
his psalms, “Thou art a priest for ever after the figure of 
Melchizedek.” David does not wish (to say) in this his saying 
that he will not die, and how can this be when he is a man? 
But God honoured him and made him His priest, and in the 
Torah there is no mention of a beginning to his days. There- 
fore David sang as he sang about him. Moses does not make 
mention of him in his book, for he was only relating the 
genealogy of the Fathers. But Shem the son of Noah has told 
us in the books of the Testaments that Melchizedek was the son 
of Malih, son of Arphaxad, son of Shem, son of Noah; and his 
mother was Jozedek. 

In the hundredth year of Abraham there reigned in the East 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 41 


a king called Karmos, he who built Shamshat, and Claudia 
,(اقلودية)‎ and Careem, and Leouza. He had a son called Caran 
and three daughters; the name of the one being Shamshout, 
and the other Harzea, and the other Leouza, and he called 
these cities by their names. When Peleg had reached fifty 
years, Nimrod journeyed to the province of Mesopotamia, and 
built Nisibis, and Raha (Edessa), and Haran; to every city he 
put a wall, and he called the wall of Haran by the name of 
Harteeb, the wife of Sem, priest of the beautiful mountains. 
The people of Haran made an image in the form of this Sem, 
and worshipped it. Ba‘alsameen fell in love with Nalkeez wife 
of Nimroda, and Nimroda fled before Ba‘alsameen ; on account 
of this the children of Israel wept over Nimroda and burnt the 
city of Haran in anger about him. When Sarah died, Abraham 
the famous (or ,الخليل‎ the Friend, i.e. of God) married a woman 
named Kentoura, daughter of Yaftour king of the deserts. When 
Isaac, son of Abraham, reached forty years, Eleazar his servant 
journeyed in search of her who was named Rebecca for Isaac. 
When Abraham reached one hundred and seventy years he 
died; his sons Ishmael and Isaac buried him by the side of 
Sarah his wife. When Isaac reached sixty years, Rebecca his 
wife conceived Jacob and Esau. When the birth-pangs took 
hold of her, she went to Melchizedek; he blessed her and 
prayed over her. He said to her, “God has already formed 
two men in thy womb, who shall be chiefs of two great nations. 
The elder of them shall be beneath the younger. Each of 
them shall hate his brother, and the elder shall serve a man 
of the race of the other. I am servant of that man, whose 
name shall be called ‘the living God, and he shall come up 
upon a branch of cursing because of those who rebel against 
him.” 

When sixty years of Isaac’s life had passed, he built a city 
which he called Ail, and in his sixty-fourth year Jericho was 
built by the hand of seven kings, the king of the Hittites, the 
king of the Amorites, the king of the Jebusites, the king of the 
Canaanites, the king of the Girgashites, the king of the Hivites 
and the king of the [Perizzites?], and every one of them built 


Gs F 


Lizga 


1 125.5 


L126 


f. 126b 


42 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


a wall to it. But the town which was called Masr (Egypt), 
the king of the Copts had built. Ishmael was the first to work 
with a hand-mill, and it was called the mill of the kingdom. 
After one hundred and thirty years of the life of Isaac, that 
is in the seventy-seventh year of Jacob, God blessed Jacob, 
and he received the blessings of Isaac, and the blessing of 
Esau his brother by deceit. He journeyed to the land of the 
East. While he was on his journey, behold, a deep sleep came 
upon him. He prepared below his head seven stones and slept 
upon them. In his sleep he saw a ladder of fire whose top was 
in heaven, and its bottom on the earth. On it Angels were 
descending from it and ascending, and he saw the Lord sitting 
on the top. When he awoke he said, “ Doubtless this place is 
the house of God.” He took the stones which were beneath his 
head and built them into an altar and anointed it with oil, and 
vowed there that he would give to God the tenth of all his goods 
as an offering. The power of this vision, O my son Clement, is 
not difficult to those who know, for it is a prophecy of the coming 
of our Lord the Christ. Verily the ladder which Jacob saw was 
a sign of the Crucifixion, and the Angels coming down from 
Heaven [were] for the Gospel to Zacharia, and Mary, and the 
Magi and the shepherds. The place of the Lord’s seat at the 
top of the ladder was like the descent of our God the Christ 
from Heaven for our salvation, and the place where Jacob saw 
it was a type of the Church, which is being interpreted, the House 
of God. The stones are a type of the altar, and their being 
anointed with oil [a type] of the union of Godhead with 
Manhood. The vow which he made of a tenth of his goods 
is a type of the Eucharist. Jacob journeyed from the place of 
the vision till he came to the town of his uncle Laban. He saw 
a well of water, at which three flocks of sheep were lying down ; 
over the mouth of the well was a great stone. Rachel, the 
daughter of Jacob’s uncle, was standing there with the sheep. 
Jacob came near to the well, removed the stone from its mouth, 
and watered the sheep that were with Rachel. Then he 
approached Rachel and kissed her. Jacob’s uncovering of the 
well was a type of Baptism, which was veiled from of old, and 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 43 


uncovered in the latter [days]. That which the priest gives to 
those whom he baptizes in the water is in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Know, O my 
son, that Jacob did not come forward to kiss Rachel until he had 
uncovered the well and watered her sheep from it. Likewise, 
I say that it is not permitted in the law of the Christ for any 
one to enter the Church till after baptism, for if he is baptized, 
he has become one of Christ’s sheep. The prophet Moses said 
in his book that Jacob wrought with his uncle Laban seven 
years for Rachel, whom he loved of Laban’s daughters, for she 
was at the height of beauty, but he gave him his ugly daughter. 
Like this was the story of Moses with the Jews whom God saved 
from the bondage of Pharaoh. On account of them he did not 
give the young girl, but he gave her who was old and faded. 
Verily the first girl whom he gave to Jacob had ugly eyes, 
and the second one was perfect in face and had beautiful eyes. 
The face of the first one was covered lest the children of 
Israel should look at its beauty; the second one had her face 
uncovered, and had a bright, and shining and beautiful person- 
ality. The girl with ugly eyes who was spouse of Jacob was the 
type of the people of his day whom he ruled; in his time there 
were prophets, and saints and pure ones, and there was little sin 
in them. The faded old woman whom Moses describes, she is 
the people of the children of Israel which went astray in the 
worship of idols, and left the worship of God; and the girl 
whose face was covered so that it was not possible for the 
children of Israel to look at her was the tribe that was estab- 
lished on the holy mount, which did not mingle with the children 
of Israel, and did not look at them, and if they had looked at it 
(the tribe), verily they would have imitated its good works. 
The better and brighter girl is the tribe which received the Lord 
of the world, the Christ, and worshipped Him in His Godhead. 
He enlightened our hearts by His holiness. 

When Jacob had reached sixty-nine years, Reuben was born 
to him, then followed him his brethren whom God brought out 
of the loins of Jacob; these were Simeon and Levi, Judah the 
ancestor of Mary, Issachar and Zebulun ; Joseph and Benjamin 


es ey 


f. 127b 


f. 1288 


f.129.a 


44 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


the sons of the beautiful Rachel; Gad and Asher, sons of Zilpah ; 
Dan and Naphtali, sons of Bilhah the maid of Rachel. Two years 
after the emigration of Jacob, he returned to Isaac his father. 
He lived after that fully thirty-one years of Levi's life. When 
he reached one hundred and twenty years his father Isaac died. 
Twenty-three years afterwards he journeyed from Haran to the 
elevated land ; Joseph was sold during the lifetime of Isaac, and 
he was a companion to Jacob in his sorrow. After the sale of 
Joseph, Isaac died; his sons Jacob and Esau buried him beside 
the grave of his father Abraham. After nine years Rebecca died, 
and was buried near the grave of Abraham. Judah married 
Hosha‘ the Canaanitess ; Jacob was grieved at that because she 
was not of the children of Israel, and said to him, “ By the God 
of Abraham and Isaac, do not mingle the seed of Canaan with 
us,” and he did not accept it from him. He begat from her Er 
and Onan [Cod. Othen] and Shelah. Judah wedded his son Er 
with Tamar the daughter of Kedar, son of Levi. Er wrought the 
deed of the people of Sodom, and God punished him for his 
deed. God killed him in answer to the prayer of Jacob, and the 
seed of Canaan was not mingled with his seed. Then this Tamar 
disguised herself, and sat in the middle of the way; Judah came 
together with her, not knowing that she was his daughter-in- 
law ; she conceived by him, and bare Pharez and Zarah. At this 
time Jacob and his children journeyed to Egypt, and stayed with 
Joseph for seventeen years. When he had completed [a hundred] 
and forty-seven years of life he died, Joseph that day being fifty- 
six years old. The wise physicians of Pharaoh embalmed him. 
After this Joseph removed his body and placed it beside the 
bodies of his father and of his grandfather Abraham. Pharez 
the son of Judah begat Hezron, and Hezron begat Aram, and 
Aram begat Aminadab, and Aminadab begat Nahson, who was 
the most cunning of the sons of Judah. And Aminadab wedded 
Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest to a girl, and from her he 
begat Phinehas the priest, who by his prayer took away death 
from the people, and whose was the deed with the javelin. Know 
that the priesthood was from Aminadab among the people of 
Israel, and from Nahson the kinghood came among them. Look, 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 45 


O my son Clement, how from Judah came the priesthood and 
the kinghood among the children of Israel. Nahson begat a 
son, who is Salmon; Salmon begat Boaz. When Boaz was old, 
he married Ruth the Moabitess; in her was kinghood, for she 
was of the race of kings. She was of the children of Lot. God 
did not make Lot unclean for his cohabiting with his daughters, 
and did not attach blame to him, and did not depreciate his 
good deed in his support of his uncle Abraham in his exile, 
and his reception of the Angels in faith, but He put the king- 
hood into Ruth who was of his race, so that the Incarnation of 
our Lord the Christ was of the race of Abraham. Also [into] 
her, the wife of Solomon, son of David, by whom he begat. 
Solomon verily had six hundred free women and four hundred 
concubines, and he obtained no child from any of them, because 
God, may His name be praised! wished that the seed of Canaan 
should not mingle with the seed of the chosen people from whom 
Jesus the Christ took flesh. The rest of the wives of Solomon 
were of the children of Canaan. Nevertheless Moses the Prophet 
of God related, for the responsible books, the chronicles of the 
children of Israel relate that Levi, when he entered Egypt with 
his father Jacob, begat there his son Amram the father of Moses. 
When Moses was born he was thrown out by his mother into the 
Egyptian Nile, and Sapphira the daughter of Pharaoh, king of 
Egypt, saved him from drowning and brought him up in her 
father’s palace. When he grew up and had finished forty years, 
he killed Casoum the Egyptian, chief of the swordsmen of 
Pharaoh. He fled to Reuel to the priest of Midian for fear 
of Pharaoh, and that because Sapphira had died before this, 
and if she had been still there, why should Moses have been 
afraid of Pharaoh? Moses married Zipporah daughter of Jethro, 
priest of Midian. She bare him two sons, these were Gershon 
and Eleazar, at the time of the birth of Joshua the son of Nun, 
and Moses’ age was fifty-two years. When he had completed 
eighty years, God spake to him from the thorn bush, and his 
tongue stammered out of fear for God, and he said, “O Lord, at 


the time when thou spakest to thy servant, his tongue stammer- f 


ed.” All his years were 120. He spent forty in Egypt, and 


f. 129b 


f. 130b 


11 


46 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


forty in Midian, and he governed the children of Israel forty 
years in the wilderness. When he died, Joshua the son of Nun 
governed them thirty-one years. Then Chushan the Atheist 
governed them after him eight years. Then Othniel the son 
of Kenaz the brother of Caleb, for forty years. Then the 
Moabites enslaved the children of Israel for eighteen years. 
Then [God] prepared their deliverance from their! hand. Their 
government was presided over by Ehud the son of Gera for 
eighty years. In the twenty-sixth year of the reign of this 
Ehud, the fourth thousand [year] from the beginning was 
finished. Then after him the famous Jabin presided over their 
government for an interval of twenty years, then Deborah and 
Barak looked after it for forty years. Then the Midianites 
conquered them, and enslaved them for seven years, then God 
saved them by the hand of Gideon. He presided over their 
government for forty years; then his son Abimelech for three 
years. Then Jufa (Tola) the son of Puah for twenty years, then 
a daughter of the Gileadite twenty-two years. Then the children 
of Ammon conquered the children of Israel and enslaved them 
for eighteen years, then God saved them by the hands of 
Jephthah, he who offered his daughter as a sacrifice before’ God. 
And Ibzan governed them for six years, then after him .Elon 
son of Zebulon for ten years. Then Abdon for eight years. 
Then the Philistines fought with the children of Israel and 
subdued them and enslaved them for forty years, and God saved 
them by the hands of Samson. He governed them for twenty 
years, and after him they remained for twelve years without a 
leader. Then there arose to rule them Eli the priest, and he 
governed them for forty years, then Samuel for twenty-two 
years. In his time the children of Israel rebelled against God, 
and set up Saul as king over them ; he was the first king among 
the children of Israel, and he governed them for forty years. In 
the days of Saul appeared the giant Goliath; he drove out the 
children of Israel and killed their young men. Then God sent 
against him David the Prophet, and he killed him; against Saul 
[He sent] the Philistines, and they killed him, because Saul left 
ti od. Rise? 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 47 


off seeking help from God, and sought help from devils. David 
the son of Jesse reigned over the children of Israel for forty 
years. Then after him Solomon reigned over them and did 
many wonderful things; amongst them his sending to the city 
of Ophir, and bringing out the gold from its mountains, and 
ships continued for thirty-six months carrying gold from its 
mountains. Also he built the city of Tadmor in the interior 
of the wilderness, and wrought in it many extraordinary things. 
When Solomon passed by Sabad, a building built by Kourhi 
and Abu Nigaf (they whom Nimrod had sent to Bila‘am the 
priest when he heard of his occupation with the stars, and he 
built there this altar to the Sun and a stone fort), Solomon 
built there also a city called the City of the Sun. Then Aradus, 
which is in the middle of the sea, was built at Solomon’s com- 
mand and they praised him yet more for his wisdom. There 
journeyed to him the Queen of Sheba and she was obedient to 
his religious worship. There came up to him at his command 
Hiram king of Tyre, and had a real love for him; he had 
already been a friend to David before him. His reign was 
before the reign of David, and he remained to the last of King 
Zedekiah. Solomon took one thousand Wives, as we. said 
above about him; and they deteriorated his mind when he 
exceeded in his love to them, and they got the power to 
mock at him, and it caused him to slide away from the worship 
of God; he sacrificed to idols and worshipped them instead of 
the Lord. He died, after reigning for forty years, an idolator 
and an infidel. Then Hiram king of Tyre was seduced and 
forgot his humanity and disbelieved in God, and claimed 
divinity, and he said, “I sit in the heart of the seas like the 
sitting of a God”; and news of him came to Nebuchadnezzar, 
and he journeyed to him till he killed him. In the chronicles 
of the Hebrews, O my son Clement, [we learn] that in the days 
of this Hiram appeared the purple dye, and this [was that] a 
shepherd and his sheep were on the sea-shore, and he saw a 
dog of his gnawing with its mouth something that came out 
of the sea, and its mouth was filled with its blood. He looked 
at the blood, and had never seen the like of it. He took some 


PAL ao 


48 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


clean wool and wiped this blood with it; with that he made a 
crown and put it upon his head. It had a brightness like the 
brightness of the sun or rays of fire. The news of it came to 
Hiram; he sent for him and wondered greatly at the beauty of 
his dye. Heassembled the dyers of his kingdom and gave them 
a commission for its like, and they were amazed at this, until 
some of the wise men of his time possessed themselves of the 
purple shell-fish. He made garments for himself with its blood, 
and he rejoiced over this with a great joy. Thou, O my son, 
and all the Greeks, disagree with the Hebrews in this narrative. 
After Solomon, Rehoboam his son reigned, and defiled the 
land by the worship of idols, by much whoredom in the city of 
Jerusalem, and by sacrificing to devils. In his day the kingdom 
of the house of David was divided, and became two parts. 
In his fifth year journeyed Shishak king of Egypt to Jerusalem, 
and took possession of all that was in the treasuries of the 
Lord’s house and the treasuries of David and Solomon, the 
vessels of gold and silver, and he was strengthened by this in 
his power. He said to the Jews, “ This is none of your earning ; 
it is some of what your fathers brought out of Egypt at 
the time of their flight.” And Rehoboam the son of Solomon 
died an infidel, after he had reigned for seventeen years. 
Abia his son reigned after him, being twenty years old. He 
enslaved Jerusalem and destroyed it, and his mother Ma‘ka, 
the daughter of Abishalom, commended his deeds. He died 
after three years, and Asa reigned. He did right, and abolished 
the worship of the stars and the images, and whoredom from 
Jerusalem. He drove away his mother from his kingdom, 
because she committed adultery and built an altar to the idols. 
There came to him Azarah king of Hind’, and Asa put him to 
flight, and reigned for forty years, then he died. After him 
his son Jehoshaphat reigned, and he went in the way of his 
father in righteousness, but he loved the household of Ahab, 
and kept company with them. He built ships, and sent by 
them to the land of Ophir to bring gold from its mountains. 
God sunk his ships, and was angry with him and his mother 


1 Probably this means Zerah king of Ethiopia. See 2 Chron. xiv. 9. 


THE BOOK OF. THE ROLLS. 49 


Sem daughter of Uriah, daughter of Shalom. When he had 
died, his son Joram reigned, being thirty-two years of age. He 
was disobedient, and sacrificed to devils, on account of his wife 
Aliah (Athaliah) daughter of Amsir (Omri) son of the sister 
of Ahab. He died an infidel. After him Ahaziah reigned, 
being twenty years of age. He was a shameless infidel. The 
Lord delivered him over to his enemies, and they killed him after 
one year of his reign. His mother took the kingdom to herself, 
and killed the kings’ sons, that thereby she might destroy the 
kingdom of the family of David. None were saved from her 
except Joash, for Jehosheba the daughter of Joram son of 
Jehoshaphat hid him. She increased adultery and infidelity 
in Jerusalem. She died after seven years, and the people of 
Jerusalem thought about who should reign over them, Jehoiada 
knew about that, and their choice fell upon none but Joash 
whom Jehoiada had hidden. He sent and brought [him] 
out to the house of the Lord; the warriors completely armed 
surrounded him, and Jehoiada the priest seated him upon the 
throne of the family of David his father, he being seven years 
of age. His mother’s name was Zibiah of the family of Sheba. 
Jehoiada the priest covenanted with him that he should do 
righteousness before the Lord. When Jehoiada the priest died, 
Joash forgot his covenants, and did not know rightly what was 
administered from the throne of the family of David, nor the 
shedding of innocent blood. He died after he had reigned for 
forty years. After him his son reigned, and his mother’s name 
was Jehoaddan. He killed every one who had killed any one of 
his household, but spared their sons, for in this he followed the 
law of the Lord. He died after he had reigned for twenty-nine 
years, and his son Azariah reigned after him, being twenty! 
years old. His mother’s name was Jecholiah. He did right 
before the Lord, save that he was bold about the priest- 
hood, for which reason he became a leper, and God weakened 
the power of Isaiah the prophet from prophecy until this 
Azariah died, because he did not reprove him for his boldness 
about the priesthood. The duration of his reign was fifty-two 


, 


1 Bezold has ““ nineteen,” in accordance with Scripture. 


[1355 


f.134a 


f. 134b 


Γ 135a 


50 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


years, and Jotham his son reigned after him, being twenty-five 
years of age, and his mother’s name was Jerusha the daughter of 
Dafma (Zadok). He did right, and the duration of his reign 
was sixteen years. After him his son Ahaz reigned, being twenty 
years of age; his mother’s name was Jahkebez the daughter 
of Levi. He did wickedly, and sacrificed to devils and idols. 
God was angry with him, and Tiglath son of Cardak, king of 
Assyria, came against him, and besieged him. Ahaz wrote him- 
self down his vassal, and delivered Jerusalem up to the Assyrians, 
and he carried all the gold and silver that was in the temple of 
God to Assyria the regions of Tiglath. In his time the children 
of Israel were led captive, and went down to Babylon. The king 
of Assyria sent instead Babylonians to the land of Judah to dwell 
in it; and they complained of what befel them to the king of 
Assyria, and he sent to them Urijah one of the priests of the 
children of Israel that he might teach them the law of the Lord. 
When they knew it, the lions ceased from them, and went to the 
land of Babylon and to Samaria. When he (Ahaz) had com- 
pleted sixteen years he died, and his son Hezekiah reigned after 
him, being twenty-five years old, and his mother’s name was Ahi 
(Abi) the daughter of Zechariah. He did right and broke the 
idols, and caused the sacrifices to cease, and cut up the serpent 
that Moses had made in the wilderness of the wandering (Tih), 
because the children of Israel were seduced in their worship of 
it. In the fourth year of his reign, Shalmanezer king of Assyria 
came to Jerusalem, and took captive the Israelites who were in 
it, and drove them away to a place beyond Babylon named 
Media. In the twenty-sixth year journeyed Sennacherib king of 
the province to the cities of Judah, and took captive those whom 
he found in them and their villages excepting Jerusalem. Verily 
it was saved by the prayer and cries of king Hezekiah. When 
Hezekiah was ill with his death-sickness, he grieved and wept 
because he had no son to reign after him; he prayed before the 
Lord, and said, “ Lord, have mercy on Thy servant, and do not 
let him die without offspring ; let not the kingdom fail from the 
house of David, nor the blessings cease which have come on the 
tribes in my days.” The Lord answered him, and told him that 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 51 


He had added to his life fifteen years; he recovered; a son 
was born to him, and he called him Manasseh. When twenty- 
six years of his reign were finished, and he was rejoicing in his 
son, he died. His son reigned after him, being twelve years old; 
his mother’s name was Hephzibah. He did wickedly, and his 
infidelity surpassed all the infidel kings that were before him in 
evil-doing. He built an altar to idols, and sacrificed to them ; 
he defiled Jerusalem with corruption, and the worship of idols. 
He took Isaiah the prophet, and they sawed him with a wooden 
saw from the middle of his head to between his feet, because he 

had reproved him for his wicked deeds. Isaiah’s age that day 
~ was one hundred and twenty years, he began to prophesy when 
he was ninety years old. Then Manasseh repented about that, 
and turned to his Lord; he put on sackcloth, and imposed a fast 
upon himself [all] the days of his life. God accepted his repent- 
ance and he died. His son Amon reigned after him, being that 
day twenty-two years of age; his mother’s name was Musalmath 
the daughter of Hasoun. He did wicked deeds before the Lord, 
and burned his children in the fire. He reigned twelve years 
and he died. After him his son Josiah reigned, being sixty- 
eight years of age; his mother’s name was Arnea, daughter of 
Azariah son of Tarfeeb. He kept righteously the feast of the 
Passover, a feast such as the children of Israel had never kept 
since the time of the Prophet Moses; he abolished the sacrifices 
to the images, broke the idols, sawed them with saws, killed 
their worshippers, and burnt in the fire the bones of the prophets 
of the Honoured One. He cleansed Jerusalem from defilements. 
None like him reigned over the Jews before him nor after him. 
He remained there for thirty years, but Pharaoh king of Egypt 
killed him. After him his son Jehoahaz reigned, being twenty- 
two years of age; his mother’s name was Hamtoul the daughter 
of Jeremiah of Libnah. Not more than three months of his 
reign had passed when Pharaoh the lame bound him, made him 
fast with chains, and carried him to Egypt, and he died there. 
After him his brother Jehoiakim reigned, being twenty-five 
years of age; his mother’s name was Zobeed, daughter of 
Yerkuiah of the town of Al-Ramah. In the third year of his 


f. 135 b 


f. 136a 


1 136b 


f. 137a 


52 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


reign Nebuchadnezzar approached Jerusalem, reigned over it, 
and made him his vassal for three years. He rebelled against 
Nebuchadnezzar, and death overtook him. His son Jehoiachin 
reigned after him, being eighteen years of age; his mother’s 
name was Tahseeb the daughter of Lutanan of the people of 
Jerusalem. Nebuchadnezzar journeyed a second time to Jeru- 
salem, bound him after three months of his reign, and carried 
him and his officers and the armies of his soldiers to Babylon. 
Nebuchadnezzar in his first attack had bound the wife of 
Jehoiakim and other wives of the grandees and nobles of Jeru- 
salem, and carried them to Babylon. The wife of Jehoiakim 
was pregnant that day, and in the way she gave birth to Daniel. 
In the Captivity were also Hananiah, Azariah, and Mishael, sons 
of Johanan. The reason of this Captivity was that Jehoiachin 
had made a truce with Nebuchadnezzar, then they betrayed one 
another. When Johanan died, Zedekiah the uncle of Jehoiakim 
reigned after him, being twenty-one years of age; the seat of all 
the kings of the children of Israel was Jerusalem; the name of 
Zedekiah’s mother was Hamtoul; he was the last of the kings 
of the children of Israel. After eleven years of his reign, Nebu- 
chadnezzar journeyed for the third time to the West, to pacify 
its cities, and the cities of the Euphrates, and of the Great Sea. 
He made his way through the islands of the sea, and took 
captive their people, he laid Tyre waste, and smote it with 
fire. He killed Hiram its king as we have already said. He en- 
tered Egypt to seek those of the children of Israel who had fled, 
and killed its Pharaoh. He returned by sea to Jerusalem, and was 
victorious there a second time. He bound Zedekiah, killed his 
sons Jerbala and Rahmut, and carried him blind and fettered 
with chains to Babylon. This was a punishment from God to 
him for his deed that he did to the prophet Jeremiah when he 
threw him into a miry well. Nebuchadnezzar appointed Jozadan 
(Nebuzaradan) the captain of his prison in Jerusalem until he 
had laid waste its wall, and burned the temple of the Lord which 
Solomon had built in it. He demolished the rest of the 
dwellings of Jerusalem, carried all the tools that he found of 
iron and brass, and the raiment which belonged to the house 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 53 


of the Lord to Babylon. Between Simeon the High Priest of 
Jerusalem and Jozadan captain of the prison to Nebuchadnezzar 
there was love and friendship. He asked if he would give him 
the old writings; he did so, and Simeon carried them with him, 
being among the crowd of the Captivity. He'saw a well in his 
way among the borders of the West; he laid the writings in it, 
and put with them a bronze vase, filled with glowing coals, 
and in it sweet smelling incense; he covered up this well, and 
went to Babylon. The devastation of Jerusalem was completed, 
and it became a waste. There was not one person in it, nor 
even a building save the tomb of the prophet Jeremiah. 
Jeremiah in his lifetime had dwelt in a place called Samaria; he 
commanded a man named Uriah that he should be buried in 
Jerusalem, and he did it. It was not known that this place was 
the grave of Jeremiah except at the devastation of Jerusalem. 
Now for the genealogies. The Syrians say that no one 
looked after them after the last devastation of Jerusalem, except 
among the tribe of the Philistines, and no one looked after 
the genealogy of the people among whom the children of Israel 
married, nor from whence was the beginning of the priesthood. 
Jehoiachin did not cease to be bound in the land of Babylon, 
and shut up in prison for thirty-seven years. Meanwhile there 
was born to Mardul a son named Mardahi, and the king let 
Jehoiachin out of the prison, and married him to Helmuth the 
daughter of Eliakim. By him she gave birth in the land of 
Babylon to a son, who was called Salathiel. Then he married 
another who was called Melkat the daughter of Ezra the 
teacher, and had no child by her in Babylon. At that time 
Cyrus reigned in Babylon. He married Masahet the sister of 
Zerubabel a nobleman of the Jews, according to the custom of 
Persia; he let her rule his affairs; she begged him to restore 
the children of Israel to Jerusalem, and he did this to its place 
where it had been before him. He commanded a herald to pro- 
claim, that there should not remain one of the children of Israel, 
who should not present himself to Zerubabel his brother-in-law. 
When they were gathered together, he commanded him to take 
them to Jerusalem and that they should build it. The children 


f. 137b 


f.138a 


f. 138 b 


Ε 139a 


54 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


of Israel returned to Jerusalem in the second year of the reign 
of Cyrus the Persian. At that time was completed the fifth 
thousand from the beginning. The children of Israel after their 
return to Jerusalem remained without a teacher to teach them 
the law of the Lord or any writings of the prophets. When 
Ezra saw this, he went to the well in which the Law had been 
put, uncovered it, and found the vase full of fire and incense, 
and he found the writings faded, there was no means to get 
them. God revealed to him that he should receive of them 
from His hands; he succeeded, and threw it on his mouth 
once, and twice and thrice, and God put into it the power of 
the spirit of prophecy; he kept all the writings, and that fire 
which was in the vase in the well was from the fire of Paradise 
which was in the house of the Lord. Zerubabel journeyed 
to Jerusalem as king over it. By Joshua son of Jozadak the 
High Priest and by Ezra, the writing of the Law and the Books 
of the Prophets were completed. After their return, the children 
of Israel kept the feast of the Passover, and all the feasts that 
they celebrated were three. The first was the feast of Moses in 
Egypt, the second the feast of Josiah, and the third after their 
return from Babylon in the days of Cyrus the Persian. The 
number of the years of the Captivity which Jeremiah the prophet 
mentions are seventy years. The children of Israel built the 
temple of the Lord in Jerusalem, and its building was finished 
by the hands of Zerubabel and Joshua the son of Jozadak the 
priest, and Ezra the scribe of the Law, in six and forty years. 
When the books of the genealogies were destroyed, the fathers 
were in despair about genealogy, and there was despair about it 
after them, until their accuracy was guaranteed by the secret 
books of the Hebrews. I relate this to thee, my son Clement, 
that when Zerubabel journeyed to Jerusalem, he married 
Malka the daughter of Ezra the teacher, and by her he begat 
a. ممه‎ called Abiud. ‘She had. already been - the wife of 
Jehoiachin before him. When Abiud grew up, he married 
Ragib, daughter of Joshua the son of Jozadak the priest. By 
her he begat a son called Jehoiachim. Jehoiachim married a 
wife, and begat a son by her. When he grew up, he married 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 55 


Alfeet, daughter of Hesron, and by her he begat Zadok. 
Zadok married Felbin the daughter of Rahab, and by her he 
begat Atin. Atin married Hesheeb, daughter of Jula, and by 
her he begat Tur (Eliud). Tur (Eliud) married Salsin, daughter 
of Hasoul, and by her he begat Eleazar. Eleazar married 
Habeeth, daughter of Malih, and by her he begat Manar 
(Matthan). Manar (Matthan) married Seerab, daughter of 
Phinehas, and by her he begat two sons in jone] womb. One 
of them was Jacob, who was called by two names, Joachim son 
of Yartah. Jacob married Had the daughter of Eleazar, and 
by her he begat Joseph. Joachim married Hannah, daughter of 
Ka‘rdal, and by her he begat Mary, by whom our Lord the 
Christ was incarnate. On account of our knowledge, O my 
son Clement, about the genealogy of the Lady Mary, and 
the genealogies of her ancestors, the Jews begin by assertions 
about us that we do not understand the genealogies, and we do 
not know them; and they venture to mock the mother of Light, 
the Lady Mary, the Virgin, and they attribute her genealogy to 
fornication, because they do not know that it was the Holy 
Ghost who came down on us, a company of twelve in the upper 
room of Zion, who taught us all that we need to know about 
the genealogies and the rest of the mysteries, as He had taught 
Azariah (Ezra) the teacher all the Law, so that he kept it and 
renewed it. Let the mouths of the cursed Jews now be 
stopped, and let them know assuredly that Mary the pure 
was of the race of Judah, also of the race of David, also of 
the race of Abraham; that they have nothing against the 
genealogies which the Holy Ghost taught us, and there is not a 
book left in their hands from which they can make a stand 


against genealogy, since their books have been burnt three 


times ; the first time in the days of Antiochus, who defiled the 
temple of the Lord, and commanded sacrifices to idols; the 
second by Herod at the time of the devastation of Jerusalem ; 
and the third, hear, O blessed son, what the Holy Ghost has 
revealed to me, about the sixty-three fathers, whose names are 


registered, and how the pedigree came about to the tribe from 
which was incarnate our God the Christ. 


f.139b 


f. 140a 


f. ه14‎ 


56 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


The beginning of genealogies. 

Adam begat Seth. Seth married Aclima, sister of Abel, 
and by her begat Enos. Enos married a woman called Hita, 
daughter of Mahmouma of the sons of Har son of Seth, and 
by her begat Cainan. Cainan married Karith, daughter of 
Kersham son of Maheal, and by her begat Mahlaleel. Mah- 
laleel married Teshabfatir, daughter of Enos, and by her begat 
Jared. Jared married Zebeeda, daughter of Kargilan son of 
Cainan, and by her begat Enoch. Enoch married Jardakin, 
daughter of Terbah son of Mahlaleel, and by her begat Me- 
thuselah. Methuselah married Rahoub, daughter of Serkeen 
son of Enoch, and by her begat Lamech. Lamech married 
Kifar, daughter of Jutab son of Methuselah, and by her begat 
Noah. Noah married Haikal, daughter of Mashamos son of 
Enoch, and by her begat Sem. Sem married Leah, daughter 
of Nasih, and by her begat Arphaxad. Arphaxad married 
Fardou, daughter of Salweh son of Japhet, and by her begat 
Salah. Salah married Muldath, daughter of Kahin son of Sem, 
and by her begat Obed (Eber). Obed (Eber) married Rasdah 
sister of Melchisedek, daughter of Malih son of Arphaxad, 
and by her begat Peleg. Peleg married Hadeeb, daughter of 
Hamlah, and by her begat Jareu (Reu). Jareu (Reu) married 
Tanaa‘b, daughter of Obed (Eber). and by her begat Serug. 
Serug married Feel, and by her begat Nahor. Nahor married 
a wife, A‘akris daughter of Reu, and by her begat Tarah. 
Tarah married two wives, one of them Juta, and the other 
Salmat, by Juta he begat Abraham and by Salmat Sarah. 
Abraham married Sarah, daughter of this Salmat his father’s 
wife, and by her begat Isaac. Isaac married a wife called 
Rebecca, daughter of Fathael, and by her begat Jacob. Jacob 
married Leah, daughter of Laban, and by her begat Judah. 
Judah begat Pharez by Tamar. Pharez son of Judah married 
Afdeeb, daughter of Levi, and by her begat Hesron. Hesron 
married Farteeb, daughter of Zebulon, and by her begat Aram. 
Aram married Safuza, daughter of Judah, and by her begat 
Aminadab. Aminadab married Baruma, daughter of Hesron, 
and by her begat Nahshon. Nahshon married Aram, daughter 


THE BOOK OF THE ROLLS. 57 


of Adam, and by her begat Salmon. Salmon married Saleeb 
(Rahab), daughter of Aminadab, and by her begat Boaz. Boaz 
married Aroof (Ruth), daughter of Lot, and by her begat Obed. 
Obed married Nefut, daughter of Shela, and by her begat Asse 
(Jesse). Asse (Jesse) married Amrat, daughter of Othan, and by 
her begat David. David married Balseba‘ (Bathsheba), daughter 
of Joutan son of Shela, and by her begat Solomon. Solomon 
married Naama, daughter of Maheel, and by her begat Reho- 
boam: who had none like him. Rehoboam married Naheer, 
daughter of Al, and by her begat Abia. Abia married Maachah 
the daughter of Abishalom, and by her begat Asa. Asa married 
Auzbah the daughter of Shalih, and by her begat Jehoshaphat. 
Jehoshaphat married Na‘mna the daughter of Amon, and by 
her begat Joram. Joram married Tala‘ia, daughter of Amoi, 
and by her begat Ahaz. Ahaz married Suma the daughter of 
Balhi, and by her begat Amaziah. Amaziah married Kama, 
daughter of Caram, and by her begat Uzziah. Uzziah married 
Jerousa, daughter of Zadok, and by her begat Jeream (Jotham). 
Jeream (Jotham) married Jahfat, daughter of Hani, and by her 
begat Ahaz. Ahaz married Ahir, daughter of Zachariah, and 
by her begat Hezekiah. Hezekiah married Hephzibah, daughter 
of Jarmoun, and by her begat Manasseh. Manasseh married 
Artida, daughter of Azuriah, and by her begat Aman. Aman 
married Tarib, daughter of Murka, and by her begat Josiah. 
Josiah married Hamtoul, daughter of Armeed (Jeremiah), and 
by her begat Jehoahaz. Jehoahaz married a woman and had 
no sons by her. Jehoiakim reigned after the death of his 
brother, and married a woman called Carteem, daughter of 
Haluta, and by her begat Salaeel (Salathiel). Salaeel (Salathiel) 
married Hamtat, daughter of Eliakim, and by her begat Zeru- 
babel. Zerubabel married Malkut, daughter of Ezra, and by her 
begat Armeed (Abiud). Armeed (Abiud) married Awarkeeth, 
daughter of Zadok, and by her begat Jachim. Jachim married 
Hali, daughter of Zurniem, and by her begat A‘zor. A‘zor married 
Afi, daughter of Hasor, and by her begat Sadoc. Sadoc married 
Faltir, daughter of Dorteeb, and by her begat Asham Joteed. 
Joteed Asham married Hasgab, daughter of Jula, and by her 


G. H 


ΓΊΔΙΑ 


f. 141b 


58 KITAB AL-MAGALL. 


begat Liud (Eliud). Liud (Eliud) married Shabshetin, daughter 
of Hubaballia, and by her begat Eleazar. Eleazar married 
Hanbeth, daughter of Jula, and by her begat Mathan. Mathan 
married Seerab, daughter of Phinehas, and by her begat Jacob. 
Jacob married Harteeb, daughter of Eleazar, and by her begat 
Joachim, known as Jonahir. Joachim married Hannah, and 
returned to the house of Eleazar. And after sixty years of 
his marriage to her, he begat by her Mary the Virgin, her by 
whom the Christ became incarnate. Joseph the Carpenter was 
the son of her [paternal] uncle Laha, and therefore his vote did 
not fall against her when Ram, priest of the children of Israel, 
delivered her to a man who should be surety for her. It was 
in the hidden work of God (may He be glorious and exalted !) 
and in the mystery of His knowledge that there was no escape 
from the Jews reproaching Mary the pure on account of her 
bearing the Christ. To our Master and our God and our 
. Lord Jesus the Christ be praise and power and greatness and 
dignity and worship with the Father and the Holy Ghost from 
now unto all time and throughout all ages. Amen. 


APPR LA: 


IN the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Ghost, the one God, we begin to transcribe the story of Aphikia 
wife of Jesus the son of Sirach, vizier of King Solomon, the 
son of David, King of the children of Israel. 

It is said: Solomon the wise heard about Aphikia wife of 
Jesus the son of Sirach, his treasurer and vizier, that there was 
not among the women of the children of Israel nor in all Jeru- 
salem one like her, so perfect in body and wise in mind. So he 
wished to see her and talk with her that he might know the 
utmost of her wisdom. So he sent to her the eunuch his chan- 
cellor, saying to her, “I long to meet with thee and talk with 
thee.” When the eunuch went to her and told her the saying of 
the King, her heart was pained and she sobbed, and said to the 
Chief, “Say to my lord the King, ‘Thy wisdom has filled the 
whole world, and how has it given place to this idea, that it 
should come into thy heart, thou whose teaching turneth the 
fool into a wise man. Yet if it be thy will, I will acquiesce in 
this unworthy idea; but let it not be carried out while my 
husband is in this city, lest there be any scandal.’”» When the 
eunuch related this saying in the ears of the King, he wondered 
the more, and begged earnestly to meet with her. He talked 
with Jesus her husband, saying, “O my son, we have urgent 
business with the King of Mosul, and I do not see a man suit- 
able to meet with him like thyself.” And Jesus said, “May 
my lord the King live! according to what he says so be it.” 
And he wrote the letters for him, and made him ride with 
honour like the son of kings. He sent with him troops and 


Fonds 
syriaque 


179, 
f. 126a 


1. 126b 


1278 


f.127b 


f.128a 


60 APHIKIA. 


gifts, and he took his journey. Then King Solomon com- 
manded the eunuch, saying to him, “Go to Aphikia wife of 
Jesus the son of Sirach, and say to her, ‘Be ready for my 
Sovereign’s reception in thy dwelling.” The eunuch went to 
her with the saying of the King. And Aphikia said to the Chief, 
“Tell my lord the King, saying, ‘Is a humble handmaid worthy 
of this great honour that her Sovereign should walk and come 
to her? I beg him not to taste any food until he comes and 
eats in the abode of his servant.’” And the eunuch went away 
from her to the King and told him of this saying. But Aphikia, 
when the eunuch had gone, called her cook and said to him, 
“Ask for all thou requirest, fowls, fish and mutton. Cook me 
from them forty kinds with one taste and let them be different 
and various in kind.” When the time came, she spread for the 
King in the chamber of her husband Jesus the son of Sirach, 
according to the honour of the king. The evening had come, 
even the end of a part of the night; King Solomon came 
to her abode, and people went before him with lanterns, and 
they brought him in to the chamber in which they had spread 
for him. He was amazed at what he saw. Then Aphikia came 
up, she and her maidens, and they bowed themselves down to 
the earth before the King, and they sat behind the door of the 
chamber in which it had been spread for the King. Then she 
commanded that the table should be brought up, and upon it 
were all kinds of bread. Then she commanded that they should 
present the kinds on the top. The King ate with gusto on 
account of the purity of the meats of which he was eating, 
and taking account. He remained contemplating the kinds 
and wondered at their variety from one another in resem- 
blance. When he had tasted these kinds which were put 
there, he found that they had all one taste. He ate, and was 
satisfied, and raised his hand. Then they brought forward many 
kinds more, and put them before him. He merely tasted them 
without eating of them. He knew certainly that this was a 
parable of wisdom. Then he said, “ Thy favours are acceptable, 
O God of Israel! I would know, O Aphikia! the meaning of 
what thou commandest me by thy foods.” And Aphikia said, 


APHIKIA. 61 


“O my lord the King! thy wisdom is sufficient for thee and for 
the whole world. Of what worth is the light of a candle placed 
before the sun? And what is the measure of thy handmaid 
that she should speak before the lord the King? The soul from 
God moves in her body. To-day she hides her corruption 
and her fetidness, and to-morrow she will be thrown into a 
grave beyond the place of the fields in which she appears, and 
she will be a naked soul, with a soul that never dies.” Then 
said Solomon, “ Blessed be the day when they gave thee birth 
into the world since thou hast filled it with wisdom.” Then 
he arose, wondering at what he had seen and heard from this 
chaste woman. When he was outside the door of the room, 
behold, a ruby got detached from his crown between the lintels 
of the door, without any one seeing it till the return of Jesus 
from the journey. He saw it lying, and he took it and examined 
it in his hand and he recognized it. He knew for certain that 
the King had entered into his chamber, and he was grieved in his 
heart and did not speak, nor did he return to his wife another 
time in conjugal intercourse till the end of two years, nor 
inquire of her, that she might appease him. She also did 
not wish to say to him, “Why art thou estranged from me?” 
saying in her heart that her husband must not say in his heart, 
“This one is longing for reunion.” And after two years her 
mother gazed in her face, and saw it, and behold, it was altered 
and changed. She looked at her limbs, and saw in them great 
weakness. And she said, “O my beloved daughter, what gives 
thee pain? for thou art very weak.” She took her by the hand, 
and went with her to a quiet place in the house, and told her all 
that had happened, and that she was grieved in her heart on 
account of her husband more than [on account of] the weakness 
that had come on her body. Her mother arose at once and 
went to Solomon, and met with him in a palace alone in a 
retired spot, for she was in much honour with him. She said, 
“Ὁ my lord the King, live for ever! I had a pleasant vineyard, 
where I could enjoy life, by God! in the first place, and be 
comforted by it; I gave it over to a vine-dresser to cultivate it. 
He waited to give me fruit for a time, then also to himself. 


f. 128b 


f. 129a 


12 120210 


f. 130a 


62 APHIKIA. 


I trusted in regard to my vineyard to this vine-dresser that he 
should not neglect to improve my vineyard. I did not visit it 
for two years. I walked to-day till I reached it, and 1 found 
it waste, going to ruin. I implore thee, 0 my lord the King, to 
judge between me and this vine-dresser, for he has spoiled a 
noble vineyard.” 

The King said to her, “What has happened to thee about 
my neglect of thy vineyard until this day?” for he knew the 
object of her speaking and the meaning of her wisdom. And 
he commanded them to call Jesus up to his presence, and made 
him sit by his side with his mother-in-law. And he said to her, 
“ All that thou hast said, repeat it to us once again according to 
what thou didst tell me,” and she was silent. Then Solomon 
said, “ What sayest thou?” And he said, “ All that she said is 
true, except that I did not weary of doing my best for the 
cultivation of this vineyard until the day that my lord the King 
sent me to Damascus. But on my return, O King, to my vine- 
yard, as I went up to the interior of the vineyard looking [about], 
behold, there was a trace of the steps of a great lion within the 
threshold. And I feared, and turned back, lest the lion should 
destroy me.” 

Then King Solomon said to him, “ Listen to me, that I may 
speak unto thee, By the truth of the God of Abraham, Isaac 
and Jacob, of Moses and Aaron, the great and high God who 
has appeared to us, He who hears us when we swear by 
Him, because that lion did not aim at doing anything beyond 
conversation in speech suitable to wisdom, a gain to all souls 
who should hear it, now, O my son! rise with joy and a pure 
heart ; enter into thy vineyard and cultivate it in honour, for its 
honour is great before the Lord of Hosts.” Then Jesus rose at 
once, and his mother-in-law, and entered his abode and sat with 
Aphikia his wife and inquired of her, and she informed him of 
what had happened, and he glorified the Lord God of the name 
of Israel. 

By the help of God, the story of Aphikia wife of Jesus the 
son of Sirach, vizier of Solomon the son of David, is finished 


and completed. 


APHIKIA. 63 


Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy 
Ghost, one true God. To Him be glory, and on us His mercies 
for ever. 

It was Alfarag who copied the book of Jesus the son of f. 130b 
Sirach, and the story of his wife Aphikia, on Friday at the 
sixth hour, the fifth Friday of the holy fast, twenty-six days 
having passed of the month of Adar, the blessed, the second day 
of the feast of the Gospel, in the year 1885 of the Greeks, and 
this by the hand of the poor hoarse preacher, rich in sins, poor 
in good things, unlucky in works pleasing to God, by name a 
priest, by deed a robbing wolf, entitled by two names, Nekoula 
son of David of the village of Kafr Houra, in the district 
of Tarablus. This is by command of the Priest, Joseph the 
Syrian, the Jacobite, of Damascus, surnamed “Golden,” God 
be gracious to him for it! and guide him in the work of ex- 
position and of its meanings, and give him the reward of his 
labour with us, as He prescribed by His holy mouth, one 
thirty-fold, sixty-fold and a hundred-fold, and cause him to 
dwell eternally in the pleasant gardens, in the bosoms of the 
_fathers, Abraham, Isaac. and Jacob, and the rest of the saints. 
Amen. Amen. Amen. 

It was written in the fortress Damascus, in the house of the 
[above] mentioned father, the priest Joseph. 


Codices 
Sinaitici 
497; 

f. 10o8r 


KYITPIANO>. KAI: IOTSTINA. 


7 / م 7 7 . م م‎ 1١ 
Ἢ ὀκτωβρίου Β΄. ΤΙρᾶξις τῶν ἁγίων μαρτύρων Κυπριανοῦ καὶ 
7 م م م / م 7 م‎ 
‘lovativns: Τῆς ἐπιφανείας τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ 
/ / a ٠ م م‎ / 
οὐρανόθεν γενομένης εἰς γῆν" Kal TOV προφητικῶν πληρωθέντων 
λό م‎ 000 > 5 ἢ > 7 80 a λό م م‎ 3 ١ 
ὄγων. πᾶσα ἡ UT οὐρανὸν ἐφωτίσθη τῷ λόγῳ τοῦ σωτῆρος" καὶ 
A 3 \ م‎ \ Toles 3 
πιστεύσαντες εἰς Θεὸν TaTépa’ Kai εἰς τὸν μονογενῆ υἱὸν αὐτοῦ TOV 
م 9 م 03 و‎ ١ Δ ‘ 2 ar 4 و9 م‎ 7 3 
κύριον ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦν Χριστόν᾽ καὶ εἰς TO ἅγιον πνεῦμα ἐβαπτίζοντο 
7 أء‎ 7 / 2 / 5 7 a ١0 7 \ 
προςετέθη δὲ καί τις παρθένος ὀνόματι lovativa’ Αἰδεσίου πατρὸς 
\ / 7 5.5 , 0 / م‎ ١ / 1 ef 
καὶ ἹΚλειδονίας μητρός" ἐν πόλει Avtioyeia TH πρὸς Δάφνην᾽ αὕτη 
52 7 ١ wy 7 ١ / له‎ ee Ὁ / 
ἦν ἀκούσασα παρὰ IIpainriou τινὸς διακόνου ἀπὸ τῆς σύνεγγυς 
4 x م‎ a م م م‎ 
θυρίδος τὰ μεγαλεῖα τοῦ θεοῦ. τήν Te ἐνανθρώπησιν τοῦ σωτῆρος 
م م 7 م م 32 م‎ \ 
ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ" τήν Te τῶν προφητῶν κήρυξιν᾽ καὶ τὴν ἐκ 
/ 7 7 lA م‎ / \ 
παρθένου Μαρίας yévynow* τήν τε TOV Μάγων προςκύνησιν" Kat 
\ و 20 / 1 / / وام‎ / Place \ 
τὴν τοῦ ἀστέρος φανέρωσιν᾽ τήν τε TOV ἀγγέλων δοξολογίαν" Kal 
م م‎ 7 ١ 7 fe a 
τῶν Ov αὐτοῦ σημείων Kal τεράτων τὰς ἐνεργείας τήν TE TOD 
م \ 7 م‎ a 
σταυροῦ δύναμιν᾽ καὶ τὴν ἐκ νεκρῶν ἀνάστασιν᾽ THY TE τοῖς 
د 2 \ \ 8 / د م‎ \ 5.0} 0 ١ ١ 
μαθηταῖς éupavnow* καὶ THY εἰς οὐρανοὺς ἀνάληψιν" καὶ τὴν 
2 م 4 م \ ‘ 4 م‎ 
ἐκ δεξιῶν καθέδραν' Kal τὴν ἀκατάλυτον αὐτοῦ βασιλείαν" ταῦτα 
᾽ 7 ea θέ \ a id \ 2 (ὃ ae 
ἀκούσασα ἡ ἁγία παρθένος παρὰ Tov διακόνου διὰ τῆς θυρίδος 
oy ” \ Auer I. 7 , ل‎ 07 ١ 
OVKETL ἔφερεν THY TOD ἁγίου πνεύματος πύρωσιν" ἠθέλησεν δὲ 
OW 5 θῇ م‎ 8 7 5 x 2 ὃ , λέ Ν \ 
ὄψεσιν ὀφθῆναι τῷ διακόνῳ Kal ov δυναμένη λέγει πρὸς τὴν 
0 م م / ل / م‎ / 0 »Ὸ 7 
ἑαυτῆς μητέρα᾽ “Axovaov μου Μῆτερ τῆς θυγατρός σου" οὐδέν 
᾽ Ε + 5 02 حو م‎ 7 : 0 / ١ 
εἰσιν ols καθ᾽ ἡμέραν προςκυνοῦμεν εἰδώλοις" ἐκ λίθων Kal 
7 sf \ م‎ 7 . 
ξύλων" καὶ χρυσοῦ Kal ἀργύρου Kal ὀστέων ζώων ἡρμοσμένοις" 
οἷς ἐὰν ἐπέλθῃ εἷς TO λιλαίων" ἃ ν᾿ λό ) ὺ 
ς πέλθῃ εἷς τῶν γαλιλαίων᾽ ἄνευ χειρῶν" λόγῳ μόνῳ τοὺς 


7 م م م‎ 
πάντας TpoToUTaL’ ἡ δὲ TO κόμπῳ τῆς φιλοκοσμίας κεκαλυμμένη" 





8 Cod. Θηρίδος. > Cod. εἱρμωσμένοις. 


Kympianoc kal “loyctina. 65 


/ ς ΄ : \ 0 / \ ἡ) 2. Ὁ ΣΕΥ 8 eS 
μὴ φησιν ὁ πατήρ σου μὴ γνῶ ταύτην σου τὴν ἐνθύμησιν" ἡ δὲ 
3 \ / م‎ a م‎ 
πρὸς avTnv’ γνωστὸν ἔστω σοι Μῆτερ μου καὶ τῷ ἐμῷ πατρὶ" 
0 2. م‎ wee ἃ \ omy م‎ a / ل‎ 4 8 
ὅτε ἐγὼ ζητῶ *06جمامم(‎ ὃν διὰ Ipavriov τοῦ γείτονος" ἔμαθον 
a م‎ ς / د‎ / \ \ > A \ ” > 
ἐπὶ πολλαῖς ἡμέραις ἀκροωμένη τὰ περὶ αὐτοῦ Kal οὔκ ἐστιν 
44 - x‘ > φ ὃ م‎ OF ς .م \ م‎ 5 rn ἢ > / 
ἕτερος Θεὸς ἐν ᾧ δεῖ" σωθῆναι ἡμᾶς" καὶ ταῦτα εἰποῦσα ἀπῇει 
ς a \ ἄπο κχ > 0 A Θ ΠΤ Χο ὁ δὲ / Satis Ted EN A 
ἑαυτῇ τὰς εὐχὰς ἐκτελοῦσα TH Dew’ ἡ SE μήτηρ αὐτῆς" ἐπὶ τῆς 
4 5 لها م‎ Aid م 6 ك7‎ 8 / Η > / δὲ 
κοίτης αὐτῆς τῷ Αἰδεσίῳ" ταῦτα διεσάφησεν᾽ ἀγρυπνησάντων δὲ 
3 a ». ' 7 75 \ ον > a > a “ 3 : م‎ 
αὐτῶν ἐπὶ 70070١ πολὺς ἡδὺς αὐτοῖς ἐπῆλθεν ὕπνος" ἀγγελικῆς 
50 7 2 , id lal 7 1 
τε αὐτοῖς ἐπελθούσης ὁπτασίας" ὁρῶσι λαμπαδηφόρους" πλείους ἢ 
3 0 \ / \ \ / 0 n , 
ἑκατὸν" καὶ μέσον τὸν Χριστὸν λέγοντα αὐτοῖς" Δεῦτε πρός με 
5 31 7 » م‎ 7 ς Oy. \ “ ١ \ 2 23 7 
καγὼ βασιλείαν οὐρανῶν χαρίζομαι ὑμῖν" καὶ ταῦτα ἰδὼν ὁ Αἰδέ- 
” J 2 Ἄν), τυ Ἂ \ 23-7 م‎ ١ \ 
aos: ὄρθρου βαθέως ἀναστὰς " λαβὼν τὴν ἰδίαν γυναῖκα Kal τὴν 
/ gs 0 ١ Nes n τ ee 1 3297 
παρθένον" ἦλθεν εἰς TO κυριακὸν ἅμα TO Ilpatriw’ Kai ἠξίωσαν 
\ a \ a / e , ἃ 5 7 
αὐτὸν Tposayayely αὐτοὺς TO ἐπισκόπῳ Οπτάτῳ ὃ καὶ ἐποίησεν" 
> م \ م‎ / ١-7 \ 
προσπεσόντες οὖν τοῖς ποσὶν τοῦ ἐπισκόπου: ἠξίωσαν τὴν ἐν 
م م م‎ 2 14 A 2 Ν 
Χριστῷ σφραγῖδα λαβεῖν: ὁ δὲ οὐκ ἐπίστευσεν αὐτοῖς δι’ αὐτὸ 
bs J 5 \ \ و 7 9 م‎ vn ” » a \ 
εἶναι αὐτοὺς θρησκευτὰς τῶν εἰδώλων: ἕως ἂν ἤγγειλαν QUT@ τὴν 
م‎ ὌΝ ον Ὁ 7 \ x د , م‎ ἶ / 6 \ 
τοῦ Χριστοῦ ὀπτασίαν καὶ τὴν τῆς παρθένου ἐπιθυμίαν: ὋὉ δὲ 
م م / \ , 0 /(؟د‎ \ A 7, 8 
Αἰδέσιος ἀπεθρήξατο τὰς τρίχας τῆς κεφαλῆς Kal τοῦ πώγωνος 
5 \ \ a 7 / م م‎ 7 
ἣν yap ἱερεὺς TOV εἰδώλων" καὶ προσπεσόντες τοῖς TOD ἐπισκόπου 
\ 5 5 م 9 \ م قي‎ pa e 
Tool’ λαμβάνουσιν οἱ τρεῖς τὴν ἐν Χριστῷ σφραγῖδα: οὗτος 
95 € ἐν a م م‎ 7 > x 
μὲν οὖν ὁ Τ]ραὕλιος ἀξιωθεὶς τοῦ βαθμοῦ τοῦ πρεσβυτερίου ἐπὶ 
\ م‎ δ / a \ 7 4 
ἐνιαυτὸν καὶ μῆνας ἕξ' ἀνέλυσεν ἐν Χριστῷ: Ἢ δὲ ἁγία παρθένος 
Aes Στ 0 \ \ > By Piss / ١ 
συνεχῶς ἀπῇει ELS TOV κυριακὸν οἶκον" ᾿Αγλάϊος δέ τις TXONATTLKOS 
0 ا‎ are / / aS 1 \ م‎ 7 5 
εὐγενὴς" TO γένει πλούσιος σφόδρα" λοιμὸς τοῖς τρόποις περὶ τὴν 
م‎ 3 7 4 ΄ fala \ 2-7 / 0 م 0 م‎ 
TOV εἰδώλων' πλάνην" ὁρῶν THY ἁγίαν παρθένον" πυκνῶς ἀπιοῦσαν 
> \ x / 7 م‎ , 
εἰς τὸν “لهام نا‎ ταύτην ἐρασθεὶς προςπέμπεται αὐτῇ διὰ πλεί- 
لها‎ 1١ 23 ل \ 7 م‎ 
στων γυναικῶν καὶ ἀνδρῶν: αἰτούμενος αὐτὴν προςγαμεῖν: ἡ δὲ 
2 7 / 7 3 / > / \ م‎ ١ 
ἁγία παρθένος πάντας ἀπέλυεν ἀτιμάζουσα Kal κακολογοῦσα Kal 
re : : 02 م‎ A 7 : Ὅ Se 5 0 , 
ἐγουσα' ἐγὼ τῷ χριστῷ μου μεμνήστευμαι € οὖν ἀθροίσας 
Μ \ > 7 > ١ > م‎ 23 \ \ 75 
ὄχλους πολλοὺς: ἐπιτηρήσας αὐτὴν ἀπιοῦσαν εἰς τὸν κυριακὸν 
» 7 7 9 م‎ Ἂ 5 > لع‎ ΝΜ \ 7 7 
ἠβούλετο βιάσασθαι" τῶν δὲ μετ᾽ αὐτῆς ὄντων κραυγὴν ποιησάντων 
δ * م > / م م‎ . \ 3 7 7 > 7 
ἤκουσαν οἱ ἐν TH οἰκίᾳ αὐτῆς" καὶ ἐξελθόντες ξιφήρεις: ἀφάντους 


> \ > 7 8 ς \ > 7. A 7 > \ > م‎ 
αὐτοὺς ἐποίησαν' ὁ δὲ ᾿Αγλάϊος τῇ παρθένῳ ἐγκρατὴς αὐτῆς 





® Cod. γείτωνος. >» Cod. θεῖς. © Cod. Αἰδεσίμω. 
ἃ Cod. λαμπαδιφόρους. © Cod. εὐγενεῖς. f Cod. εἰδόλων. 


G. I 


f. 108 7 


f. logr 


f. 17 


66 Κγπριὰνὸο 


δ Ὁ \ an 4 \ 3 2 م‎ ” 
ἐγένετο; ἡ δὲ νεᾶνις ποιήσασα THY ἐν χριστῷ σφραγῖδα" ἔρριψε 
3 τς ΤῸΝ \ na 4 \ \ \ 3 م‎ \ \ 7 
αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν ὕπτιον: Kal τὰς πλευρὰς αὐτοῦ Kal τὴν ὄψιν 

7 م م 1 له‎ 7 
apavicaca πυγμαῖς" καὶ περιρρήξασα" τοὺς χιτῶνας αὐτοῦ" θρί- 
auBov αὐτὸν ἐποίησεν ἀκόλουθον πράξασα τῇ διδασκάλῳ Θέκλᾳ. 
καὶ ἀπῇει εἰς τὸν κυριακὸν οἶκον: Ὃ δὲ ᾿Αγλάϊος ὀργισθεὶς" 
προςῆλθεν Κυπριανῷ τῷ Μάγῳ᾽ καὶ τάσσεται αὐτῷ δύο τάλαντα 
δ n 7 م‎ 
χρυσίου καὶ δύο ἀργυρίου: ὅπως διὰ τῆς μαγείας αὐτοῦ aypevon 
ce treed 7 ies IO\ © 57 3 \ / 
τὴν ἁγίαν παρθένον" οὐκ εἰδὼς ὁ ἄθλιος ἀνίκητον εἶναι THY δύναμιν 
τοῦ χριστοῦ; ὁ δὲ Κυπριανὸς ἔκαλεσεν᾽ ἐν ταῖς μαγείαις αὐτοῦ 
c / 7 4 
δαίμονα" " ὁ δὲ δαίμων ἐλθὼν λέγει: τί με κέκληκας; ὁ δὲ 
١ م م ل‎ 
Κυπριανὸς εἶπεν πρὸς avtov' épa παρθένου τῶν γαλιλαίων ὁ 
ΣΑΣ 2 a : \ > δύ 550 τ 5 م مم‎ : 7 Xx 3 ς 
yAdlos: καὶ εἰ δύνασαι αὐτὴν αὐτῷ παρασχεῖν ἀπάγγειλον" ὁ 
1١ ” \ 3 4 « ” 5 ,ὔ Ante / 
δὲ ἄθλιος ἃ οὐκ εἶχεν ὡς ἔχων ἐπηγγείλατο παρασχεῖν" λέγει 
2) a e \ en, \ ” “ 7 A 7 ς 
αὐτῷ ὁ Κυπριανὸς εἰπὲ τὰ ἔργα σου οὕτως πιστεύσω' λέγει ὁ 
7 / م م م‎ 
δαίμων" ἀποστάτης ἐγενόμην Θεοῦ" πειθόμενος τῷ ἐμῷ πατρὶ" 
ἢ Nis ee 0 / 607 / 35 ” ay, 1 
οὐρανοὺς ἐτάραξα" ἀγγέλους ἐξ ὕψους Katécupa’ KEvav ἠπάτησα 
م‎ Ἂν; 7 7 
᾿Αδὰμ παραδείσου τρυφῆς ἐστέρησα" مامكا‎ ἀδελφοκτόνον ἐδίδαξα: 
م‎ 74 ey) 3 37 \ , 0 xe A 3 
γῆν αἵματι ἐμίανα᾽ ἀκάνθας καὶ τριβόλους Ou ἐμὲ ἡ γῆ ἀνέτειλεν 
Ὁ ΡΥ IES 5. 7 5 ? / 7 0 
μοιχείας" ἐγὼ ἐδίδαξα" εἰδωλολατρείαν παρεσκεύασα᾽ μοσχο- 
لها‎ x م‎ x 
ποιεῖν τὸν λαὸν ἐδίδαξα: σταυρωθῆναι τὸν χριστὸν ὑπέβαλον᾽ 
4 م‎ 
πόλεις συνέσεισα᾽ τείχη κατέρρηξα: ταῦτα πάντα ποιήσας" 
7 م ص \ 9 / 7 7 > م‎ 
ταύτης πῶς ἀδρανήσαι δύναμαι" δέξαι οὖν TO φάρμακον 70070١ 
\ en 3 3 A / ” 5 x > \ \ 
καὶ pavov τὸν οἶκον τῆς παρθένου ἔξωθεν: κἀγὼ ἐπελθὼν τὸν 
7 > 7 7 Ἂν; 3 7 ς / / <6 x 
πατρικὸν μου ἐπάγω νοῦν Kal εὐθέως ὑπακούσεταί cov. Ἢ δὲ 
ἁγία παρθένος τρίτην ὥραν τῆς νυκτὸς ἀναστᾶσα ἀπεδίδου τὴν 
3 BN ἣν al 2 7 \ Χ ε \ a ὃ 1 0 \ ١ 
εὐχὴν τῷ Θεῷ’ αἰσθομένη δὲ THY ὁρμὴν τοῦ δαίμονος“ Kal τὴν 
7 م م م‎ 7 
πύρωσιν τῶν VeppaVv* πρὸς τὸν ἑαυτῆς δεσπότην ἀνεγρήγορον τὸν 
م م م‎ Ν م‎ 
νοῦν διεγείρασα. καὶ τῇ σταυροφόρῳ δυνάμει πᾶν TO σῶμα 
/ م‎ (2 XN 
κατασφραγισαμένη" φωνῇ μεγάλῃ λέγει: Ὃ Θεὸς: παντοκράτωρ᾽ 
7 م 2 م‎ Ν 5 م م‎ II ΧΟ ΝΣ ¢ NEG 
ὁ τοῦ ἀγαπητοῦ σου παιδὸς ᾿Ιησοῦ χριστοῦ ἸΙατήρ' ὋὉ τὸν 
> 4 ἡ 7 “2427 \ \ > / 
ἀνθρωποκτόνον ὄφιν ταρτάρῳ βύθίσας" Kal τοὺς ἐζωγρημένους 
م‎ \ a 
ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ διασώσας" ὁ τὸν οὐρανὸν τανύσας καὶ THY γῆν ἑδράσας" 
ς \ 7 7 
0 τὸν ἥλιον δᾳδουχήσας Kal τὴν σελήνην λαμπρύνας᾽ ὁ πλάσας 


Ἂς 7 م م‎ \ A / 
Tov ἄνθρωπον ἐκ τῆς Tposomot@cews' ἑαυτῷ" Kal TO πανσόφῳ 





4 Cod. περιρήξασα. 5 Cod. δαίμωνα passim. © Cod. μοιχίας. 
4 δαίμωνος passin. © Cod. τῶν: f Cod. προσομοίωσιν. 


Kal ᾿Ιογοτίνδ. 67 


, 7 , 5 مم لها له‎ 
παιδί σου ἀνακοινωσάμενος" καὶ θέμενος αὐτὸν ἐν τῇ τρυφῇ τοῦ 
, ὌΝ / A ἢ / ١ 
παραδείσου" iva δεσπόζῃ τῶν ὑπό σου γενομένων κτισμάτων 
3 , ἘΝ 7 > / 7 5 5, م‎ > / 
ἀπάτῃ δὲ ὄφεως τούτων ἐξορισθέντα᾽ οὐκ ἀφῆκας ἀπρονόητον" 
> Ν ὃ \ م‎ / 8 4 5 / ΨΌΌΝ > , 
ἀλλὰ διὰ τῆς σταυροφόρου δυνάμεως ἀνεκαλέσω αὐτὸν ἰασάμενος 
.م مم \ م‎ 3 / > 7 
αὐτοῦ Ta Tpavmata’ Kai διὰ τοῦ χριστοῦ σου εἰς ὑγείαν ἐπανή- 
a] / / ’ 7 5 \ 
yayes’ δι᾿ οὗ κόσμος πεφώτισται᾽ Kal πάντα γινώσκουσι" σὲ TOV 
Ν / م م م‎ ١ / 
ἐπὶ πάντα Θεὸν. θέλησον καὶ viv Sv αὐτοῦ σῶσαι τὴν δούλην 
\ “ Nee Va / 
gov’ Kai μὴ ἁψασθω μου πειρασμὸς" σοὶ yap συνεταξάμην παρ- 
م.م :م م مم م \ م‎ 
θενεῦσαι" καὶ τῷ povoyevet* cov παιδὶ Ἰησοῦ Χριστῷ" Kai ταῦτα 
> م 7 م‎ x a م م م‎ 
εἰποῦσα Kal κατασφραγισαμένη πᾶν TO σῶμα TH TOD Χριστοῦ 
“ay ᾽ / a / b Now, SN ey i 
σφραγῖδι" ἐνεφύσησεν TO δαίμονι" καὶ ἄτιμον αὐτὸν ἀπέλυσεν 
e \ 1 م‎ » \ / 
ὁ δὲ δαίμων ἀπῆλθεν Katnoyuppévos’ Kal ἔστη κατὰ πρόσωπον 
Ais \ 14 39 A id \ مم‎ 53 > 53 « 
Κυπριανοῦ" καὶ λέγει αὐτῷ ὁ Κυπριανὸς: ποῦ ἐστιν ἐφ᾽ ἣν 
/د‎ / 2 SN د‎ / \ \ 2 50000 1 Ἂ 
ἔπεμψά σε; ὡς κἀγὼ ἠγρύπνησα: καὶ σὺ ὡς ὁρῶ ἠστόχησας 
[ὦ 7 / 39 م‎ \ > 7 
καὶ ὁ δαίμων λέγει" μή με ἐρώτα" εἰπεῖν σοι yap ov δύναμαι" 
io 60 7 م‎ \ ” ᾿ 2 δὲ Κ 5 x, 7 
eldov® yap τι σημεῖον καὶ ἔφριξα: ὁ δὲ Κυπριανὸς καταγελάσας 
م‎ ١١ م‎ 7 23 7 7 
αὐτοῦ: προσχὼν ταῖς μαγείαις" ἐκάλεσεν ἰσχυρότερον δαίμονα. 
\ “ δὲ 2 7 / 0 λέ م‎ K بي‎ ΨΜ \ 
καὶ οὕτως δὲ ὁμοίως καυχώμενος“ λέγει TO Κυπριανῷ. ἔγνων Kal 
\ 54 4 \ \ د‎ 7 > 7 x > / 7 
τὴν σὴν κέλευσιν καὶ τὴν ἐκείνου ἀδρανείαν. διὸ ἀπέστειλέν 
e 7 8 / θ 7 \ 7 : δέ / 
με 0 πατὴρ μου διορθώσασθαί cov τὴν λύπην: δέξαι τοίνυν 
\ م‎ CA / ار م‎ \ 
TO φάρμακον τοῦτο Kal ῥᾶνον κύκλῳ τοῦ οἴκου αὐτῆς" κἀγὼ 
/ / 3 ΠΝ Πα τε πππ \ \ \ / 
παραγενόμενος πείσω αὐτήν᾽ ὁ δὲ Κυπριανὸς λαβὼν τὸ φάρμακον 
5 7 \ > / \ / 2 م‎ e / e \ 
077١ καὶ ἐποίησεν καθὼς προσέταξεν αὐτῷ ὁ δαίμων. ὁ δὲ 
id / 6 ΝΕ ΘΟ / \ “ / 3 / 
Δαίμων παρεγένετο" ἡ δὲ ayia παρθένος τὴν ἕκτην ὥραν: ἀπεδίδου 
\ 0 \ / 3 M / 3 4 5 م‎ > 
τὴν εὐχὴν Aéyouca’ Μεσονύκτιον eEeyerpoynv' τοῦ ἐξομολο- 
a θ 7 ه‎ 9 x \ 7 Le: ὃ / Ἐ Θ Ὗ له‎ cs 
γεῖσθαί" σοι ἐπὶ τὰ κρίματα τῆς δικαιοσύνης σου εὲ τῶν ὅλων 
م‎ 7] e 3 7 © 
καὶ Κύριε τοῦ ἐλέους. ὁ τὸν διάβολον καταισχύνας. ὁ τὴν θυσίαν 
م‎ \ 7 2 3 ١ 
τοῦ ᾿Αβραὰμ μεγαλύνας" ὁ τὸν Βὴλ καταστρέψας" καὶ τὸν 
lA 7 ᾿ \ a \ a A \ \ 
δράκοντα φονεύσας" καὶ τοῦ dia τοῦ πιστοῦ cov Δανιὴλ τὴν 
lal / / م‎ lal / / 1 2 1 “ 
τῆς θεότητός σου γνῶσιν τοῖς Βαβυλωνίοις γνωρίσας" ὁ διὰ τοῦ 
م 4 م \ م‎ \ 
μονογενοῦς, σου παιδὸς ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ: τὰ πάντα οἰκονομήσας. 
ς \ \ 7 7 \ / / م‎ 
ὁ Ta πρὶν ἐσκοτισμένα φωτίσας" Kal τὰ νενεκρωμένα μέλη ἡμῶν 
7 e \ 5 / 4 1١ م‎ 
ζωοποιήσας ἐν ἀφθαρσίᾳ: ὁ τὰ πτωχὰ TrOUTIcas® καὶ τὰ τῷ 


θανάτῳ δεδεμένα λύσας" μὴ παρίδῃς με πανάγιε βασιλεῦ: ἀλλὰ 








8 Cod. μονογενῆ. ١ Cod. δαέμωνι passim. © Cod. Tor. 1 Cod. καυχόμενος. 
© Cod. ἐξομολογῆσθαι. * Cod. μονογενοῦ. 5ك‎ Cod. πλουτήσας. 


ΓΙΟΥ͂ 


f. I1IOV 


firs 


68 Kytpianoc 


/ / \ / ١ \ ¢ Fon ΤῸ / \ 
τήρησόν μου τὰ μέλη πρὸς τὴν ἁγνείαν᾽ ἄσβεστόν μου τὴν 
, 17 م 7 “ / م‎ / 
λαμπάδα διατήρησον τῆς παρθενίας" ἵνα συνειςέλθω τῷ νυμφίῳ 
ἊΣ ΟΝ > δ a8 ‘9 6s, 
μου Χριστῷ: Kal ἁγνὴν ἀποδώσω" ἣν παρέθου μοι παραθήκην. 
2 5 > م 3 \ \ م‎ € i t/ م‎ ig / 7 > 
ὅτι OL αὐτοῦ καὶ σὺν αὐτῷ σοι ἡ δόξα Gyr τῷ ἁγίῳ πνεύματι εἰς 
م م‎ / 5 Ν م‎ 7 ἐν \ 
τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων. ἀμήν. καὶ ταῦτα εὐξαμένη Kal τὸν 
/ 2 م‎ 7 7 \ 
σταυρὸν ποιησαμένη: ἐπετίμησεν τῷ δαίμονι Kal ἄτιμον αὐτὸν 
>» πα Ὁ τῶν / ee الريك ل‎ ae 0 7 
ἀπέπεμψεν ὁ δὲ κατησχυμμένος" ἐφ᾽ οἷς ἐκόμπαζεν ἀναχωρήσας 
” 59 / Pi € \ x 7 8 م‎ » 
ἔστη ἀπέναντι Κυπριανοῦ" Ὁ) δὲ Κυπριανὸς λέγει᾽ ποῦ ἔστιν 
. 1.5 aN ” NSS / i / N > a 9 7 A 
ἐφ᾽ ἣν σε ἔπεμψα; καὶ ὁ δαίμων: νενίκημαι Kai εἰπεῖν ov δύναμαι 
3 م‎ \ 8 
εἶδον" yap τι σημεῖον καὶ ἔφριξα' “O δὲ Κυπριανὸς ἀποῤῥηθεὶς 
/ / و‎ Ν , م‎ 7 
ἐκάλεσεν ἰσχυρότερον δαίμονα" τὸν πατέρα πάντων τῶν δαιμόνων 
\ /, 3 As TT 5 e و‎ LO 7 as Nite te 7 
Kal λέγει αὐτῷ" Τί ἐστιν ἡ τοιαύτη adpdvera® ὑμῶν" νενίκηται 
2 ε / / 5 Ὅ Se > 7 , SN ΕΝ, 8 7 
πᾶσα ἡ δύναμίς σου € δαίμων λέγει" ἐγὼ ἄρτι" σοι ταύτην 
0 / . / ١م‎ ¢ 0 νι \ / 7 
ἑτοιμάσω᾽ μόνον σὺ᾽ ἕτοιμος γενοῦ" ὁ δὲ Κυπριανὸς λέγει" Ti TO 
م م‎ / 3١ ς 7 5 ١ 
σημεῖον τῆς νίκης σου; Kal ὁ δαίμων εἶπεν᾽ ταράξω αὐτὴν ἐν 
πυρετοῖς διαφόροις" καὶ ἐφιστῶ αὐτῇ μεθ᾽ ἡμέρας ἕξ ἐν μεσονυκτίῳ 
βεέτοις م‎ ἢ HEU ἡμερᾶς μ Ὁ. 
Ν 3 4 \ , / A 
Kal ἑτοιμάσω σοι αὐτὴν. ὋὉ δὲ δαίμων ἀπελθὼν, ἐνεφανίσθη τῇ 
εἰ} θέ > / 0 : \ θί Ἔα τυ αν" 00 1 
ayia παρθένῳ ἐν σχήματι παρθένου" Kai καθίσας ἐπὶ τῆς κλίνης 
λέγει τῇ ἁγίᾳ τοῦ Θεοῦ κόρῃ: Θέλω κἀγὼ σήμερον ἀσκῆσαι μετά 
bah ΠΡ iat hr P2 Yo onEP 4 μ 
7 oO 3 Ν / م‎ 7 > 7 Ἃ / 4 
σου: τί οὖν ἐστι TO ἔπαθλον THs παρθενίας εἶπέ prot’ ἢ Tis ὁ 
7 \ ١ CES / (2 \ Cy, 
μισθός; πολὺ yap ὁρῶ σε καταπεπονημένην. “H δὲ ἁγία 
, 7 م‎ / 1 x \ Ν \ om 
παρθένος λέγει τῷ δαίμονι᾽ ὁ μὲν μισθὸς πολὺς: TO δὲ ὦθλον 
3 7 \ Ὁ / /د : /د‎ Ψ > م‎ 4 \ / 
ὀλίγον: Kal ὁ δαίμων ἔφη: Kva ἦν ἐν TO παραδείσῳ καὶ παρθένος 
ΘΑ ας \ 7 5 م م‎ ΝΣ 1 3 g δὲ θ لم‎ h 
nv’ Kal μόνη ἣν συνοικοῦσα τῷ ap’ εἶταξ δὲ πεισθεῖσα 
5 7 AY م م م‎ 3 1 ' A 7 x 
ἐτεκνογόνησεν: THY γνῶσιν τῶν καλῶν εὐθὺς ὑπεδέξατο Kal 
/ 0 / > Sheen ep: 1556-7 , 507 
κόσμος ἅπας τετέκνωται δι᾿ αὐτῆς. Ἣ δὲ ayia παρθένος ἀνέστη 
3 \ \ 7 2 7 ‘ CS \ n 7 3 an \ 
ἐπὶ τὸ προςεύξασθαι ἐπειγομένη δὲ ὑπὸ τοῦ δαίμονος ἐξελθεῖν τὴν 
7 4 j 7 \ م لعا‎ 
θύραν" ἐπὶ συννοίας γενομένη καὶ ταραχθεῖσα σφοδρῶς: καὶ 
م‎ ς د \ م‎ ١ \ 
γνοῦσα τίς ἐστιν ὁ ἀπατῆσαι αὐτὴν σπουδάζων" ἔσπευδεν ἐπὶ τὰς 
3 5 / Ne ae, \ Cod 7 م‎ 000 7 1 
εὐχὰς" σφραγισαμένη δὲ ἑαυτὴν TO σημείῳ τοῦ σταυροῦ" ἐνεφύσησεν 
م \ ” \ 7 8 م‎ > έλ 1 ς δὲ Ν ἑαυ yy 
τῷ δαίμονι Kal ἄτιμον Kal τοῦτον ἀπέλυσεν" ἡ δὲ μικρὸν ἑαυτὴ 
> \ م م‎ 7 ١ i 
ἀπὸ τοῦ ταράχου ἀπολαβοῦσα ἔστη εἰς προσευχὴν καὶ Tapa- 
م د 7 2 م‎ ς \ 3 7 7 1 i τ 
χρῆμα ἐπαύσατο αὐτῆς 0 πυρετὸς εἰπούσης οὕτως" δόξα σοι Χριστὲ 


5 Ν ς 5 7 \ م 7 د م‎ 7 ١ 
ὁ θεὸς ὁ τοὺς ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀλλοτρίου καταδυναστευομένους σώζων καὶ 





®* Cod. ἀποδύσω. > Cod. κατισχυμμένος. © Cod. ἴδον. 
4 Cod. dépavia. © Cod. τῆ: f Cod. σοι; 
8 Cod. εἶταν. 8 Cod. πισθῖσα: i Cod. σοινοίας. J Cod. ἐνεφύσεισεν. 


KAI ᾿Ιογοτίνὰ. 69 


١ ١ / e a > a‏ / / \ \ م 
φωταγωγῶν πρὸς TO θέλημά σου τοὺς σοὺς δούλους" ὁ ταῖς ἀκτῖσι‏ 
a \ > \ 7‏ م / > > \ \ > / م 
5ك τῆς δικαιοσύνης ἀποσοβὼν τοὺς ἐν ἀωρίᾳ συλοῦντας" τὰς‏ 
4 م > / / a a‏ 
μὴ δὸς" νικηθῆναί με ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀλλοτρίου" καθήλωσον ἐκ τοῦ φόβου‏ 
/ \ \ / 7 7 لها 
σου τὰς σάρκας μου Kal TO νόμῳ σου ἐλέησόν pe’ καὶ δὸς δόξαν‏ 
١ / >‏ روي لم dA 9 τυ‏ \ > م 
τῷ ὀνόματί σου Κύριε εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας. ἀμήν: “O δὲ δαίμων μετ‏ 
١ \ 58‏ 2 م 1 م 
αἰσχύνης πολλῆς ἐνεφάνισεν" TH Κυπριανῷ" ὋὉ δὲ πρὸς αὐτὸν'‏ 
θέ a / 9) > ¢‏ م \ قو 01 40 > θῶ‏ 2 7 ~ 
Kal σύ ye ἀληθῶς ἐνικήθης" ὑπὸ μιᾶς παρθένου" Tis οὖν ἐστι ἡ‏ 
ὃ / 3 to e‏ 3 م > 5 7 / \ ὃ ΄ be! e‏ 
ύναμις αὐτῆς; ὁ δὲ δαίμων λέγει" εἰπεῖν σοι οὐ δύναμαι" εἶδον‏ 
a 0 00 /‏ , 0 7م a \ 9 \ ١‏ / 
γάρ τι σημεῖον καὶ ἔφριξα" καὶ εὐθέως ὑπεχώρησα᾽ εἰ οὖν βούλῃ‏ 
c ١ 7‏ 7 له 
μαθεῖν: ὄμωσόν μοι Kal λέγω cou: εἶπεν δὲ ὁ Κυπριανὸς" τί σοι‏ 
id \ 5‏ 54 7 
ὀμόσω; ἔφη ὁ δαίμων: τὰς δυνάμεις μου τὰς μεγάλας τὰς Tapa-‏ 
ἢ e \ \ / \ \ / f \‏ 7 
μενούσας pot’ ὁ δὲ Κυπριανὸς λέγει" μὰ τὰς δυνάμεις σουΐ Tas‏ 
ἊΨ σ \‏ / / 2( 7 , 
μεγάλας οὐκ ἀπαλλάσσομαί σου" ὁ δὲ δαίμων λέγει: εἶδον“ TO‏ 
»Μ 0 / / ς Ν‏ 1 7 5 م لها 
σημεῖον τοῦ ἐσταυρωμένου καὶ ἔφριξα' τότε λέγει ὁ Κυπριανὸς"‏ 
ς 7 7‏ 4 1 9 
οὐκ οὖν ὁ ἐσταυρωμένος μείζων σου ἐστίν; ὁ δαίμων λέγει"‏ 
ον \ 3 / \ /‏ 0 , ΄ 
πάντων μείζων ἐστίν. ὅσα yap ὧδε πλανήσωμεν Kal πράξωμεν‏ 
م \ (ep rile‏ \ > / \ - > ; و > 
ἀπολαμβάνωμεν" ἐκεῖ yap φούρκελος ἐστὶν χαλκοῦς" Kal πυροῦ-‏ 


ΣΝ ἢ \ / h 
TAL Και TLUETAL ELS TOV τένοντα 


/ > م 
τοῦ ἁμαρτήσαντος" ἤτοι ἀγγέλου‏ 
Sue 4 nr‏ \ م i‏ 7 4 > 14 \ 7 8 د BA‏ 
ἤτοι ἀνθρώπου" καὶ οὕτως ἐν ῥοιζήματι' TOD πυρὸς οἱ ἄγγελοι TOD‏ 
ΠΩ ας \‏ 2507 0 مم \ \ : , 5 
éoTavpwpmévou' πρὸς TO βῆμα αὐτοῦ ἀπάγουσιν αὐτὸν: ‘O δὲ‏ 

\ / > \ , / rn 
Κυπριανὸς λέγει" οὐκ οὖν κἀγὼ φίλος σπουδάσω γενέσθαι τοῦ 
> / 20 \ 7 م € س7‎ 7 \ e 
ἐσταυρωμένου: iva μὴ εἰς τοιαύτην ὑποβληθῶ κρίσιν; Kai ὁ 
5 / / ” / 5 aj ” G Nes 

αἴμων λέγει: "Opwods μοι καὶ ἐπιορκεῖς!; ἔφη ὁ Κυπριανὸς 

a / \ 7 / κα 0 م‎ 5 ὃ \ \ م‎ 
σοῦ καταπτύω" Kal Tas δυνάμεις σουΐ ov φοβοῦμαι" διὰ yap τῆς 

\ / لها‎ a م م‎ / \ 
νυκτὸς πέπεισμαι ταῖς εὐχαῖς Kal ταῖς δεήσεσι τῆς παρθένου" Kal 

\ , n> / ΄, 1 و‎ Ὁ 30 / 

τὴν σημείωσιν TOD ἐσταυρωμένου θαυμάζω: δι᾽ ἧς Kayo σφραγίξζω 
\ > , 7 .م‎ \ x \ 

ἐμαυτὸν ἀποταξαμενός σοι" Kai ταῦτα εἰπὼν ἐσφράγισεν" ἑαυτὸν 

λέγων" δόξα σοι Χ 6٠ καὶ λέ » δαί : jou ἀπ᾽ ἐμοῦ" 

91 Χριστέ: καὶ λέγει τῷ Saipove’ πορεύου ἀπ᾽ ἐμοῦ 
πον \ ΡΝ, ΠΤ \ / γ ἢ / 1 
ἐγὼ yap ζητῶ τὸν Χριστόν ‘O δὲ δαίμων ἀπίει" κατησχυμμένος 

Pa ire \ \ \ \ 0 
σφόδρα᾽ ὁ δὲ Κυπριανὸς λαβὼν πάσας Tas μεγάλας γραφὰς 
> / / \ / \ \ 
ἀπέθετο νεανίσκοις" Kal παρεγένετο εἰς TOV κυριακὸν᾽ Kal προς- 


\ م م م ᾽ / \ 7 53 7 م م‎ 
πεσὼν τοῖς τοῦ μακαρίου ᾿Ανθίμου ποσὶν λέγει αὐτῷ" δοῦλε τοῦ 





® Cod. συλλοῦντας. Ὁ Cod. das. © Cod. ἐνεφάνησεν. 
4 Cod. ἑνικήθεις. © Cod. δῶν. f Cod. ov. 
& Cod. ἴδον. Cod. τέναντα. ١ Cod. ῥυζήματι. 


J Cod. ἐφειορκεῖς. K Cod. ἐσφράγησεν. ' Cod. κατισχυμμένος. 


1 1117 


f Tier 


70 Kytpianoc 


5 7 Ὅν 7 7 , > a \ > 
εὐλογημένου Χριστοῦ" βούλομαι στρατεύσασθαι αὐτῷ" Kal év- 
م 5 7 م‎ 7 Oe, ς Ν 
ταῦθα γίνεται εἰς τὴν μάτρικα τῆς στρατείας αὐτοῦ" ὁ δὲ μακάριος 
Ε θ 7 \ 4 \ a > a θ م 2 م‎ 8 
Ανθιμος νομίσας: τὸ μήπως Kal τοῖς ἐκεῖ θηρεῦσαι ἀπῆλθεν" 
hi م / م 7 7 م م م‎ 
λέγει αὐτῷ ἀρκοῦ Κυπριανὲ τοῖς ἔξω φείδου τῆς ἐκκλησίας τοῦ 
م‎ €c / 7 3 4 
Χριστοῦ" ὁ δὲ Κυπριανὸς λέγει" πεπίστευμαι κἀγὼ OTL ἀνίκητός 
ἐστιν: διὰ γὰρ τῆς νυκτὸς ταύτης δαίμονας ἔπεμψα τῇ ayia 
fase ΤῸΣ 5 ed μονῶᾶς ee ἐλ ieee 
/ a م م م‎ 7 
παρθένῳ icyupwtdtouvs: Kal τῇ σφραγῖδι τοῦ Χριστοῦ ἐνίκησεν 
د‎ \ \ / 5 7 > Φ \ Nes 4 ΔΝ 
αὐτοὺς" διὸ δέξαι τὰ βιβλία ἐν οἷς τὰ κακὰ ἐποίουν" καὶ ἔμπρησον 
\ / e ١ 7 
αὐτὰ ἐν πυρὶ καὶ ἐμὲ ἐλέησον" ὁ δὲ πεισθεὶς: Tas μὲν βίβλους 
5 لها‎ > 4 8 : 5 > 7 2 A 3 / له‎ 
αὐτοῦ ἐνέπρησεν: αὐτὸν δὲ εὐλογήσας ἀπέλυσεν εἰπών σπεῦδε, 
/ ἢ \ 0 / 5 ὌΝ τς \ و‎ ١ > \ 
τέκνον, εἰς TOV εὐκτήριον oikov’ ᾿Ο δὲ Κυπριανὸς ἀπελθὼν εἰς τὸν 
μὰ foxy 1 \ / ᾿ ἈΦ م‎ 
οἶκον αὐτοῦ πάντα μὲν τὰ εἴδωλα συνέτριψεν δι᾽ ὅλης δὲ τῆς 
Ν > 7 4 ١ 7 م 3 07 5 7 م‎ 
νυκτὸς ἐκόπτετο ἑαυτὸν λέγων: πῶς τολμήσω ἐμφανισθῆναι" TO 
م م‎ 3 \ 4 xX م‎ 5 / 
προσώπῳ τοῦ Χριστοῦ" τοσαῦτα κακὰ δράσας" ἢ πῶς εὐλογήσω 
5 \ 2 م‎ 5 7 7 1 ὃ 5 ε 7 53 θ / 86 7 : 
αὐτὸν ἐν τῷ ὀνόματί pou’ δι’ οὗ κατηρασάμην ἀνθρώπους ἁγίους 
3 7 3 3 / 7 7 45 1 > \ 
ἐπικαλούμενος τοὺς ἀκαθάρτους δαίμονας ; θήσας οὖν τέφραν ἐπὶ 
\ م‎ ” \ Aa: an /د 5 م 23 م‎ 3/ x 
τὴν γῆν ἔκειτο διὰ σιγῆς᾽ τοῦ θεοῦ αἰτῶν τὸν ἔλεον: ὄρθρου δὲ 
4 7 4 اح \ 2 1 3 /د‎ 59 
γενομένου: σαββάτου μεγάλου ὄντος ἀπήει εἰς TOV KUPLAKOV οἶκον" 
7 e م , ,22 / م‎ 7 
ὑπάγων δὲ προςηύξατο 08606 λέγων: Κύριε" εἰ ἀξιός εἶμι δοῦλός σου 
م‎ / b 7 5 7 2 \ 5 i 5 م‎ 
κληθῆναι ج76‎ عرمج٠١‎ δός μοι εἰσιόντι εἰς TOV οἶκόν σου ἀκοῦσαι 
4 / a 4 a > / \ 5 ني‎ ἔν Ὁ / 
κληδονισμόν τινά τῶν θείων γραφῶν" εἰσιόντι δὲ αὐτῷ ὁ ὑμνό- 
/ 52 3 7 i} \ 
ypados Δαβὶδ ἔλεγεν" εἶδες“ Κύριε μὴ παρασιωπήσεις" Κύριε μὴ 
5 / م اي‎ \ 7 εν fh ἐξ 5 3 7 4 م‎ 
ἀπόστῃς ἀπ᾽ ἐμοῦ" καὶ πάλιν ὁ Ἢσαΐας" ἰδοὺ συνήσει ὁ παῖς 
͵ 03 7 5م‎ / ١ / ἡ 
μου" καὶ πάλιν ὁ Δαβίδ' προέφθασαν οἱ ὀφθαλμοί μου πρὸς ὄρθρον 
م م‎ \ 7 by , ς oy Ὁ \ rn ς 
τοῦ μελετᾶν τὰ λόγιά σου" καὶ πάλιν ὁ Ἡσαΐας: Μὴ φοβοῦ" ὁ 
م‎ x » Gers / 3 \ A aN > / 
mais μου Ἰακὼβ: καὶ ὁ ἠγαπημένος ᾿Ισραὴλ ὃν ἐγὼ ἐξελεξάμην" 
3 7 م / م \ م‎ 
καὶ ὁ ἀπόστολος δὲ" 110206١ Χριστὸς ἡμᾶς ἐξηγόρασεν ἐκ τῆς 
م : , / م‎ 5 5 / 
κατάρας τοῦ νόμου" γενόμενος ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν κατάρα᾽ εἶτα πάλιν 
ΠΝ Gist? , \ / 0 / 0 ١ / 
Δαβίδ: τίς λαλήσει τὰς δυναστείας τοῦ κυρίου; ἀκουστὰς ποιήσει 
3 م‎ 5 2 ١ م‎ 7 ον 
πάσας τὰς αἰνέσεις αὐτοῦ. εἶτα ὁ φωτισμὸς τοῦ εὐαγγελίου 
5 δ 7 out) , 5 3 م‎ 4 7 51 
εἶτα ἡ δαδουχία τοῦ ἐπισκόπου" εἶτα τῶν κατηχουμένων λόγος 
, \ \ 2 n J i 9 \ 
πορεύεσθαι yap τοὺς κατηχουμένους ὁ διακονῶν ἐπεφώνει᾽ ὁ δὲ 
Ἄμε δ Ὁ ς 
Κυπριανὸς ἐκαθέζετο" λέγει αὐτῷ ὁ ᾿Αστέριος ὁ Διάκονος" πορεύου 


ἐξ 3 λέ 3 A e K Me ay ὃ ΟΝ δ. σον, 5 د م‎ 1 
ECW eyel AUT@ 0 UT Pplavos OVAOS EYEYOVa" TOV EDTAUP® 





a Cod. ἐμφανησθῆναι. > Cod. τέλιος. Sods δες. 4 Cod. φοβούμαι. 
* Sic 10. Cod. 1 Cod. αἰναίσεις. ὁ Cod. ἐγέγωνα. 


KAI ᾿Ιογοτίνδ. 74 


7 / /, ἘΣ Ὁ \ , 1 9 9 
μένου καὶ ἔξω με Barres’ ὁ δὲ Διάκονος λέγει" οὔπω τέλειος" εἶ 
e \ \ / oe / e \ 7 
ὁ δὲ Κυπριανὸς λέγει" ζῇ ὁ Χριστός μου ὁ τοὺς δαίμονας καταισ- 
/ 5 القن‎ / , Ὁ μι τ 5 ΠΥ ΑΙ 
χύνας" καὶ τὴν παρθένον σώσας" Ka μὲ ἐλεήσας" οὐ μὴ ἐξέλθω 
14 ‘ , ١5 4 ᾿ eo. © 5> 2 / 3 / م‎ 
οὕτως" εἰ μὴ" τέλειος γένωμαι" “O δὲ ᾿Αστέριος ἀνήγγειλεν TO 
/ / 1 ας ς 7 3 ١ ١ 
ἐπισκόπῳ᾽ καλέσας οὖν αὐτὸν ὁ ἐπίσκοπος" Kal ἀναστὰς κατὰ 
\ ἢ \ / 0 ره \ ام‎ 7 Eee 2 ἀν 
TOV νόμον μετὰ πάσης ἀκριβείας: λαβὼν ἐφώτισεν αὐτὸν" TH δὲ 
5 50 ς 7, 7 τ / E \ 53 7 1 ἐξ 1١ م‎ 8 7 yp 
ὀγδόῃ ἡμέρᾳ" ἱεροκήρυξ καὶ ἀναγνώστης καὶ ἐξηγητὴς τῶν θείω 
/ م م‎ 59 a / 3 
μυστηρίων ἐγένετο τοῦ Χριστοῦ: χάρις δὲ αὐτῷ ἐπηκολούθησεν“ 
9 ΄ > / م‎ a \ ١ 
κατὰ πνευμάτων ἀκαθάρτων Kal πᾶν πάθος ἰᾶτο' πολλοὺς δὲ καὶ 
3 a م‎ ς / / > / ” \ 
ἐκ τῆς τῶν EXAnvev μανίας ἀποσπάσας ἔπεισεν χριστιανοὺς 
tA θ 5 ّ 4 6 δὲ م ’ م‎ 10 ὃ م‎ 5 
γενέσθαι" πληρωμένου" δὲ τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ συγκάθεδρος τοῦ ἐπι- 
/ / ak \ / y \ , A / 
σκόπου yeywvev’ ἕξ καὶ δέκα ἔτη τὸν θρόνον τοῦ πρεσβυτερίου 
/ 31 ς , ١ / 
κατασχών" καὶ ὁ μακάριος ἽΛνθιμος συγκαλεσάμενος ἐπισκόπους 
له 7 , م‎ 
τῶν πέριξ πόλεων: καὶ ἀνακοινωσάμενος αὐτοῖς" παρεχώρησεν 
δ τοῖς θ , 2 2 \ = 3 27 cof 
αὐτῷ Tov θρόνον τῆς ἐπισκοπῆς" μετὰ δὲ ὀλίγας ἡμέρας ὁ كماما‎ 
“A θ > Ἂ: , , x: a ‘0 ’ a \ / 53 7 
νθιμος ἀναλύσας ἐν Χριστῷ, παρέθετο αὐτῷ τὴν TolmVNnY’ κατά- 
4 , م‎ 4 3 A م‎ 
στασίν τε ποιησάμενος πᾶσαν ὁ μακάριος Κυπριανὸς ἐν TH τοῦ 
A / \ ἘΣ ied, , , 
Θεοῦ ἐκκλησίᾳ τὴν ἁγίαν παρθένον διάκονον προεβάλλετο᾽ 
3 / ie 7 ΄ \ م‎ 7 
ὀνομάσας αὐτὴν ‘lovotivay. μητέραν τε αὐτὴν τοῦ ᾿Ασκητηρίουϊ 
/ . ١ ١ 6 / A / \ 7 
ἐποίησεν᾽ πολλοὺς δὲ Kal ἄλλους ἦν φωτίζων τῷ βίῳ Kal τῷ 
λό e ΄ K ا‎ \ ‘Q م‎ / lal 6 av 
oy@ o μέγας Κυπριανὸς" καὶ προςετέθει TH ποίμνῃ τοῦ Χριστοῦ 
ν 10) e 60 \ ١ ‘ م‎ \ ١ ل‎ \ 23 \ IA م‎ 
t ἡ δόξα καὶ TO κράτος viv Kal ἀεὶ Kal εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας TOV 


58 3 7 
αἰώνων. ἀμὴν. 


























a Cod. τέλιος. b Cod. pi. © Cod. yévouat. 
4 Cod. ἐπικολούθησεν. © Cod. πληρωμένους. f Cod. ’Aornpiov. 


f. 2 7 


1 111 


72 Ky tpianoc 


Μ 7 Arse 7 Vere 50 e /‏ 5 / 2" 0ه د م 
Τῇ αὐτῇ ἡμέρᾳ: Μαρτύριον τοῦ ἁγίου καὶ ἐνδόξου ἱερομάρτυρος‏ 
A eae 7 1١ 7‏ م 
Κυπριανοῦ καὶ ᾿Ιουστίνης ἀεὶ παρθένου"‏ 
م \ Ν‏ / 7 )9 م م 
*Tav προφητικῶν οὖν! λόγων" πληρουμένων τὰ περὶ TOU‏ 
لما + ! 7 م 4 > a 7 7 4 Nigel,‏ > م a πος‏ 
Σωτῆρος" ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ Χριστοῦ" “καὶ ὅτι ἐμμέσω" τοῦ σίτου "τῆς‏ 
eb \ a / e / 7‏ / 3 
δικαιοσύνης ἂν ἐφύει ζιζάνια" "" Skat τοῦ μόνου ἀγρίου λύκου"‏ 
م 2 9 2 §8 \ b.7 δ df K‏ 7 7 \ 
τὴν ποίμνην κατανεμομένου" "7 ὁ ἅγιος Κυπριανὸς ὅδι᾿ ἐπιστολῶν‏ 
an / 5 7‏ \ 
πάντας διορθούμενος"" τοὺς" κατὰ πᾶσαν πόλιν!" ἀπέσπα" πλα-‏ 
7 > \ 2( 7 م م م 
νωμένους" ἐκ τῆς θήρας τοῦ λυμεῶνος" λύκου" ὁ 06‏ 
7 ’ / 2 م \ 7 
ὄφις καὶ βάσκανος"" θεασάμενος τὴν τοῦ ἁγίου ἐπισκόπου‏ 
م ’> 5 3 \ م م 
σπουδὴν“ τῆς πίστεως Kal OTL ἀποσπᾷ τοὺς aT αὐτοῦ πλανω-‏ 
لظم م د 367 م \ 0 
μένους" ἀνθρώπους "" "ὑποβάλλει διὰ τῶν ἰδίων αὐτοῦ ὑπηρετῶν"‏ 
م / ١ ς‏ 6 يم م , a‏ 5 
τῷ KounTe® τῆς ἀνατολῆς" ὅτι Κυπριανὸς ὁ διδάσκαλος τῶν‏ 
J Ν‏ م م و \ VA‏ م 
χριστιανῶν: καθαίρει") τὴν δόξαν τῶν θεῶν: γοητεύει γὰρ"‏ 
πάντας" & 18 θέ ) 18 1 a 7-1-2 a) Ap?‏ 
s* ἅμα ᾿᾿-παρθένῳ τινὶ" καὶ ἀνασείει' πᾶσαν THY ἀνατολὴν‏ 
i ς ١ / A 4‏ 2 م 
du ἐπιστολῶν “καὶ αἰνυγμάτων" Ὁ “O δὲ κόμης θυμοῦ μεγάλου"‏ 
K \ ¢/‏ /¢ \ م : ς‏ م 1 TA θ \ 22 xr / ὃ‏ 
ησθεὶς @xerever διὰ TOV ὑπηρετῶν τὸν ἅγιον Κυπριανὸν ἅμα‏ 
\ > م ΠΟΣῚ‏ 7 7 م 
τῇ παρθένῳ δεσμίους ἐν πάσῃ ἀσφαλείᾳ! ὑπαντῆσαι" εἰς τὴν‏ 
7 4 2 / 7 
Δαμασκόν" “καὶ τούτων οὕτως προςαχθέντων ἐπερώτα" ὁ κόμης‏ 
e \ 3‏ م م “τ‏ \ 7 
λέγων" Σὺ εἶ ὁ διδάσκαλος τῶν χριστιανῶν; ὁ “ποτὲ πολλοὺς‏ 
26 . / > م 7 م 26 / ὃ‏ م 95“ λύ‏ 
περιαχλύσας"“" τῇ δυνάμει “τῆς γοητείας τοῦ ἐσταυρωμένου;‏ 
)7 
κ‏ 


27 / 2 7 7 / 7 ١ > 
πάλιν ἐμφερομένου" πάντας περικλύζων" κηρύττων TOV ἐσταυρω- 





a Cod. ζηΐζάνια. Ὁ Cod. κατανεμωμένους. © Cod. πλανομένους. 
4 Cod. σπούδην. © Cod. πλανομένους. f Cod. ὑποβάλλη. 

® Cod. τῇ κώμητι. h Cod. καθέρει. 1 Codd. ἀνασίει. 

J Cod. ἀσφαλία. Kk Cod. eudaipwuévov. 





* Acta Sanctorum Septembris Tom. VII. p. 242 seq. Ex bibliothecae Parisinae 
codice 520 collato cum cod. 1485. 


1 om. οὖν 2 --νῦν 3 τῶν τε λόγων τοῦ Κυρίου 4 περὶ τῆς σπορᾶς 
5 τῶν τε ζιζανίων πληθυνομένων καὶ τοῦ λαοῦ σκορπιζομένου, 6 rob τε λύκου σοβοῦντος 
7 τοῦ Χριστοῦ" 8 πάντας δι᾽ ἐπιστολῶν διωρθωσάμενος 9 om. τοὺς 10 + καὶ 
χώραν, πολλοὺς 11 ἀπέσπασεν 12 om. λυμεῶνος 18. βασκαίνων, 14 om. 
θεασάμενος ... ἀνθρώπους 15 ὑπέβαλεν Εὐτολμίῳ, 16 καθεῖλε 7 δὲ 
18 τινὶ παρθένῳ, 19 + καὶ τὴν οἰκουμέην Ὁ οῃη. καὶ αἰνιγμάτων 21 om. μεγάλου 
2 ὑπὸ δεσμοὺς καὶ πᾶσαν ἀσφάλειαν τῶν ἀρχόντων ἐκέλευσεν αὐτοὺς ἀπαντῆσαι 
28. ἹΤροελθόντας δὲ αὐτοὺς ἠρώτω (szc) 24 om. λέγων 25 πολλοὺς ποτὲ συναθροίσας 
26 τῶν θεῶν; “7 Νυνὶ δὲ διὰ τῆς τοῦ ἐσταυρωμένου ἐμφαίνων ἀπάτης περικλύζεις τὰς 


3 ; 1 5 δὲ 
τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἀκοὰς, προκρίνων τὸν ἐσταυρωμένον τῶν ἀθανάτων θεῶν. 


PLATE V 





owe برسم د بوكر » بستحي‎ Ἶ 
QT πεφθημεροσ re 


ver > a +‏ © تنك 6 ,اكيوب مععى . 


4g ores 
(AER ει μα, ἐδ حك‎ 


στο" οἱ re‏ يميه 
piel ye pmaw:‏ نوي يرم 
ᾧ‏ در رو 806 wo‏ 
foc‏ بميلة nye‏ بيه Ea‏ : 
ميد ممر εν"‏ جه دعس ع دوه Yi‏ 
مره دع .3 εδύδισ‏ ضمرة 
نهو دوعت ومعصدنيي 
نوي برقع “ασοι‏ 
we ve yas at‏ 
roy <P "δου‏ عه بر EE‏ 
; > م ب قحب opt‏ 
τεύχο ht epacge’‏ 
(ser Ὁ‏ “امسو رموه رق 


2% 
» يجيي‎ oT AD paps 


“αλύμεμ αν (ee δὼ 


% 


3 Ν 3 , 
Κυπριανὸς καὶ ᾿Ιουστίνα 


Cod. Sin. 497, f. 1ogr 





᾿Ιογοτινὰ. 73‏ اها 


4 \ / og ¢ \ 
μένον Kal τοὺς ἀηττήτους θεοὺς βδελυττόμενος ; ὁ Ὃ δὲ! Κυπριανος 
/ A « 4 ل 7 لها‎ > / 
Neyer’? πῶς ἑαυτὸν συνέστησας" TO κόμπῳ τῆς ἀλαζονείας "" 
ἡπλουτῶ 7 διαβολικῇ μαγείᾳ"- κἀγὼ γὰρ ὥςπερ σὺ ἐζωγρη- 
OY TH) OlAPOMRT paryerd yo yep @simep YPN 
“4 35 م‎ 7 2010 / 
σμένος ἤμην" ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀλλοτρίου: "καὶ TH λλήνων φιλοσοφίᾳ 
7 7 \ \ : لي‎ / 
ἐσκοτιζόμην"" πολλοὺς μὲν ἀπέκτεινα" πολλοὺς δὲ “τῇ πορνείᾳ" 
1 Μ / \ a ¢ / " 7 
ἐδούλωσα' ἀλλ᾽ ὁ Χριστὸς ἔσωσέν pe® διὰ τῆς ἁγίας παρθένου 
nA ΄ / wn / 31 lal / 
ταύτης" "λέγει αὐτῷ 0 Κόμης: πῶς ἐσώθης διὰ τῆς παρθένου; 
Ν / 7 ’ of. 5, 4 
Ὃ ἅγιος Κυπριανὸς λέγει "" "σχολαστικός τίς ᾿Αγλαΐδης ὀνόματι" 
م 7 م‎ 3 7 
ἠράσθη αὐτῆς: καὶ μηδὲν ἀνύσας" νόμῳ τῶν γάμων αἰτούμενος" 
b a J \ 7 7 م م‎ } , 7 a 
ἐπ᾿ ἐμὲ ἐλθὼν ἠξίωσέν με TH τοῦ φίλτρου μανίᾳ ἀπολαύειν αὐτῇ "" 
م م‎ a 7 م / لها له‎ 
ἐγῶ δὲ θαῤῥῶν ταῖς βίβλοις μου ταῖς μαγικαῖς "" ἀπέστειλα αὐτῇ 
/ 7 0 \ a م‎ γ م‎ 
δαίμονα" καὶ τούτου κατήσχυνεν" τὴν δύναμιν: TH τοῦ Χριστοῦ 
ὃ / 810 «11 م‎ δὲ 7 “ / / ’ 9 \ 
υνάμει τοῦτο δὲ ποιήσας ἕως τρίτου πέμψας εἰς αὐτὴν τὸν 
Μ مم / م‎ A 7 م‎ 4 
ἄρχοντα τῶν δαιμόνων" καὶ τοῦτον τῷ σημείῳ τοῦ ἐσταυρωμένου 
/ ١ \ / م‎ 2 ’ 7 € 7 
atreEnpavev’ Tov δὲ τὸν ἄρχοντα τῶν δαιμόνων ἠρώτησα opKiaas! 
١١ م 7 \ له > / 7 م.م م‎ 
αὐτὸν τοῦ σταυροῦ τὴν δύναμιν ὥστε εἰπεῖν μοι THY δύναμιν τοῦ 
᾽ 2 \ 4 8 7 / ς \ > 7 > / 7 
σημείου" Kal ὁ δαίμων πληρούμενος ὑπὸ ἀγγέλων ἀνήγγειλέν μοι 
م‎ 0 ١ ب‎ "δὲ 3. 0 / e592 \ , \ \ 
ἅπαντα᾽ καὶ ὅτι οὐδὲν εἰσὶν οἱ δαίμονες" ἀλλὰ κακίας Kal παντὸς 
م م م‎ ١ \ ١ > 
πράγματος πικροῦ ἀπατεῶνες" διὰ τοῦτο Kal TO πὺρ TO! αἰώνιον 
د‎ / > Aas م‎ δὲ ’ 7 ١ م‎ 8 / > / j 
ἡτοίμασται αὐτοῖς" ταῦτα δὲ ἀκούσας Tapa τοῦ δαίμονος " avévn a 
> Ν م‎ 2 7 3 ١ ll م‎ 3 ١ م‎ ١ / 12° A θί 1 / 
ἀπὸ τῆς πλάνης" Kal" TO πρὸ ἐμοῦ ἐπισκόπῳ νθίμῳ" προςήγα- 
31 x / 2 9 ١19 7 13 م / .م‎ or 
γον Tas μαγικὰς βίβλους" καὶ" παρόντων"" τῶν πρώτων τῆς πόλεως 
/ \ \ م م‎ A 
“ἐνέπρησεν αὐτὰς πυρὶ." 5" διὸ παρακαλῶ σοι ἀπαλλαγῆναι" τῆς 








2 Cod. ἀλαζωνίας. م‎ Cod. μαγία passim. © Codd. ἡμῶν 

4 Cod. mopvia. © Cod. κατίσχυνεν. f Cod. ὡρκήσας. 

5 Cod. δαίμωνες passim. " Cod. ἀπαταιῶνες. τ σα. τῶ: I Cod. ἀνένιψα. 
1 ἅγιος 2 + Σὺ δὲ εἶπέ (sic) μοι" 3 τολμᾷς ἑαυτὸν συνιστᾷν 4 καὶ τῆς 


διαβολικῆς μανίας; ᾿Εγὼ γὰρ πρώην ὥσπερ καὶ σὺ σήμερον, ἤμην ἐξωγρημένος (- 21) 
6 καὶ πορνεύειν ἐδίδαξα. ᾿Αλλὰ νῦν ἔσωσέ 
9 


5 τῇ σοφίᾳ τῶν Ελλήνων ἐσκοτισμένος. 


8 Σκολαστικὸς 


με ὁ Χριστὸς 7 ταύτης παρθένου. om. λέγει... λέγει. 
γάρ τις, ὀνόματι ᾿Αγλαΐδος, ὁ τοῦ Κλαυδίου, ἐρασθεὶς αὐτῆς καὶ τῷ νόμῳ ἣν ἀσπαζόμενος 
γάμον, καὶ μηδὲν ἀνύσας πρός με ἐλθὼν ἠξίωσέ με τῆς τοῦ φίλτρου μανίας ἐπαπολαύειν 
αὐτῇ. 18 ἔπεμψα δαίμονα πρὸς αὐτὴν" καὶ τοῦτον ἐξήρανε τῇ σφραγίδι (sic) τοῦ 
Χριστοῦ. MANAG καὶ ἕως τρίτου ἀρχοντικοῦ δαίμονας ἔπεμψα, καὶ τούτους 
κατέστρωσε τῷ αὐτῷ σημείῳ. ᾿Εγὼ δὲ ἐσπούδασα μαθεῖν τὴν τοῦ σημείου δύναμιν, πολλὰ 
ὁρκίσας τὸν δαίμονα" καὶ ὁ δαίμων ὑπὸ ἀγγέλων μαστιγωθεὶς πάντα μοι ἀνήγειλεν. 
Τότε ἐγὼ ἀνανήψας 12 προσαγαγών μου τὰς βίβλους, 13 καὶ 14 ἐνέπρισα (sic) 
ἐν πυρί. 15 Διὸ καί σε παρακαλῶ ἀποστῆναι 


τς Κ 


τίν 


{ΠΥ 


74 Kym pianoc 


6 


a 7 Perey > 5 A > A 
TOV εἰδώλων μανίας" καὶ ‘etsndOev εἰς οἶκον Θεοῦ" “ἐν ᾧ ἡ 
0 / 1 5 0 / م‎ A δ ς 
τριὰς" δοξάζεται καὶ τότε γνώσῃ" τὴν δύναμιν τοῦ Χριστοῦ." ὁ 
/ م 55-000 م‎ 1 7 5 \ 2 
δὲ κόμης ᾿πλησθεὶς θυμοῦ καὶ ὀργῆς "' ἐλεγχόμενος ὑπὸ "τοῦ ἰδίου 
7 5 5 > , 6 \ 2 و‎ 2 7 θέ 6 
συνειδότος" ." ἐκέλευσεν “τὸν ἁγιώτατον ἐπίσκοπον κρεμασθέντα 
ξέ Ani \ ἘΣ 6 δὲ te / / 8 
ἔεσθαι' τὴν δὲ ἁγίαν παρθένον “opoiws βουνεύροις τύπτεσθαι 
7 5 7 7 7 ١ 2 
κατέναντι ἀλλήλων" Ἢ δὲ παρθένος réyeu'® δόξα σοι "Χριστὲ ὁ 
\ Ὁ..2 / 5 10 ١ \ \ / 10 > 7 / 11 \ εἶ 
τὴν" ἀναξίαν με οὖσαν "καὶ τὸ πρὶν ξένην" οἰκείωσάς με"! πρὸς τὸ 
7 5 Δ ὩΣ / 7 iA 
cov” θέλημα" καὶ ἠξίωσας" ὑπὲρ τοῦ ὀνόματός σου τύὐπτεσθαι""" 
م‎ x 7 1b 2 7 16 7 م‎ 3 / 7 16 iN 
Tov δὲ δήμων" ἀτονησάντων" “buvovaens τῆς aylas παρθένου" τὸν 
Θ 3 eA 7 17 5 ١ 5 ς ١ 7 8 3 See A δὲ 
cov’ ἔκεύλευσεν αὐτοὺς ὁ ἡγεμὼν παύσασθαι: ἐπὶ πλεῖον δὲ 
a CaF م‎ es bss 7 é 
τοῦ ἀγίου Κυπριανοῦ" Ceopévov: *ovd ὅλως ἤσθετο Τῶν βασάνων 
\ 4 n 78 0 ὃ 5 ‘18 2 7 2 ΄ 3 019 
καὶ λέγει τῷ κόμητι' διὰ TL ἀπονενόησαι ἀποστάτης OV 


20 


Θεοῦ: καὶ δραπέτης τῆς" ἐλπίδος αὐτοῦ" ἑγὼ δὲ "᾿Ισπουδάξω 


x A 7 7 م‎ a م و‎ 
διὰ τῶν βασάνων τούτων καταξιωθῆναι τῆς βασιλείας τῶν 


a2 ΄ 
ETTAVGATO 


> م‎ «> “ / 7 21 c δὲ 7 22 5 
oUpavav’ ὧν ὅπερ μέγα μοι χαρίζει" ὁ δὲ κόμης" οὐκ 
A 9 o« , م‎ i ’ 7 
τῶν βασάνων εἰπὼν" ἢ" βασιλείαν" οὐρανῶν “"χαρίζομαι σοι 
م‎ \ 7 5 \ 
πλείωσιν"" ὑποβληθῆσῃ" βασάνοις" καὶ ἐκεύλευσεν αὐτὸν καθ- 
,ὔ a م م‎ \ \ M4 δ , 
αἱρεθέντα *év τῇ φυλακῇ βληθῆναι" τὴν δὲ μακαρίαν" παρθένον 
م 7 / 2 م‎ Ns > 7 

δὲν τῇ οἰκίᾳ Tepativns ἐκέλευσεν τηρεῖσθαι' καὶ εἰςελθούσης Ὁ 
3 م‎ 3 ١ ١ 1 م 276 / 30 1 : 305 7 د‎ 
αὐτῆς els THY οἰκίαν ἐφωτίσθη 7 οἰκία χάριτι του Χριστοῦ" 
\ 5593507 6 7 Dias: ς 7 An 31 > \ 
μετὰ δὲ ὀλίγας ἡμέρας" ἐκέλευσεν ὁ κόμης πριαχθῆναι αὐτοὺς" 
\ 4 A 7 32 K لها‎ ١ & 39 د‎ 7 ١ 7 
Kal λέγει τῷ μακαρίῳ υπριανῷ: μὴ τῇ ἀπάτῃ καὶ μαγείᾳ 


7 \ 2 0 م 4 \ م 
ὁ δὲ μακάριος‏ قث τοῦ Oavévtos* ἀνθρώπου ἑαυτοὺς *OédeTe ἀπατᾶν‏ 





® Cod. γνώσει Ὁ Cod. συνηδότος. © Cod. 6v. 
4 Cod. vk. © Cod. ὑποβληθῆσι. 





1 ἐλθεῖν εἰς τὴν δόξαν τοῦ θεοῦ, 2 ὅπου ὁ ἀληθινὸς θεὸς εὐσεβῶς καὶ ἀληθῶς 
3 ἀνίκητον τοῦ Χριστοῦ δύναμιν. 4 ὀργισθεὶς θυμῷ Oris οἰκείας συνειδήσεως 
6 αὐτὸν κρεμασθῆναι καὶ 7 ὠμοῖς δέρμασι μαστίζξεσθαι κατ᾽ ἄμφω 8 ἤρξατο 
λέγειν" 9 6 θεὸς ὅτι 10 om. καὶ... ξένην 11 om. pe 12 σου 


13 καταξίωσας με 14 γαῦτα παθεῖν. 15 δημίων 16 καὶ τῆς ἁγίας ὑμνούσης 


17 παύσασθαι αὐτοὺς. Tot δὲ ἁγίου Κυπριανοῦ ἐπὶ πλεὸν (52) 18 οὐδὲν ἐφρόντιζεν 
ὅλως. Λέγει πρὸς αὐτὸν ὁ Kéuns* διὰ τί ἀπονενόησαι. Ὃ δὲ μακάριος Κυπριανὸς λέγει 
πρὸς αὐτόν" Σὺ 19 + τοῦ. 20 εἰς Χριστὸν πίστεως. 2. ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐπιγινω- 
σκόμενος εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν τῶν οὐρανῶν φθᾶσαι σπουδάζω, ἵνα καταξιωθῶ διὰ τῶν 
βασάνων τούτων ἐπιτυχεῖν τῶν αἰωνίων ἀγαθῶν. 25 τύραννος. 23 Ki. 24 σοι 
°5 περιποιοῦμαι, μείζοσιν Ξὁ βληθῆναι ἐν τῇ φυλακῇ 27 ἁγίαν 28 εἰς Ta 
Tepevriov προσέταξεν εἶναι. 29 ب‎ δὲ 30 πᾷς ὁ οἶκος αὐτοῦ τῇ 31 προσαχθῆναι 


32 om. μακαρίῳ Som. Τῇ 34 τεθνηκότος 3 ἀποκτεῖναι θελήσητε. 


Kal ᾿Ιογοτίνὰ. 75 


\ a 4 \ \ a 
Κυπριανὸς λέγει جا‎ Kopnte'! "τὸν θάνατον σὺ ποθεῖς καὶ 

\ 507 / “5ه م‎ δὲ 3 4 ad 3. Ὁ 
τὴν αἰώνιον κόλασιν περιποιῆσαι" 30 δὲ" κόμης "" ἐκέλευσεν 


4 
τήγανον' 


0 On \ 07 ١ > a 7 5 \ / 
πυρωθῆναι καὶ βληθῆναι ἐν αὐτῷ πίσσαν "καὶ στέαρ 
7 م‎ “ 5 \ , e/ “ 
καὶ κηρίον"" καὶ “ἐν αὐτῷ" βληθῆναι" τὸν μακαριονῖ" ἅμα τῇ 
VA \ \ “ م‎ “- \ 
παρθένῳ: "ἐκέλευσεν δὲ τὸν ἅγιον πρῶτον βληθῆναι": "καὶ 
3 / م‎ if / kK م‎ > 5 / d.9 > 2 44 
εἰςξελθόντος τοῦ ἁγίου Κυπριανοῦ ἐν τῷ τηγάνῳ οὐχ ἥψατο 
> “10 x \ 11 \ 9 / \ \ e ͵ ? 07 5 ١ 
αὐτῷ" TO Tup* “Kal ἐκέλευσεν Kal τὴν. ἁγίαν ἐμβληθῆναι Kal 
1 م‎ 7 yy 8 2 3 > / ὃ 4 11 
πλησιάσασα TH τηγάνῳ ἔστη" ὁ γὰρ ἀρχέκακος διάβολος 
/ \ 0 7 4 / م‎ 4 / \ 
δειλίαν" αὐτὴν." ὑπέβαλεν" Kai™ λέγει αὐτῇ ὁ ἅγιος" Κυπριανὸς" 
2 2 a : \ / / ١ 
devpo! 1) δούλη" τοῦ Χριστοῦ" ἡ جنوج"‎ δαίμονας Enpavaca Kal" 
x 7 ص 3 م 3 م‎ 17 ١ 18 ١ 50 rn 
Tas Tuas τῶν οὐρανῶν μοι ἀνεφξασα" καὶ" τὴν δόξαν τοῦ 
fal - م‎ “ 7 7 
Χριστοῦ πῶς νῦν ὑπὸ κέντρου τοῦ ἀλλοτρίου ἐδειλίασας";} 
ἡ δὲ مج200‎ 7 7 eye / اتا ار خاي‎ ١ 
ἡ 06 “TO” τοῦ σταυροῦ σημεῖον" ποιήσασα ἐπέβη ἐν" τῷ 
, 1 \ 3 > / م 4 8 م 3 ΄ / د وو‎ 
τηγανῳ" καὶ ἡσαν ἀμφότεροι ""ἀγαλλιόμενοι ὡς ἐν TH ρόσω τοῦ 
id A 990 4 > A \ , σ΄ ‘ 3 7 2 e 7 
Eppav” ὡς εἰπεῖν τὸν μακάριον Κυπριανὸν" δόξα ἐν ὑψίστοις 
Θ م‎ Ἂν 9 ١ م > 23 . 7 16 7 8 5 2 2 > لج‎ 
εὦ Kal ET γῆς εἰρήνη, ἐν ἀνθρώποις evdoxia’® εὐχαριστῶ σοι 
oa ὃ (4 A .م‎ 7 -“ ‘ / 0 
“ὁ Θεὸς ὁ παντοκράτωρ" καὶ Κύριε tod ἐλέους" ὅτι τὴν κρίσιν" 
/ م م \ 7 / / 7 م‎ / 
ταύτην ὑπὲρ τοῦ ὀνόματός σου “πάσχωμεν᾽ Kal νῦν εὐχαριστοῦμέν 
4 \ 7 م‎ 7 Η A , 23 1١ 23 
σοι wa τὴν θυσίαν τῆς KapTocews' ἡμῶν ταύτην ὀσφρανθεὶς εἰς 
’ ἣ > δί : \ د م‎ / 6 e 7 > a > ١ 26 \ 
οσμὴν εὐωδίας" Kal ταῦτα ἀκούσας" ὁ κόμης εἶπεν᾽ ἐγὼ “διὰ 
/ > 7 27 \ / له‎ 7 j م 4ئ‎ +28 "AO / δέ 
βασάνων ἐξεύρω" τὴν τέχνην τῆς μαγείας; ὑμῶν ανάσιος δέ 


, Re / ΟῚ م‎ / ΟἹ 5) / 
τις συγκαθεδρος" αὐτοῦ" λέγει “TH اتن جرورم‎ Zed κελεύει με ἡ 
‘ 7 





® Cod. κώμης. >’ Cod. rlyavor. © Cod. αὐτὸ. 
μη Ὕ 





4 Cod. τιγάνω. ὁ. Cod. δηλήαν. ΓὉοά. δεύρω. 
® Cod. ἑδηλίασας. πο οα τῶ: ١ Cod. καρπόσεως. J Cod. paylas. 

1 om. τῷ Κόμητι 2 Οὗτος ὁ θάνατος τοῖς ποθοῦσιν αὐτὸν αἰωνίον (52) ζωὴν 
περιποιεῖται. 3 Tére 6 4 σύννους γενόμενος 5 κηρίον καὶ στέαρ, 
6 βληθῆναι ἐν αὐτῷ 7 + Κυπριανὸν. 5 om. ἐκέλευσεν... βληθῆναι 9 Τοῦ δὲ 
μακαρίου ἐμβληθέντος 10 αὐτὸν 11 τῆς δὲ ἁγίας παρθένου ἐλθούσης ἐγγὺς, ὁ 
μισόκαλος δαίμων 12 om. αὐτὴν 13 Tére 14 μακάριος 15 μοὶ ἡ ἀμνὰς 
18 om. τοὺς... καὶ 17 ἀνοίξασα 18 + δείξασά μοι 19 ἡ τοὺς δαίμονας νικήσασα, 
καὶ τὸν ἄρχοντα αὐτῶν εἰς οὐδὲν ἡγησαμένη τῇ σταυροφόρῳ δυνάμει τοῦ Χριστοῦ. 
20 τὸν σταυρὸν ἐπὶ τοῦ σώματος 21 om. Ἐν *2 ἀναπανόμενοι ws ἐπὶ δρόσου, 


23 Τοῦ γὰρ διαβόλου ἐκπεσόντος ἐκ τῶν οὐρανῶν τὰ σύμπαντα εἰρήνης πεπλήρωται. 
Χριστὸς γὰρ ἐλθὼν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς τὸν διάβολον ἐτροπώσατο, καὶ τῇ σταυροφόρῳ δυνάμει 


τὸν κόσμον ῳκτείρησεν. Διὸ 24 θεὲ “5. κόλασιν 6. ἐκτελῶ, καὶ 
παρακαλῶ σε ἵνα τὰς θυσίας ἡμῶν ὀσφρανθεὶς προσδέξῃ εἰς ὀσμὴν εὐωδίας. ᾿Ακούσας δὲ 
σήμερον ἐλέγξω ὑμᾶς, καὶ 8. 4+ ἐκπομπεύσω. 29 ὧν 30 καὶ φίλος, 
ἱερεὺς δὲ πρῶτος, αὐτῷ Ἵ κελεύεις με ἡ ἀρετή σου ἐπὶ τῷ βρασμῷ τοῦ 


τηγάνου στῆναι 


1114 


1 ts 9 


76 KytTpianoc 


A an 54 ١ لها \ 6و‎ 3 / 
ὑμετέρα ἀρετὴ στῆναι ἐπὶ τοῦ τηγάνου" Kayo” ἐπὶ TO ὀνόματι 
an a 1 1 9 >’ 2 ١9 A 7 ١ 9 δύ 
τῶν Θεῶν" νικήσω ᾿αὐτους" καὶ" τὴν νομιζομένην αὐτοῖς" δύναμιν 
an Lola ١ 5 7 9 7 م 4 / 8 5 هم‎ 
τοῦ Χριστοῦ" καὶ ἐπέτρεψεν ὁ κόμης τῷ ᾿Αθανασίῳ *rapactihvat 
Ἴ , 8 \ / GA 1 , ets hy \ id gs ٠. عد‎ 
τῷ τηγάνῳ᾽ καὶ λέγει οὕτως" Μέγας" ὁ "θεὸς “Ηρακλῆς"" καὶ ὁ 
\ a 3 Ἀν Ὁ, ς \ Colle 06 م‎ 2 8 7 
πατὴρ τῶν θεών ᾿Ασκληπιὸς"" ὁ THY ὑγίειαν“ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις 
/ 5 \ A ᾽ > \ > م م م‎ 
παρεχόμενος "7 καὶ *év τῷ προςεγγίσαι αὐτὸν ἐν τῷ βρασμῷ τοῦ 
\ , 7 م‎ ١ \ A 
πυρὸς" εὐθέως κατεκυρίευσεν αὐτοῦ TO πὺρ" καὶ ἡ γαστὴρ αὐτοῦ 
oh ΕΥ 1١ Ν 5 > م‎ > Aa Ὁ 10 8 δὲ 7 
διεῤῥάγη" καὶ τὰ σπλάγχνα αὐτοῦ ἐξεχύθησαν "" 330 δὲ μακάριος 
3 / ᾿ م‎ , \ NEM a: δε ον ἃ € 
"ἦν ἄμωμος" σὺν τῇ παρθένῳ d0Eacovtes” τὸν Θεὸν" “Kal ἰδὼν ὁ 
/ \ / 7 v 13 , 7 2 \ £ bu 
κόμης TA γενόμενα λέγει" ὄντως" τάχα. ἀνίκητος ἐστὶν ἡ δύναμις 
م م‎ / 7 3 / 5 Ν \ 
τοῦ Χριστοῦ" "οὐδέν μοι μέλει" εἰς τί!" τὸν ἱερέα “TOV ἐμὸν 
, 15 , / e 16 AG / 16 4 7 \ م‎ 5 Loe 
φίλον" ἀπέκτεινεν" “Kal exadecev”® Lepevtivoy Tov συγγενῆ αὐτοῦ 
17 \ Xré ’ 17. / 18 7 ١ / , .18 
Kal λέγει αὐτῷ" τί ποιήσωμεν τοὺς κακούίργους τούτους; 
λέ ει م‎ e 40 / 1 δέ Ν \ CaF ’ .19 
ἔγει αὐτῷ ὁ Tepevtivos’ μηδέν σοι πρὸς τοὺς ἁγίους τούτους 
9 7 / 3 20 δ δύ 20 م م‎ 23 32 7 
ἀνίκητος γὰρ ἐστιν “Ἢ δύναμις" τῶν χριστιανῶν ἀλλὰ Trapa- 
\ aA لها م‎ aN \ e / 
πεμψον αὐτοὺς τῷ βασιλεῖ δηλῶν τὰ κατ᾽ αὐτοὺς" ὁ δὲ κόμης 
x, a م م‎ ١ 
ἔγραψεν" ἀναφορὰν “τῷ βασιλεῖ Διοκλητιανῷ" ἔχουσαν Tov 
μ 2 A / م 4 7 م‎ ١ 
τύπον τούτον᾽ " Κλαυδίῳ Καίσαρι τῷ μεγίστῳ" γῆς καὶ θαλάσ- 
᾿ 24 ١ \ eA 24 8 7 5 م‎ , 3 \ 
ons’ “καὶ παντὸς ἔθνους" δεσπότῃ Διοκλητιανῷ χαίρειν" κατὰ 
\ 3 م‎ 7 Ἢ ’ 00 ا‎ 7 
Tov θεσμὸν τῆς βασιλείας cov’ συνελάβομεν" Kumpiavov™ διδά- 
A a 5 / 7 5 م 5 م‎ No 
σκαλον τῶν χριστιανῶν" ἅμα παρθένῳ τινι" ἐν τῇ ᾿Ανατολῇ καὶ" 
\ لا 0 / 1 , 3 4 , م‎ 
διὰ TOV ὑπομνημάτων γνώσῃ πόσοις" βασάνοις “Kal αἰκισμοῖς 
\ م‎ 4 \ a a 1 5 
KaluTroBrAnOncav’ διὸ νῦν ἔπεμψα αὐτοὺς τῷ σῷ κράτει" ὁ 


δὲ Βασιλεὺς “deEapévos τὴν ἀναφορὰν καὶ ἐγκύψας “τοῖς ὑπο- 





5. σιγάνου. » Cod. θεῶς Ἡρακλεῖς. © Cod. ᾿Ασκλήπίος. 
4 Cod. tyiav. © Cod. médn. f Cod. Ὑνώσει. 





1 + Kal 2 om. αὐτοὺς και 3 om. αὐτοῖς 4 καὶ δ᾿ Αθανάσιος, προσελθὼν 
τῷ τηγάνῳ, λέγει" > -εῖ 6 ὑγείαν 7 παρέχων 8 ταῦτα εἰπὼν, 
καὶ μόνον προσεγγίσας τῷ βρασμῷ τοῦ τηγάνου κατεκυριεύθη ὑπὸ τοῦ πυρὸς, 9 ἐγυμ- 
νώθησαν 10 اوم ل‎ τὰ ὀστὰ (51) αὐτοῦ διεσπαράχθησαν, καὶ ἐξεχύθησαν" 
11 Κυπριανὸς ἄμωμος ἔμεινε 12 δοξάζων 13 πότε ἀνέκραξεν 6 Κόμης λέγων" 
14 Totro δὲ μόνον μέλει μοι ὅτι 15 καὶ μόνον ὄντα φίλον μου 16 Καλέσας οὖν 
17 λέγει 18 ποιήσω τοῖς κακούργοις τούτοις 19 «μὴ δὲ ἀντίπιπτε τῇ ἀληθείᾳ, 
20 6 Beds 21 ἡράφει 22 τοιαύτην 23 om. μεγίστῳ 24 om. καὶ παντὸς 
ἔθνους 85 συνέλαβον °6 + τὸν 27 om. Tit “ὃ ὡς 9 ὅτι τοσαύταις 
30 ὑποβληθέντες οὐκ ἐπείσθησαν ٠ d ὃ τῷ σῷ κράτει τούτους ἀνέπεμψα. 31 om. 
δεξάμενος...καὶ 32 rots σκρινίοις, καὶ τὰς βασάνους τοῦ μακαρίου θαυμάσας, ἐλογίσατο 
μετὰ τῶν φιλῶν (sic) αὐτοῦ καὶ λέγει: Κυπριανὸς ὁ τῆς ᾿Αντιοχείας διδάσκαλος, καὶ ἡ 
παρθένος ᾿Τουστίνα, ἐκλεξάμενοι 


κἀὶ “loycTiNa. 727 


١ / 5 / 5 \ 
μνήμασιν: καὶ καταμαθὼν τὰς βασίνους τῶν μακαρίων καὶ 
1 / ١ 7 1 7 
θαυμάσας" ἐκέλευσεν λέγων: Κυπριανὸν ᾿Αντιοχέα καὶ διδάσκαλον 
rs a ١ / 9 / > / 32 ١ 
τῶν χριστιανών καὶ παρθένον ᾿Ιουστίναν ἐκλεξαμένους"" τὴν 

6 a a \ / \ Wa 
ματαίαν αἵρεσιν τῶν χριστιανῶν: Kal παραλειπόντας! τὸ ζῆν 
) al U 4 e / / 
“kal τὴν ἐπιθυμίαν τοῦ θανάτου ἀγαπήσαντας" κελεύω τούτους 

١‏ 7 5 / لع م 
τὴν διὰ τοῦ ξίφους ὑποβληθῆναι τιμωρίαν" *atrayouévov δὲ‏ 
/ > 7 م ١‏ م 4 / / م 
τοῦ ἁγιωτάτου ἐπισκόπου Κυπριανοῦ καὶ τῆς μακαρίας lovativas:‏ 
١‏ قي / لها 7 لها 
ἐπὶ τὸ ἀποκεφαλισθῆναι καταντήσαντες ποταμῷ τινι Γάλλῳ ὑπὸ‏ 
م 4 7 > 7 \ / 
τὴν μητρόπολιν Νικομηδείας" μακρὰν διωρίαν αἰτησάμενοι" τοῦ‏ 
γ᾽ 4 ١ / x 7‏ 2 \ 4 7 
προςεύξασθαι: "καὶ ἐφ᾽ ἱκανὸν προςευξάμενοι. καὶ μνημονεύσας‏ 
١ 3‏ / \ م e “ \ - / a‏ 
ὁ ἅγιος Κυπριανὸς τῶν δούλων τοῦ Θεοῦ: καὶ ποιήσας τὴν ἐν‏ 
7 7 5 م م لها 
Χριστῷ oppayida’ στήσας ἐκ δεξιῶν τὴν παρθένον" παρεκάλεσεν‏ 
\ 8.4 , 8 م ١‏ 07 \ > م 7 \ 
τοὺς δημίους πρῶτον αὐτὴν τελειωθῆναι μὴ πῶς δειλιάσῃ""" Kal‏ 
x 5 4 “ 1‏ \ / 5 / 
τούτου γενομένου "ἐδόξασεν τὸν Medv® ὁ ayos* Κυπριανὸς "ἴ‏ 
/ / ) / 
Θεόκτιστος δέ τις "ἐρχόμενος ἀπὸ ἀποδημίας καὶ θεασάμενος"‏ 
7 م / 3 Ν ig‏ ΄ 
Tov ἅγιον Κυπριανὸν" "ὡς ἦν συνκάθεδρος τοῦ παρανόμου βασι-‏ 
λέως" ἐκέλευσεν "αὐτὸν παραχρῆμα ἀποτμηθῆναι" καὶ οὕτως‏ 
δ \ \ 0 / 0 “‏ > 
ἐν εἰρήνῃ δοξάξων καὶ αἰνῶν" τὸν Θεὸν ἀπετμήθη [6] ἅγιος Κυ-‏ 
Ac‏ \ / لها د / 5 / ’ \ 34 
Mplavos’ Kal ἐκέλευσεν τὰ τίμια αὐτῶν σώματα κυσὶν Bopa‏ 
١ /‏ 97 0 / ا 0 ١‏ 7 م 2 
pepijvat’ καὶ οὕτως ἐπὶ πλείστας ἡμέρας ἐτέθησαν τὰ σώματα‏ 
2 .م م م / « م 
τῶν ἁγίων πλησίον τοῦ ποταμοῦ; μηδενὶ αὐτῶν ἁψαμένων.‏ 
δέ 10 \ ١ 4 ll \ iar y,‏ \ 
πλαστικοι 66 τινες" πιστοὶ ἀκούσαντες “TOs ὡγίους τελειω-‏ 


θέ \ ” e ’ > م‎ ς / ᾿ / ἃ 
evTaS καὶ ὄντας ομοφύλους αὐτῶν Ρωμαίους TTAPAYEVOLMEVOL 








® Cod. δειλιάσει. 5 Cod. aivor. © Cod. Boppa. “ Cod. παραγενάμενοι. 

1 παραλιπύντες ἢ τὸν θεὸν αὐτῶν προετίμησαν, τὴν διὰ ξίφους τιμωρίαν ἐπενεχ- 
θῆναι. 3 ᾿Απενεχθέντων δὲ αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τὸν ποταμὸν Γάλλον ἐν τῇ Νικομηδέων 
πόλει, μικρὰν διορίαν (sic) ἠτήσαντο 4 καὶ μνησθῆναι τῶν κατὰ κόσμον ἐκκλησιῶν 
καὶ πάντων τῶν πιστῶν, καὶ τὴν ἐν Κυρίῳ ποιήσας σφραγίδα (sic) ὁ ἅγιος Κυπριανὸς, 
ἐκ δεξιῶν λαβὼν τὴν Παρθένον, πρὸ αὐτοῦ τελειωθῆναι ἠξίου. 5 εἶπεν 5 μακάριος 
7 Δόξα σοι Χριστέ. 5 διαβαίνων ἐξ ἀποδημίας ἠσπάσατο 9. Φουλεανὸς δὲ 
ὁ συγκάθεδρος... '° αὐτῶν els βορρὰν (sic) τοῖς κυσὶ ῥιφῆναι. Προκειμένων δὲ αὐτῶν 
ἐπὶ πολλὰς ἡμέρας τοῖς αἰμωβόροις, ναῦταί τινες Ρωμαῖοι 11 ὅτι περετελειώθῃ (s7c) ὁ 


ἅγιος Κυπριανὸς, ὧν αὐτοῖς ὁμόφυλος Ῥωμαίοις, ἕξ ἡμέρας παραμείναντες, καὶ πάντας τοὺς 
φυλάσσοντας λαθόντες, ἔλαβον τὰ λείψανα σὺν τοῖς παραχθεῖσιν ὑπομνήμασι" καὶ 
ἀναχωρήσαντες ἐκεῖθεν ἀνέβησαν ἐν πλοίῳ καὶ ἐπανῇξαν ἐν ᾿Ρώμῃ, κομίζοντες δῶρον 
τίμιον τὰ λείψανα. Καὶ προσήγαγον αὐτά τινι ‘Povpivy ματρώνῃ γένους Καβάρου, ἥτις 
λαβοῦσα τὰ λείψανα ἔθετο ἐν τόπῳ ἐπισήμῳ, ἐν ᾧ πάντες οἱ συνερχόμενοι ἰάσεις 
λαμβάνοντες δοξάξουσι θεόν. ᾿Ἐπράχθη δὲ ταῦτα ἐν ὑπαθείᾳ (sic) Διοκλητιανοῦ ἐν τῇ 
ἐπιφανειτάτῃ (sic) Νικομηδείᾳ, καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς δὲ 


111 


78 Kympianoc kal ᾿Ιυγοτίνὰ. 


١ 7 aA ς lA \ A 7 ١ / , 
καὶ παραμείναντες ἕξ ἡμέρας καὶ ἕξ νύκτας καὶ λαθόντες πάντας 
a Be a / . / / 
τοὺς τηροῦντας᾽ τὰ τῶν καλλινίκων σώματα τοιαύτῃ πίστει 
τ΄ 7 Gene oN / \ , , Nas: , b 
ἀνείλαντο"" ὑπὲρ χρυσίον καὶ λίθους τιμίους" καὶ ἀπεκόμισαν 
705 9 a / a \ of م‎ , 3 
αὐτὰ ἐν τῇ Ῥώμῃ: δῶρον πολυτελὲς ἅγιον τῇ πόλει avaypa- 
/ \ + م > 7 > م‎ ς / \ \ 
Wapevor καὶ τὰ τῆς ἀθλήσεως αὐτῶν ὑπομνήματα: τὰ δὲ 
, م‎ 7 2 / 1 
σώματα τῶν ἁγίων Poudiva tis καὶ Ματρώνη᾽ πιστοτάτου γένους 
Ἐπ \ , / ١ χ τὸ اد | م‎ \ 
ὑπάρχουσαι καὶ πάνυ φοβούμεναι τὸν Meov' λαβοῦσαι αὐτὰ μετὰ 
م م‎ ١ 7 5 x / /د‎ a εἰ 
χαρᾶς πολλῆς καὶ ἀγαλλιάσεως" καὶ ποιήσασαι ἄξιον τῶν αγίων 
/ 3 , oo / 
Μαρτύρων οἶκον κατέθεντο αὐτὰ ἐν τόπῳ καλουμένῳ Κλααϊφόρῳ᾽ 
/ م‎ 04 2 / , 0 / 
μέσον τῆς πόλεως 12 فرصرو٠‎ ἐν ἐπισήμῳ τόπῳ de ov πάντες 
(2 7 م‎ / 59 a /, \ 3 / / 
οἱ συνερχόμενοι τοῖς τιμίοις αὐτῶν λειψάνοις" τὰς ἰάσεις λαμβά- 
> \ \ 7 0 م‎ ١ / 
νουσιν ἀπὸ παντὸς πάθους" δοξάζοντες καὶ αἰνοῦντες Tov φιλάν- 
Ἂς Ν 4 a ¢ 7 
θρωπον Θεὸν" καὶ εὐχαρίστου: ὕμνους ἀναπέμποντες τοῖς ἁγίοις" 
م / م 9 > 0 / 5 م‎ 
ταῦτα émpaxOnoarv’ ἐπὶ Διοκλητιανοῦ καὶ Μαξιμον τῶν παρα- 
7 7 5 a / / 
νόμων βασιλέων ἐν TH περιφανεστάτῃ Νικομηδέων μητροπόλει" 
\ 7 , 0 / 7 ١ 1 Pe 
πρὸ τεσσάρων καλάνδων ᾿Οκτωβρίῳ β΄" κατὰ δὲ ἡμᾶς" βασιλεύ 
οντος τοῦ Κυρίου ἡμῶν ᾿Ιησοῦ X 00 ᾧ ἡ δοξ ὶ τὸ KpaTos’ 
ρίου nu@v Ἰησοῦ Χριστοῦ" ᾧ ἡ δόξα καὶ τὸ κρατος 


1 لها‎ \ > \ ١ 2 > Ἁ 3 م‎ A 5 i. 3 7] 
νυν καὶ GEL Και ELS TOUS ALWVAS TeV ALWY@V Αμὴν. 








* Cod. ἀνήλαντο. > Cod. ἀπεκομήσαν. 





1 om. viv καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ 


CORRIGENDA. 


Page |, line 17, for Vigdamdg قسطس‎ read قسطس وقسطينا‎ 


23: 


for اليها‎ read 


علا 3 
تحضر 1 


23 


Lal! 


يبحضر 


perhaps we should read ختمت‎ as in Cod. 


95 
03 


15 for بعس‎ 


9; 


1 اولى‎ 
٠, (Sad 
” سوته‎ 


read 


33 


02 


يعيس 
اولادى 


ويوسئينة KN‏ 
εν ὺ Ces‏ كنيسيتك الجامعة dee)‏ ولشغبك ‏ الدومن 
سلامة وعجب رحمتك عنى الكل LS‏ عجبتبها فينا Show) deme!‏ 
القدوس فى كافة صفاته الاب والابن والروح القدس الى ابد 
الدهور امين وختم ذاته بالصليب والبتول واقامبا من يمينه واحنيا 
loli‏ وظلبا الى hed!‏ ان يضرب Sic‏ البتول Vol‏ وفعل οἰ οὖν‏ 
وضرب عنقه بعدها فعلى هذه الجبة توفيا بالسيف فى الثانى من 
تشرين الاول يوم الخميس فى الساعة السادسة من النبار لتمجيد 
الاهنا الذى له السبح الى الدهور امين والسبح لله دايما وعلينا 


رحمته امين 





PLATE IV 





كبريانوس ويوستينة 
6 139616 
To face p. r»‏ 


Io 


T5 


20 


As‏ كبريانوس 
السما لبس بتدبيره جسما وصارت السلامة على الارض وفى نزولنا 
نحن عبيده الغير مستحقين ارسل رحمته فى الخلقينة علينا وصار 
ἢ‏ ندى وفرحا لك المجى ايها المسيح الأهنا GY‏ لم تبعل عا 
Jane‏ رحمتك المجد اتعطفك reed!‏ لمحبتك فانه قى عظمت 
اسمك المقدس على الكل فاذ سمع الوالى قوله قال انى لمتعجب 
حت دن انان صرب ودفن نشل Geel!‏ على اسار يتان أو 
الجلوس من اصحاب الامير فليامرنى عزك ان اتقدم الى الضلقينة 
واهتف باسما الالبة المعظمين فتبصر حينين هلاكبما δ‏ له الوالى 
وبادر الى الخلقينة WG‏ يا 'هرمس واسقليفيوس المعظمين فى 
Lil‏ الجليلين اسمعانى وانقضا اسحار هذين الذين ما يسجدون 
لكم ايحترقا ومعما قال هذا القول خرج من الخلقينة شباب نار 
ارق كليم فلا ee Goll sis τ ol,‏ دهتنا ene‏ 
لك المجد *يا الاهناء ايسوع المسيح فان ر<متك اطاقت بنا واحرق 
اللبيب من لم يعرفك من الاه عظيم كلاهنا انت هو الاله الصانع 
العجايب فلما ابصر الامير ما جرى انذهل حايرا وقال وحى الاله 
ما ادرى ما Cede etl‏ الساحرين لان مسيحبما قد استولى 
على العقوبات وعلى الالبة ثم قال لبعض الجلوس معه ماذا 
Ile Lay esl‏ ا ات a} SS Lely τ‏ ان الام اضرت 
col) lok clos ee er τὺ te ioe ee‏ 
ον lee Ges, 5G Cant CSc eas alg‏ 
لكان وال Grail! ed‏ اصيلينا Srmly dels‏ صل BUS Ngladg‏ 
τον gmt aU fume τῦθς τον‏ اليا رفس poll‏ الا 
يديبما قاياين نمجد ونشكر لك يا ربنا والاهنا ايسوع المسيح لانك 
اهلتنا نحن الذليلين ان تبلغ الى هذا السعى فنسالك ان تقبل 

يالاهنا as 2 Cod.‏ ل" 


f. 148b 


f. 149a 


7 249 


Q 


P1474 


f.147b 


flas a 


γᾷ ويوسةينة‎ 

لتنسحق 'عظامه وتقدرم يلطم amy‏ البتول فاذا وجعبا ذلك قالت 
اشكر لك يا ربى والاهى SY‏ اهلتنى عبدتك ll‏ ببذه العقوبات 
من Show! Gel‏ فربط الاعوان للقدريس على البكرة واداروها فلم 
ينفع فعليم شيا بل كان كمن لا يولمه شى مصليا فيتف الامير 
إن القدسن WL‏ امن Y‏ عقل ad‏ لي كن حصنت Wale‏ فى ايمائلة 
بانسان مات موتا عاصيا وما ترحم ذاتك . قال له المغبوظ يا ليك 
اطغت جبالتى وامنت بالمسيح سيدى OH‏ بتعاذيبك يبب لى 
ملكوة السما بل oF‏ اظلم ذهنك لاثارك ان ترضى الشيطان اباك 
BLEU"‏ المغتصب وقال له ان كنت انت ايها الشيخ الشر بعقوباتى 
τ‏ ملك السياوات UG‏ اعاقبك ee‏ كثيرة Ol pel (ee‏ 
كان يجى مسيحك ذيعتقك من يدى وتقدم الى الاعءعوان بان 
يديروا البكرة عليه شديدا ليبلك نفسه فاذ عملوا ما امرهم به لم 
τ‏ نامر الامير eee‏ الى السبس aes ls‏ إلى 
صاحب له يسمى اندرانيوس ليحفظبا لينظر فى امرها πὴ‏ ايام 
قليلة امر الامير باحضارهما وقال للقدريس Ν‏ تلزمنا ان Sted‏ من 
(OUI Solar! Jet‏ تقاهر به قال SS Cs!‏ من Seo‏ عن 
اسم ايسوع المسيح يعيش الى الدهر .59 سمع الامير كلامه امر 
باحضار خلقينة كبيرة وامر ان يلقى فيبا نفطا ورفتا وكبريةا ويذاب 
كله واذ اغلى يلقى فيه القديسين احيا فاذ اتموا امره حطوا 
القديس فنزل GN ἀπὸ‏ سماوى برد الخلقينة وحين ابصر يوستينة 
القديسة تقدم وتطرم معه فى الخلقينة قال لبا فرحى ايتها البتول 
يوستينة عروس . المسيح لان بك عرفت طريق الحق فسجدرت 
وانحدرت ls‏ فقال Cori!‏ بصوت عظيم المجى لله فى العلى 
وعلى الارض السلامة والسرور لان ربنا ايسوع المسيح اذ نزل من 

200 عشامة‎ * Cod. فاغتاص‎ ΕΠ: ius 


Io 


Io 


15 


20 


YA‏ كبريانوس 
باسحارهما يطغيان الرجال والنسا فاذا استمع الامير قوليم اشتد غضبه 
فارسل جندا فاخذوهما الى Gover‏ وقدما الى حضرة اميرها مغلولين 
فقال اكبريانوس انت هو كبريانوس المفسد الشعب عن طاعتنا EDU!‏ 
الرتنا المعلم السجود لايسوع الناصرى المصلوب فاجابه القريس 
WL‏ نعم بالحقيقة انا هو لكنى اذ كنت فى ro‏ هذه الضلالة وقتا 
من الزمان ولابيك الشيطان صديقا مجدونا pS!‏ منكم لم اعرف طريق 
Gol‏ بل كنت اعتقس الظلام نورا فحين ارتضى من هو الاهى 
حقا عرفنى طريق الحق ببتول جليلة هى هذه العجوز الذى تراها 
مد الى عنقا ف انا اخ τ‏ الشرنفا depo mad!‏ إن 
يكون معبا فلما تعب كثيرا فيما قصده ولم ينل مراده جا الى 
عندى bo!‏ فاعطانى ذهبا وفضة كثيرة Wish)‏ بحيلى فدعوت 
جنيا وارسلته اليبا ليخدعبا فعاد الي مخزيا فارسلت WG‏ فصابه 
مصاب الاول فاسترعيت رييسبم WIG‏ فلما مضى بمجاهرة كثيرة 
عاد Las!‏ مخحزيا δ‏ سالته مقبقه عليه ماذا اصاب مجاهدتك وقوتك 
قد ضعفت فقال لى رايت علامة المصلوب فخشيتها وهربت منها 
ois‏ له انا المسوح ]3[ ] «Δὲ‏ منك هو فقان γε‏ حيك تكوث 
قوته ما يمكن Leo nel‏ ان يدنوا من ذلك المكان ولا يعمل شيا 
فلما Crow‏ قوله وجمعت عقلى atin)‏ فلعنت قوته وختمت ذاتى 
بقوة الصليب ونبضت فاحرقت مصاحف السحر وبادرت الى الاسقف 
واصطبغت وصرت gene‏ عبدا فاذ قد سمعت منى هذه الاقوال 
ايبا الامير فدع هذه ANSI?‏ التى قد قيدتك واذ قى عرفت الحق 
فامن بالمسيح الضابط حياتك ايبب لك حياة خالدة wind‏ استماع 
الامير خطابه اضطرب Ip‏ فامر ان يسطحا جميعا ويضربا بالسياط 
τ᾿‏ الل pol od‏ إن gle πὩπΠιο‏ اله در Lele‏ 

τ COG. seo) > Cod. ΩΝ 


f. 145 b 


f. 146a 


f. 146b 


f. 144a 


Rom. viii. 
355 
f. 144b 


f. 145 a 


YY ويوسينة‎ 

الزيادة 'ذنب Sls‏ النعمة وفى تلك الايام ral?‏ علينا ذاكيوس 
SS!‏ وانشا على المسيحيين اضطروادا فى كل مدينة hg‏ واضطرهم 
على التضحية للاصنام فلم يستقر كبريانوس المغبوط مكاتبا ومراسلا 
للمومنين بكل سقع قايل" يا اخوتى Ν᾽‏ نشفقن على هذه الحياة 
الوقنية jeer τ‏ 5 ابا نا من الموت فلنيت عن اليسيه Lanse)‏ 
به لان تاثيرات هنا الدرهر ما يسوى المجد deer‏ ان يظبر Linke‏ 
فلبذا لا نصغى الى موطن ولا الى جلس ولا الى غنا سايل هالك 
ولا الى اولاد ولا الى دموع امراة ولا الى قنية ولا تصير شى من 
Lov‏ السايلة عثرة تقطعنا عن السفر الذى لا يبلى . فان ليس حظ 
wil‏ شرفا Yo‏ اعظم bec‏ ولا عنى الله ماذورا من السام Goro!‏ 
pow rw‏ ملك lobed!‏ فلبذنا كتب بولس المغبوط WS‏ ماذا 
λων‏ من هحب المسوح غم ام ضيقة ام مخافة ام سيف انى 
Jy the Y Ot YD Seo!‏ هوت Yo‏ خليقة اخرى τς‏ 
تفصلنا من المحبة التى بايسوع المسيح الذى امن αἰ‏ الات 
WIS Lay‏ كناسة cu‏ المسيح فقط فقفوا يا اخوتى فى الامانة 
متاصلين غير متزعزعين هذه الاقوال واكثر منبا كان τς‏ بها 
0-2 "اقوط all Cll wads‏ شيا كدرين راد shy‏ اليل 
المحال الذدى كان فى وقتا من الزمان ddsno‏ مشعائل| له aw‏ 
ies ped‏ فى قوم من she‏ الاصنام وحمبم على السعاية 
بكبريانوس المغبوط فذهبوا الى دمشق وسعوا به الى اقرينيانوس 
يطيع pol‏ ملوكنا ولا يسجى LEY‏ ولا يستقر من لعن الالبة 
والماوك ويروم باسحاره ان يستميل نسانا الى امانته وله aro‏ بتول 

Cody ذنئله‎ 25 Cod. اهتام‎ 


Io 


15 


20 


γι‏ كبريانوس 
الثامن صار نذيرا مخبرا باسرار المسيح }4 وفى يوم الخامس 
والعشرين سامه ابيودياقون وفى يوم الخمسين وقفا فى مرتبة 
τὰν‏ الشماس وتابعته dori‏ على الشياطين وشفى كثيرين من اسقام 
كثيرة واسترجع كثيرين من Wiad!‏ بالصيام وجعليم ان يصيروا 
مسيحيين ولما تمت له din‏ ساوى εἷλον‏ فى الجلوس ومسك 5 
مرتبة القسوسية ثم دعا انثيموس المغبوط اساقفته الذين حول 
مدينته وصنف لبم اخباره وافرج له عن كل موضع الاساقفة 
وكرسيرا unig‏ ايام قليلة قضى انثيمس الاسقف اجله وفوض اليه 
رعيته يجعلونه اسقفا وبعدس سيامه ارسل الى المغبوطة يوستينة ان 
تحضر ome‏ مريى بمبالغة ان تحقق بها اموره wc‏ الشعب فلما TO‏ 
هم جات المغبوطة حدثها بكل ما عرض له واذ سمع الشعب شكروا الله 
الصانع عجايب منذهلة مجيدة فصلى عليها كبريانوس وسامها ريسة 
الرواهب وسلم lal)‏ جماعة العذارى المستسيرات بسيرة » 
وكان القديس كبريانوس يرعى عند ذلك رعية المسيح باهتمام 
ومخافة الله نايحا بلا فتور على ما عمله فى اول عمره من الشرور 15 
Sls‏ راى ابليس المحال ان كبريانوس قى ارتجع عنه *اغتاظ عليه 
حيس وكان القدرس قن طلب فى وقت ablbrol‏ ان ريحظية wy)‏ 
سلطانا على الارواح النجسة حتى بحسب ما كانوا فى اول عمره 
£f143b‏ تحت سلطانه هكذ١ا dons‏ المسيح تطروهم ايضا والذين كان 
كبريانوس لبم فى وقتا من الاوقات صديقا صار uml doris‏ 20 
ὦ, od lylare‏ ا τ‏ لبتي (od!‏ لصن أ πο‏ 
الى الحق وهو ull‏ ما يشا موت الخاطى المنافق مثل ما يشا 
ان يرجع فيحيا Οὐδ‏ كبريانوس المغبوط يشفى كل مرض وسقم 
Rom.v. 20‏ ويطرد الشياطين قايلا فى ذاته اقوال بولس الرسول بحيث تكاثرت 
اعتاض σα,‏ © الاسقفة Cod.‏ 1 


f. 141 a 


f. 141b 


Ps. cxix. 

148 

15. 11-7 
Ps. xxxv. 
22 

is, .17ل‎ 2 


Gal. iii. 13 


f. 1424 


Yo ويوستينة‎ 

انا ان mammal‏ ل" يغالب وخيره بانبزام الشيطان وبظفر يوستينة 
drill‏ وقال للاسقف تسلم هذه المصاحف التى بها كنت اعمل 
اد هر واشرفا GUL‏ وار دى” انا فاحل ἐπ‏ المضاهف| فاخرفا 
وباركه وصرفه قايلا اضرع الى الكنيسة فمضى الى منزله فسحق 
JS‏ ما فيه وفرقه فاقام طول الليل نايحا على نفسه قايلا ويلى 
الشقى كيف اجسر انا ان اظبر فى مجن المسيم KS‏ عملت هذه 
الشرور الجزيل مقدارها وكيف اسبحه بفمى GH‏ به لعنت ناسا 
كثيرين واستعنت بالشياطين النجسين ووضع على راسه رماد 
طاليا من الله رحمة وصفحا δ‏ حان السحر وكان يوم السبت 
الكبير مضى الى الكنيسة مبتبلا قايلا يا ربى ايسوع المسيح ان 
Cus‏ متهن إن hue 6s!‏ لك كاملا Che‏ ذلالة Grow!‏ فى 
هيكلك من كتبك الالبية وافهم قوتها وفى دخواه الكنيسة سمع من 
قول داوود النبى ادركت عيناى الغلس "درس اقوالك ومن شعيا 
النبى ها Cols‏ يقير ومن ذاووذ ايضا اذ فى Sal)‏ نا my‏ كله 
تصمت رب ues Y‏ منى ومن شعيا Y bal‏ تخف يا يعقوب 
ولدى ويا اسرايل حبيبى فانا اخترتك ومن الرسول بولص ان 
المسديح ابتاعذا من اعنة الناموس ثم سمع ببشارة الانجيل وبعد 
تعايم الاسقففا وقول الشماس ايها الموعوظين انصرفوا فجلس 
كبريانوس فقال a)‏ استاريوس الشماس انصرف الى خارريج الكنبسة 
فقال له كبريانوس قد صرت للمسيح عبدا وتبعدنى خارجا فقال له 
انت لست بعبدا كاملا فقال له كبريانوس حى هو المسيم الذى 
اخزى الشيطان Gales‏ البتول ور<منى انا انى لا خرجت حتى 
اصير كاملا فاعاد الشماس على الاسقف كلماته فدعاه الاسقف 
استعرض نيته على ما يامر الناموس واستحلفه واعمده ففى اليوم 


1 Cod. adds lés! ان‎ 


10 


15 


20 


γξ‏ كبريانوس 

f 139b‏ على ما ارى ان ليس قوتك شيا اجابه الشيطان ما يمكندى اقول 
لك Quy‏ رايت علامة مرهبة فجزعت OW Sarg‏ شيت ان 
تعرفبا فاحلف لى فاقولبا لك قال له كبريانوس بمن احلف لك 
قال ad‏ بالقوات الثابته في ' انك لا “تستبيدل بى بديلا فقال له 
كبريانوس Gey‏ القوات الثابتة فيك ما استبدل بك بهدلا فلما وثق 5 
τ.‏ نميه قال Solas! dere Sol‏ فعشين)ا JUS Does‏ 
له كبريانوس اما المصاوب اذا اعظم منك هو اجاب الشيطان نعم 
وذلك ان جميع التين نخدعبم هاهنا ويعملون اعمالنا هنا ويحمى 

ὧν} cro SME! f. 2‏ وتوضع فى اعناقيم وتقتادهم على هذه الجال 
ملايكة المصلوب الى الوقوف قدام عرشه فقال كبريانوس للشيطان TO‏ 
فلاحرص انا pol‏ للمصلوب صديقا ليلا احصل فى هذه العقوبة 
Gantt‏ فقال له الشيطان اتعزرنى بعد ان حلفت لى قال 
كبريانوس انا ارفضك انت ولا اخشى من قواتك لانى فى هذه 
ρα Cub! os ALU‏ وطلبات ,الببول δ} wd ol dart‏ 
اخر الا يسوع المسيح المصلوب الذى ما يستطيع قواتكم ثبوتا 15 
قرام صليبه فانا اختم ذاتى واباينك انت واوافقه هو 31S‏ قال هذا 

ذهب: 6 القول ختم ذاته WG‏ لك المجب ايها المسيح الاله (SMI‏ لم 
تعرض عن حيلتك انصرف يا شيطان فانى انا طالب مسيحى 
فللوقت تناول كتب اسحاره فاودعها عنس بعض الشباب ومضى 
الى البيكل الى عنى mont!‏ المغبوط الاسقف فحنى على قرميه 20 
WE‏ يا عبى الاله الصادق انا مومن ان الجنى oI‏ السماوى #فاودنى 
فى جندية المسيح فتوهمه δος ἐλ‏ جا ليسحر الاخوة الذين 
هناك فقال له يا كبريانوس يجربك الذين Σ‏ الكنيسة ولايق 
بك ان تصير خليلا لكنيسة المسيح فقال كبريانوس قد ايقنت 


᾿ Cod. adds فى‎ > Cod. Jring * Cod. فاوذون‎ 


f. 138 a 


f. 138b 


i; 1304 


ويوسيينه 1 
السيرة على ما تبصر شى hie‏ صبى سنى وقد تعلمت كتبا كثيرة 
وكلبا تقول ان ليس غير خاطى الا الله وحده فمن هذه الجبة 
عاشرت العالم وما سقط من سيرتى لان حوا فى الفردوس كانت 
فلما اطاعت وفعلت ما فعلت وصلت الى المعرفة بالاشيا الحسنة 
sty ὧν USs‏ قال الشيطان هذا القول جزعت البتول واشتميلتا 
قشعريرة وحمى واسترق lds‏ ونبضت تابعة لمن خاطببها غير عارفة 
لمن ors‏ ولحقت للشيطان الذى تقدمبا فلما κοι‏ ان تخرج 
من باب البيت ختمت ذاتبا بعلامة الصليب فطفر الشيطان كالطافر 
من ضربة السيف فلما رات القديسة ما جرى رسمت رسم الصليب 
ايضا فغاب الشيطان خازيا . ثم افاقت قليلا قايلة ويلى عنما قليل 
oo‏ يتزعزع خطواتى وتسكن فى الجحيم نفسى ثم عادت فاغلقت 
الاب ومشهت 7 ley‏ عينيبا” فزالت القشغريرة والحيى وصارت 
صحيحة فرفعت الى السما bry‏ وقالت بدموع مناجية الاهنا 
الجواد لك المجى ايها المسيح الاهنا لانك ارسلت معونة Shige‏ 
وضربت 'العدو محاربى لك on‏ ايبا السيد المسيح الاهى ذور 
العالم الذى اضات حدقنى قريحتى الى Cede?‏ الشيطان عدوى 
لك المجى ايبا المسيح الاهى العين الذى ١‏ تنام الناضرة الراحمة 
جميع المتوكلين عليك الان علمت ان يمينك نصرنى ورفعنى 
π᾿ atl ee‏ الحياة go τ το‏ انك 
لم تغفل عن مذلتى انك حرستنى بقوتك التى تسود كل شى 
حين استولى الغريب علي ODE‏ يا رب Gey‏ خوفك فى لحمانى 
وبشريعتك ارحمنى واعط لاسمك يا ربا تمجيدا ثم وقف 
اشنطان قرام > fei‏ خاريا فقال اله كبريانوس ها الزامر آنا 
ole!) ρου‏ اده Gos! τ‏ والبهر غلتك Use‏ واهلة 


1 Cod. العدوا‎ ed. ا‎ 


Το 


15 


20 


Io 


15 


20 


25 


vs‏ كبريانوس 
القديم مظلما انت يا ربى المتعطف لا تدفعنى الى ضحك العدو 
وشماتته بى لكن احفظ اعضاى بعفتك واحفظ مصبام ' بتوليتى غير 
مطفى Uses)‏ الى grill thew! reel Hus‏ فى كافة Δ‏ 
الاب والابن وروح القدس الى ابى الدهور امين فاذ ابتبلت هذا 
الابتبال زجرت الجنى فصرفته مستبزيا فمضى فوقف قدام كبريانوس 
فقال له واين هى التى ارسلتك Ya‏ فقال الجنى قى غلبت وما 
استطيع ان اقول لك رايت علامة مخيفة فجزعت وارتعدردت فضحك 
عليه وصرفه وان كبريانوس استدعى ريس الجن واعظمهم قوة فاذ 
جا قال له ما هى هذه الخيانة والمبانة على ما ارى ان جملة 
5,5 قى cual‏ فقال له الشيطان انا اعدرها لك الان فكن 
مستعدا وقال له كبريانوس صف لى اولا صنوف شجاعتك وعلامة 
sie‏ حتى اصدقك فقال له Spo ὦ‏ مغانى الله ποῦ‏ الها 
واستزلت من العلو ملايكة وخدعت حوا واعدمت أدم نعيم الجنة 
وعلمت قاين ان يقل هابيل وجعلت شعب اسرايل ان يعبدوا 
الع واتتيت leg τ‏ الكفر she Oia) Selle‏ 
slau‏ ونقضت Cote)? ες lay ἐρῶν Clams jell‏ 
اصحاب البدع وعلمت السحر والتعزيم فبذه الافعال YAS‏ انا 
Lie‏ كيك ek‏ إلا شيامة اا امضن" فازعضا See‏ 
لله ely.‏ الل ون ال i ks, ρῶς.‏ لتلا 
الشيطان بصورة بتول poms‏ الى بيت البتول حقا وقرع الباب ودخل 
فجلس مع الصبية القديسة وبدا يقول لها قد عرفت لك انك قل 
حصلت فى SD) ly) Seed pet aided!‏ قن عرفت ها Dy‏ 
وما هى سيرة بتوليتك وما ينالك من الاسهار بسببها لانى اراك 
مغمومة كثيرا قالت البتول القديسة ثوابها كثير والجباد Yat‏ يسير 
lb lis‏ الا مر هذه الكال alle‏ لانن آنا كن ارت هذه 


' Cod. بثوليتى‎ * Cod. موسى‎ 


f. 136 " 


د 
ب 
w‏ 
“I‏ 
دع 


137 ك1 


f. 135a 


f. 135b 


{1264 


ويوستينة \¥ 
مرت Coy! wks Leal!‏ والمفت peels‏ واضات الثير leas‏ 
الانسان من الارض على شببك ورسمته بابنك عنصر الحكمة وجعلته 
فون نعيم الفردوس ايتمقع بالخيرات oll‏ خلقتبا ولما خدعه 
'الطغيان وبقى لم تغفل عنه يا متعطفا على الناس بل بقوتك 
دعوته بابنك الوحيى ربنا ايسوع المسيح الذى به استضا العالم 
وامتدت السما وجرى الما وعرفته البرايا كلبا الاها شا ὧδ᾽‏ يا سيدى 
ان تخاصدنى Ὁ τ ΟΥ3‏ ولا تمسنى تجربة شيطانية لانى اياك عاهدرت 
ولابنك الوحيى ايسوع المسيم فاذ صلت هذه الصلاة و[حصنت] 
USNS‏ برسم الصليب نفخت على الجنى فصرفته ذليلا فمضى الجنى 
فوقف قدام كبريانوس مستخزيا فقال له كبريانوس اين هى التى 
Ut SLY!‏ كيف قف το‏ انا وجيت انت JUS‏ له Y cpt‏ 
تسايلنى فما يمكننى ان اقول لك لانى عاينت علامة فخشيتها 
وانصرفت فضحك عليه كبريانوس وصرفه ودعا باسحاره من كان 
اقوى من ذلك واذ وقف به اخر قال لكبريانوس مفتخرا قد عرفت 
حالك وركاكة رفيقى فلذلك ارسلنى انا لازيل حزنك Se‏ هذا 
Soul!‏ فاطرحه حول Ls‏ وانا اذهب اليها فاخض كبريانوس الروا 
le ee‏ ال الل الى الى عبن I‏ فلا 
وكانت تصلى فى الساعة السادسة من الليل قايلة فى نصف 
الليل قمت لاشكرك على احكام عدلك فلما شعرت بشر الخبيث 
رفعت الى العلو يديبا قايلة *يا الاه* الكل ورب الرحمة يا حافظ 
جرى البوا وما oles?‏ حدوده وخوف التنين تحت الارض يا من 
الشرات τ πρὸ‏ ضهية ἔχ‏ انك الذى esl‏ بابل 
وقتلت التنين يا من عرفت برنيال المومن لاهل بابل معرفتك 
با من حبكت Sul‏ الحبيب جميع الاشيا فاضات ما كان فى 

Cod. Qa "ρα 2G * Cod. φῦ 


LO 


15 


20 


10 


15 


20 


35 


Υ-‏ كبريانزوس 
ale‏ فى امانة المسيح وكانت البتول ملازمة الكنيسة فى الصلوات 
والطلبات مصرعة إلى اليسيم وذاينا وان اسان dew!‏ غلاريوس 
كان جنسه شريفا موسرا Ire‏ وبعوايده مفسدا وفى عبادة الاصنام 
ومسارعا لما ابصو البتول القديسة فئ دوام مضيبا الى الكنيسة عشقبا 
Wels‏ برجال كثيرين ونسا طالب ان يتزوجها فدفعت جماعة 
المرسلين وقالت لهم انا δ‏ خطبت للمسيم فاستصحب هو جماعة 
من اصدقايه واتبعبا فى رجوعبا من الكنيسة repo‏ ان يغضيبوها 
فخرج اهلبا وجميع من كان فى Wire‏ بسيوف مسلولة فيزموا 
Ls!‏ وعيبوهم فبادر هو فاعتنق البتول فرسمت ذاتها برسم 
صليب المسيح وطرحته الى الارض على ظبره واوهنت حينيذ 
τὶ‏ ومزقت atlans atle‏ امندوها صائفة AMS lee lo pl‏ 
المعلية الكبيرة افاغتاظ ومضى الى كبريانوس الساحهر BY‏ كان 
فى تلك الوقت هناك قى وافى من افريقية وكان خبر سو صنايعه 
وحيله قد صار مسموعا فى كل موضع فدخل الى عنده غلابيوس 
المقدم ذكره فذوعده انه يعطيه مذوين فضة ان نال غرضه واقتنص 
البتول ولم يعرف الشقى ان قوة المسيحم ما تقبر فاستدرعى 
كبريانوس باسحاره جنيا وقال له قى وجدنا بتول من ملة 
eee gl!‏ ارو اي ا ees DUS ey Ol Goes Gl‏ 
الجنى الشقى بما لا يمكنه كانه يملكه وقال له كبريانوس خف هذا 
الدوا واطرحه حول Len‏ وانا ادخل فازعج عقلها وفى الحين 
تطييك وكانت الول فى تلك (padi κε‏ لله Blo‏ الساعة 
الثائة فى اللل فليا شدرث بقل Se)‏ ورتت تاجيا كله 
إخلامة τὰς ς᾽‏ الى ديرها ic Spey‏ قايلة coh‏ 
الممسك الكل بابنك الحبيب ايسوع المسيح يا من دفععت re‏ 
οὐ Yalu!‏ الى الزفيرير lly‏ وخلطت المصيدين كلك يا من 

! Cod: فاعتاص‎ 


1 1321 


f. 1344 


Ε 1220 


12 15-2 


1 1515 


كبريانوس ويوستينة 14 


وذهب ١‏ يمكنها ان تنفع ذاتها ولا غيرها ونحن يا ام شعب نعيا 
فارغا فى سجودنا لبذه التى قى علمت بحقيق ان لو صلى Dols‏ 
من المسيحين فلعنها لتكسرت وبادت فقالت لها امها يا ولدى 
انت تعرفين اعتصام ابيك بالالبة فابعدى هنا الراى Sic‏ فانه ان 
عرف هذا Sie‏ اشدد غضبه عليك فقالت ons‏ المسيم القديسة 
لامها ان 'اغتاظ ابى ليس اعيى “اغتياظه شيا فاعلمى انت وهو 
ابى انا تايقة الى المسيم ἅμ‏ امانة موثرة ان اصير مسيحية 
لاننى منف سمعت تعليم برايليوس الشماس الحكيم جارنا الجليل 
فن SASL]‏ الى Cael Cd‏ باليسيم Cet)‏ بيتك Jody‏ أنه كو 
الاه الاحيا والموتى وان الخلاص ليس هو الا به ثم نبضت بمسارعة 
مستغيثة بالمسيح مصلية فاخبرت Whey bool‏ بكل ما سمعته من 
ابنتبا فقال لبا Gal‏ المراة وماذا اصاب ابنتنا فينيغى لنا ان peed‏ 
فى هذا الامو ونتضرع الى Ady‏ التى لا تموت iy‏ يخبرونا بضلال 
τὺ}‏ كال ee‏ هنا القول شرا ee‏ تم قر وكا نت 
الصبية يوستينة النفيسة تبتبل فى امرهما ان تستضى نفوسبما وان 
الرب المسارع الى المستغيثين به استجاب صلوات القديسة فوقف 
بوالديبا مع كثرة جنود سماويين فى هجوعبما وقال ليما تعالوا 
الى فاعطيكما ملكا سماويا فدرهش هفاسيوس وامراته من المنظر 
الرهيب وقام فى dats‏ عميقة فاخف ابنته وامراته وجا الى بيت 
برايليوس ”الشماس وسالوه ان يوصليم الى الاسقفا فعمل مرادهم 
فحنى هذاسيوس على قدمى الاسقف فساله ان يعطييم الخاتم 
الذى بالمسيح فلم يحنج الى فعل ذلك حتى اخبروه بمنظر المسيح 
وبامانة البتول وقص هذاسيوس شعر راسه ولحيته لانه كان للاصنام” 
كاهنا وسجتى هو وحرمته والبتول القديسة واخذوا ΚΣ‏ خاتم 
المعودوزية واهله لمرتبة القسوسية وأقام lad‏ سنة ἄκων‏ اشيو وقضى 
alow!‏ لوا τ" Code cate!‏ اغناض 00" 


το 


[5 


20 


25 


شبادة كبريازنوس ودوستينة 


oe roam ela wed sled eagle اده‎ heel at الاب والارن والروت‎ ce 
كبريانوس الشاهد فى الكبنة الحسن الطبر ويوسةينة القديسة صلات.»م‎ 
معنا اجمعين امين‎ 

لما اشرق حضرة ربنا والاهنا ايسوع المسيم عند حضرته فى 
الارض وتيت اقوال الانبيا استنارت اليسكونة (gt!‏ تحت Lyd‏ كلا 5 
كلام الخلاص ὦ‏ امن اهلها wets oly‏ اب ممسك الكل وبرب 
sols‏ ايسوع المسيح الاهنا وبالروم القدس مرشهنا واستضات 
بالمعمودية وبحسن العبادة نفوس المومنين بالمسيم الذين see‏ 
يوستينة 'البقول التى كانت من مدينة انطاكية اسم ابيبأ هداسيوس 
واسم امبا قليذونية واذ كانت هذه البتول جالسة تطلع من BASU‏ 10 
منزلبا سمعت كلام رجل اسمه برايليوس يقرا عظايم الاهنا فى 
تانسه وولادته التى لا ترجم من مريم Used!‏ وسجود المجوس له 
وظبور النجم وتسبيح الملايكة والجرايح والايات الصايرة به وارتقايه 
الى السماوات وجلوسه من ميامن الاب وعنىس استماعبا هذه 
الاقوال ما طاقت احتمال حرارة ايمانها بالمسيح فاثرت ان تعاين 5: 
es) ae le‏ بذاتا. يغليبا اصول Gs GO‏ يلها We‏ 
any‏ ذلك }0 ذلك الوقت وفى AVL YoY SIG LLY κι‏ 
قليزونية اسمعى اقوالى واطيعى مشورتى التى تشير عليك بالاشيا 
acto‏ الصادقة ΟἹ‏ هذه }49 الزى تدم لا lee)‏ دابيا كن 
علمت علما يقينا انها اصنام wo Y‏ لبا من Slam‏ وخشب وفضة 20 

' Cod. Yards! passim 


f. 130a 


f. 130b 


[ὑ3τ8 


f. 131b 


1١ 


Πα... 0 


ἔ 108 a 


1Y افيقيا‎ 


فيه لنا مستانفا فشرحت القول وصمتت فقال سليمان ليشوع ماذا 
تقول وما 'هو معنى ما قصصته فقال يشوع ان جميع ما *حكيته 
Ud Gro‏ اتشلا عن das‏ ينانا diay‏ الفلاحة حتى اليوم الذى 
ارسلنى الملك الى سوريا bel’‏ عاودت من سفرى وتقدمت الى 
orth Ghd! ob‏ إلى واخلهة فرايت اثر وطى اسل عظيما 
معتلما قد عرفته فخشيت ان يظفرنى فيفترسنى ويبلكنى اما سليمان 
πλιὸ}‏ فقال له gow!‏ حتى احدتك اعلم ان ww‏ قى Ses‏ 
السان LS‏ قلت بل حى هو الرب اله ابراهيم واله Gamw!‏ واله 
يعقوب وموسى وهرون الاله العظيم العالى المطلع علينا الان اسمع 
ا كد os‏ يدان CUS‏ الاسن ل ايوق شن من نهار ولك 
AopKI SWI τ}‏ المحروقة "فيه Biron" τε Bll Sqw‏ 
بحكمة ينتفع لسماعبا انفس كل من يصغى اليبا والان يا بنى 
τὰ οὐ‏ ورور وغرا οτος σὰν‏ 
الى She‏ وكرمك اعمل فيبا حسب كرامتها لانبا كرمة جليلة 
امام ”رب الصاباووت وللوقت حوص يشوع وحماته وانطلقوا الى 
منازابيم وجلس مع افيقيا زوجته وتقصى bie‏ على كنه الامر 
فقصته عليه وجميع ما كان *ومجدوا اله اسرايل والمجى لربنا 


دابما 


ἘΣ Cod aka Coda ونيا‎ 6 sod Gass 


He Bora نسار‎ ° Cod. a3 rane i Coda coat " Cod. ومجدو‎ 


Io 


15 


1 كت حيصمد كم 
a‏ وذمل بعون الله pom‏ افيقيا زوجة يشوع ابن Ευ-‏ وزدمر 


سليمان ابن داوود 


wale’ بيو‎ mano «-νροῖλο عه لعدت ولحذزيك-‎ 
احلصسن‎ OD كك 5 بد حه‎ ‘az oi yo tL 


وكان shill‏ من نسخ PES‏ يشوع ابن شيراخح وخبر زوجته 5 
yl Las‏ 7الجيعة. فى" dels‏ الساؤسة فى dapat!‏ السامسة من 
الصوم المقدس بستة وعشرين يوم مضت من شبر 'ادار المبارك 
κοῦ‏ يوم عيى البشارة سنة الف وثمانماية خمسة وثمانين لليونانيين 
وذلك على يى خاطبا مسكينا صحلا غنيا بالخطايا . فقيرا فى 
νυ AU το ev Ld Sloe!‏ فين (ofp‏ الفعل to tes‏ 
ble‏ . مترجما باسما نقولا ابن 5995 من ἀω,βἘ‏ كفر حورا من 
اعمال up? 989. ntl‏ االشووى نونف Sloped!‏ باللعقوض Cle ١‏ 
المكنى زربابى الله يحنيه فيه . ويبديه فى عمل شرح ومعانيه . 
ويعوضه عوض تعبه معنا bey‏ رسم من dod‏ القدوس الواحى CWA‏ 
وستون وماية ويخلده بجنان النعيم بحضون GY‏ ابراههم واسحاق 15 
ويعقوب وكافة القديسين امين امين امين 


كتب بدمشق المحروسة فى بيت الاب المذكور الخورئ يوسف 


: Cod. ادر‎ 


F. s. 570 


f. r30b 


Ἦν ἃ. δὸ 


ΤΟΣ Ρ 


الذى على awl)‏ ولم يدرى slog‏ ما بين الاخشاب المعمولة فى 
العتبة ولم يراه rol‏ حتى وصل يشوع من سفره فراه ملقى فاخذه 
وصيره فى كفه وعرفه وتحقق يقينا ان الملك οϑ‏ حضر الى 
مجلسه PLS‏ وتوجع قلبه ولم يعود يقرب زوجته ولا يدذو الى 
فراشه ومضجعه فى شركة زواج حتى انقضت له سنتين من الزمان 
Wis‏ انه لم يتقصى منبا كى تخبره كنه الحديث وهى ايضا لم 
تطلعه على الخبر ولم تساله لماذا اعتزلت عن فراشك ايلا يظن 
ly‏ انبا ما سالت الا لاجل قضى غرضبا ولما كان بعى هذه المدة 
lol - τὸς‏ فى وجا Sy Us‏ تغيرت ὑπὸ Sly Wom!‏ 
سانا وتاملت اخضايا ge ss Cols‏ لحييا اكات τλῆ‏ 
فقالت لها يا Cel‏ الحبيبة ماذا تشتكين من الوجع 65 جسمك 
فقد ارى بدنك كله صار مبزولا وحال حسنك تغير فنبضت 
ومسكت بيى lol‏ واختلت ly‏ فى موضع معتزل فى منزلها واخبرتها 
بجميع ما كان وانها متوجعة القلب من Sel‏ زوجها ΞΡ‏ 
CIN Yel capes ts Up coil ciadll Gp‏ والطلقت الى 
سليمان الملك واجتمعت به وحده وهو فى خدره فى خلوة كوننها 
onic‏ مكرمة وقالت يا سيدى يعيش الملك الى الابى اعلم ان 
Saad‏ بستان انظر الى الله تعالى واليه لتعزيتى به فسلمته لفلاح 
يفلحه وانه لا يتوانى فى فلاحته ولم اتفقد Gio‏ سنتين فانطلقت 
اليه اليوم وطفته جميعه فوجدته قد خرب وتلاشى واسلك ايها 
الملك احكم لى بالعدل مع هذا الفلاح لانه اخرب جنانا فقال لها 
tell‏ ول حتى Cts‏ عن sly‏ الن WY!‏ وؤلك انه تحفق 
تاويل خطابها ومعنى حكمتها فامر باحضار يشوع الى عنده واجلسه 
جانب حماته وقال لبا CON!‏ حكيتيه جميعه وقصصتيه كردى القول 


' Cod. واثر‎ > Cod. اكتر‎ 


ΤΟ 


1S 


20 


Mansa τς 

فى pad‏ وحده فى خلوة WY‏ كانت τς deyS‏ با[ كثر . 
وقالت يا سيدى SU‏ عيش الى الابى. كان لى كرما لطيفا انا 
tect‏ بالله اول" واتعزى به . فسلمته الى كرام يفلحه . فيكث يعطى 
لى اثمر Bro‏ ثر له Last‏ فونقت من Wide coop‏ االعرام 53201 
يضيع dasa‏ كرمى . فلم افتقدره هوذا الى سنتين . ومضيت اليوم 5 
اليه حتى اشرف عليه فوجدته قد خرب وتلف . وانا اتضرع اليك 
λυ‏ الملك انك Xe‏ بين وبين اهذا الكراف ἐπε τὼν‏ 
كرم عزيز . فقال لبا الملك وما الذى دهاكى gt‏ تراونتى بكرمك 
الى اليوم . لانه علم منتها كلامها ومعنى حكمتبا . فامر ان يدعوا 
eo‏ الى حضرته الى 595 . فاجلسه على جانبه مع حماته . وقال 10 
لبا جميع ما قلتيه اعيريه علينا dvds‏ اخرى حسب ما قلتى لى 
فسكتت . فقال سليمان ما ذا تقول انت . فقال جميع ما قالته 
صحيح هو. غير انى ام افتر من فلاحة هذا الكرم بالحسنى . الى 
ροῦν egal‏ افيه نيدي Sa‏ إن الشام فلن (iad)?‏ رسوعن 
Ul‏ المنك lls Jt Sects τοὺ‏ الع اناظر 1١ pt Sy‏ 
وطيات wel‏ عظيم. من داخل العتبة . فخفت ورجعت الى وراى 
ليلا يبلكنى الاسى . فقال له الملك سليمان اسمع لى لاكلمك . 
Gas‏ اله ابرهيم واسحاق ويعقوب وموسى وهارون AY‏ الاعظم 
العالى المتطاع عليذا . السامع ΝΙΝ το‏ لمر 
wal‏ يصنع شيا الا الحريث . كلاما Garo‏ بالحكمة وريج لفوسش 200 
جميع سامعيه . 9 OV‏ يا بنئنى قم cote‏ وقلب نقى . ادخل الى 
atel Xp. amdily Shed‏ لدت خرامتة plad ΠΥ‏ رب اضباوولت . 
وللوقت AIS‏ ينوع وحماته . ودخل الى منزله . وجلس مع افيقيا 
زوجته . فاستقصى (Lr‏ فاعامتبا بما Cope‏ ومجنب الرب اله اسم 


25 اسرايل‎ 
' In red above the line. 7 od. pl 


πος 170 


f. 120 Ὁ 


“110 ἃ 


E450 


و 


τ افيقيا‎ 

الملك واركان ike‏ عبده الدنى يشوع الذى لا يستحق وطى 
ely ee deg la‏ لف بار الخدر ρον‏ دقرت 
المايدة بين يدى Mell‏ فتعجب الملك من المايدة واصناف 
come!‏ الث ا,نؤقيا ον‏ المستلفة الصفات. وامرت ἀν‏ 
اطعمة اللحوم الملونة من كل نوع فاكل الملك بشبوة لاجل 
ملاة الاطعمة ونزاهنبا وحسن Sed Lleol!‏ ينتظر الى الالوان 
}20 فى المواعلنت عن بعضيا Gary‏ تاذ ها χα ἐν gh‏ بن 
الاعزبة Coll‏ فيبا وجى سايرها طعم واحى فاكل حسب ANA‏ 
والنباية ورفع يده ثم 'قدموا اليه الوان *كثيرة من الاشربة اما “هو 
وكان يذوق فقط ولا يستعمل منبم شيا فتحقق بالحكمة الالبية 
الحالة فيه دون ساير الخلق ان جميع ما طبخ من تلك الاطعمة 
انبا كانت بصناعة محكمة فقال مقبولة هى انعامك ولكن Gay‏ 
sl wl coy‏ ا ae os)‏ انيقي τι Ol‏ 
معنى ما اعتبدتيه فى اصلاح هذه الاطعمة لغذاى منبها واستعمال 
اياها ومن الاشربة مثل ذلك فقالت افيقيا يقنع سيدى الملك 
الحكمة الباهرة التى البمه الله اياها مع Soran!‏ حكمة العالم باسره 
ما “هو مقدار ole‏ مطفطف قدام الشمس المذيرة واى خبرة لامة 
دنية عنس مخاطبة سيدها الملك اذ نسمة الله تبارك السارية فى 
جسدها اليوم تستر Yt‏ وصديدها السايل من جسدها عدد الدود 
Sul‏ يسعى فى اعضايبا فى القبر سيما دينونة وحكم وقضا 
ا τ el cee de uty Aye‏ نال ليان 
الملكث نعم هى ولادتك فى هنا العالم لتمتلى من حكمتك كل 
من يسمعبا ونبض للوقت متعجبا مما راه وسمعه من الامراة 
العفيفة وقصد الخرويح من الباب واذا δῦ;‏ انخلع ae apo‏ 


' Cod. قدمو‎ 2 Cod. byte ὃ Cod. هوا‎ 


ΤΟ 


15 


20 


10 


15 


20 


mandir 745‏ 
قهسموا ايضا الوان كثيرة . وجعلوها قرامه . فصار Godby‏ منها فقط . 
من غير ان ياكل منبا. فعلم يقينا ان هذا كان تمثالا من 
السكية ‏ فقال Send‏ مقبولة يا GI. lew! all‏ ارين lst‏ يا ὑπ}‏ 
المعنى CGH!‏ امرتينئنى به فى طعاميك . فقالت افيقيا يا سيدى 
الملك . حكمتك تكفاك وللعالم كله . فما شان نور السراج الموضوع 
قرام الشمسن Cola.‏ هو Aol αὶ‏ نتكلي قزام السيل اليلك. والنفسن 
من الله تتحرك فى جسدها. اليوم تستر نتانها وذفرتها وبالغى هى 
مطرحة فى قبر a=‏ عن موضع الفضاء . التى فيه تعرض . وهى 
نفس عارية بنفس لا تموت . فقال سليمن نعم يوما ولدوك فى 
العالم حتى مليتيه من الحكمة . وقام وهو متعجب مما Ol) AS‏ 
وسمع διμον! SUG Cys‏ العفيفة . Alo‏ كان هايها مهن -υ‏ 
المقصورة . واذا بياقوتة قى انقلعت من تاجه . بين اسكفتى الباب 
من غير ان ml Maly‏ من الئاس الى عودة يشوع من السفر. 
فراها مطروحة . فاخذها وتاملها فى ow,‏ وعرفها . وعلم يقينا ان 
الملك دخلل الى قيطونه . فحزن فى قلبه ولم يتكلم . ولم يعود الى 
φρο dandy του‏ بخلطة المضجع الى كمال سنتين . ولم يستقص 
منها لكيما ترضيه . وهى ايضا لم οὐ»‏ تقول له لماذا اعتزلت عنى . 
قائلة فى قلبها ان لا يقول بعلبا فى قلبه ان هذه اثتاقت للجماع . 
وكان من بعد سنتين . نظرت امها الى وجببها . فراته واذا هو JS‏ 
Sills  ريقتو lant!‏ اعضات) Cn ed SIs‏ جنا SIS‏ 
بنتى الحبيبة ماذا يوجعك . لانك BF‏ ضعفتى جدا. CASE‏ بيدها 
وذهبت بها الى مكان هادى فى بيتها . واعلمتها بجميع ما جرى 
وهى حزينة القلب من el‏ بعلها اكثر من الضعف Sm (GH‏ 


فى جسدها . فقامت امها للوقنت ومضت الى سليمن واجتمعت ب4 


F.s. 179 


f. 128 a 


2250 1ك 


f. r29a 


F. a. 50 


f. 106 b 


افيقيا 11 
وزيره قايلا له اعلم يا بنى ان لنا حوايج we dope‏ ملك dunno‏ 
صور وليس ارى ان اجبز فى ذلك aol‏ غيرك لعلمى بملاقاتك 
ومخاطبتك فقال له يشوع يعيش سيدى Mell‏ الى HW‏ يكون 
بحسب ما Spel‏ فانجز Well‏ مكاتبات وتناوليم يشوع وركب وسافر 
مكرما جليلا كابن ملك بطرايف وتحف وصحبته اجناد وغلمان 
وان سليين sled! pol τ‏ القصى ان δ‏ || اذيقيا زوجة 
يشوع ابن شيراخح ويخبرها ان Moll‏ يحضر اليبا فى iro‏ الان 
فانطلق الخصى ودخل اليبا وقص Cre Yale‏ الملك فقالت افيقيا 
US? Cosel‏ ل ]| الملل أن كنت انا Speed! Ao‏ كل تاهلت 
لبذه الكرامة العظيمة اليسعى سيدى الملك الي فسالمه وقسمت عليه 
ly‏ لا يستطعم شى من الاطعمة ge‏ يحضر الى منزل عبدته لخر 
الم الي ع دنا Grey‏ إلى اليلك اشير :ذا SUP‏ 
واما افيقيا استدعت بطباخ لبا وقالت له Gel‏ منك ان تصنع لى 
اربعين لون طعام من لحوم الضان ولحوم الطير ولحوم الحيتان 
"وتكثر ابزارهم وتوابليم ويكون جميعبم طعم role‏ مختلفة الالوان 
ثم صنعت خبزا خورا من دقيق درمك نقى ناعما متفقا لطعم 
Cpe lac! MiSs, dial! Lilic.‏ الأشرية” المتفقة ف arte)‏ 
المختلفة فى اللون من كل شى يليق بالملوك bola‏ حان الوقت 
Moll sco)‏ بسطت تحت الملك فى مجلس يشوع 'بسطاحه كحسب 
كرامة Lely Sobel‏ كان Leal!‏ ومضئى من }1 pom Slee‏ 
سايمان الملك الى خدرها بشمع يقد قدامه حتى وصل الى 
bee la‏ لمت Isl cy les‏ لمرو ees pees‏ 
7احدى جواريباة وخرت ساجدة امام الملك وقالت نعم بقدوم سيدى 

1 000. حهديت‎ =e Ot. (Jas * Cod. لسعى‎ ‘ Cod. ody 
* Cod. وتكثتر‎ * Cod. بسطحته‎ 7 Cod. جوارها‎ dol 


το 


15 


20 


5 


Eo 


15 


Mansi εν 


WL‏ . يا بنى ὦ‏ ححوائجا داعية عنض ملك الموصل . وانا لم ارى 
رجلا يصلح للقاره مثلك . فقال يشوع يعيش سيدى الملك . حسب 
ما يامر كذلك يكون . فكتب له الكتب وركبه باكرام كمثل ابنا 
اليلوك . وارسل aro‏ الهناذ وهنايا. وسافر. فامر سليين ὑπο Moll‏ 
قايلا له. امضى الى افيقيا زوجة يشوع ابن شيراخح وقول As sic‏ 
اتفضرىئ ان مولاى Yao‏ الى وارك ‏ فزهب Cp ded!‏ اليبا يكلام 
CIS. SU!‏ افيقيا للانتاذ WU He Con pel‏ إن كانت 
ae‏ الكشقيرة فق التحقت هذه الكرامة العظيية gt‏ بيسن 
مولاها وياتى اليبا.انا اتضرع اليه ان لا يذوق شيا من الطعام الى 
عند ان يحضر وياكل فى منزل عبدته . فانصرف الخصى من عندها 
الى الملك . واعلمه ببذا الكلام . فاما افيقيا لما ذهب السقلابى 
دعت طباخبا وقالت له.اسال عن كل ما تحتاج اليه من الدجاج 
والاسماك والغنم واطبخ لى منغهم اربعين لون بطعم واحد . وتكون 
ἐξ ς:‏ متلفة الالوان (gd SUN τος νος Lely.‏ قيطون 
λα‏ يشوع ابن شيراح حسب كرامة الملك . وحان المسا حتى 
انقضى جزء من الليل . فاتى سليمن الملك الى منزلبا . وقى ساروا 
قدامه بالشمع . وادخلوه الى المقصورة التى فرشوا له فيها. فتعجب 
من ما Samad. ol‏ افيقيا هى 'وجواريبا . وس.جدوا على الارض 
قدام الملك. وجلسوا خلف باب اليقصورة التى فرشوا Se‏ فيها. 
فامرت ان ينبضوا المايدة وعليبا من انواع الاخباز. ثم امرت ان 
يقدموا الالوان الى فوق . فاكل الملك بشبوة لاجل نقاوة الاطعمة 
التى ياكل Lio‏ ويشاهدها . ومكث يتفرس من الالوان . وهو متعجب 
من اختلافبا laa.‏ عن بعض فى الشبه . واذا هو GIS‏ تلك الالوان 
الموضوعة WIS lores‏ طعم sels‏ . فاكل وشبع ورفع ننه انوا 
وجوارها Cod.‏ ' 


F.s. 179 


1 big: 


"177 Ὁ 


Fonds 
arabe 50 


f. 105 


f. τοῦ ἃ 


افيقيا 


قصة امراة يشوع ابن شيراح مع سليمن الملك الحكيم بن )59 

قال انه لما بلغ سليمان الملك الحكيم بن داود النبى عن 
امراة يشوع بن شيراخ وزيره انها SIS‏ حسن وجمال 'ضخمة الجسم 
τυ‏ الشرة do‏ اللطلقة aad) deo‏ غريرة all‏ والشكية toe‏ 
اللسان فصيحة المنطق طيبة الخلق كاملة فى كل الخصال دون 
ساير النسوان وجميع Oly‏ اسرايل وكلمن بيروشليم يتمنى مشاهدتها 
ومخاطبتها والاجتماع بها والحضور عندها كى يتحقق صفاتبها ونباية 
ما حصيت به من الفبم والحكمة فارسل اليبا خادما من خواصه 
كاتما oped‏ قايلا الملك يريد الاجتماع بك Sets?‏ معك ولما 
سمعت هذا الكلام من الخادم عن لسان الملك ارجع قلبها وتنبدت 
1 اك كلا sll eis‏ دن uy co)‏ رف سكوك 
الماهرة قد جرت العالم باسره كيف خطر هذه الفكر الردى الدنى 
على قلبك وذلك ان غزر علمك وادابك قى صير والجبال والحمق 
فضلا من ذوى الحكمة بل اذا كان هذا ارادتك فينبغى ان يرجع 
سيدى ”هذا الفكر ولا يتمه ليلا تكون “عثرة لم تستدرك فيبا الفارط 
فلما sole‏ الخصى الى wie‏ الملك ببذا الخبر فتامل الملك هذه 


الكلام ودبر dhe‏ لتجبيز wind Yogi”‏ ذلك Bote!‏ بزوجها يشوع 


ον δες adgnb 50000 لتحرت‎ > Cod. هرد‎ 
Od: Jas Cod? ose © Cod. opts τ Cod. جوزها‎ 


Io 


15 


Fonds‏ يم بح بى يم 


syriaque 6 


aba‏ م بسم الاب والابن والروح القدس الاله sell‏ نبدا بنقل خبر 
افيقها زوجة يشوع ابن شيراح وزير ملك سليمن ابن داوود ملك 
بنى اسرائل 
قال فسمع سليمن الحكيم من اجل افيقيا . زوجة يشوع ابن 
شيراخ ذازنه ووزيره . ان ليس فى ὦ‏ بنى اسرائل . ولا فى 5 
اورشليم LAS‏ . من هى صحيحة فى جسدها وحكيمة فى عقلها 
Le‏ . فاشتبى ان يراها ويتحدث lyre‏ . حتى يعلم منتها حكمتيا . 
فارسل اليبا سقلابى الذى كان صاحب سره WU‏ لبا انى تايق 
الى لقايك والحديث theo‏ . وكان لما مضى اليبا الخصى . واذبرها 
(ode το τ, τρις‏ الملك 10 
ان حكيتك قن ملت ὦ‏ كله فكيف PS Ni GI, dem‏ 
ان يحضر بقلبك . وتعليمك يصير الجاهل حكيما . لكن ان كانت 
ا6ه: 6 ارادتك ارفضى ببذا الفكر الدنيا . فليس يتم ورجلى فى هذه المدينة 
W‏ يكون معيرة . فلما Coat! Gad‏ هذا الكلام فى δ‏ 
الملك تعجب بالاكثر والتمس لقاها . فتحدث مع يشوع بعلها 15 


MamAw دده‎ 


p> sar ca-X ay‏ عابم 


قصة افيقيا امراة يشوع ابن شيراخ 


ae τ 


ἬΝ 7 
i 


eee 
د‎ 
1 ا د‎ 
ام‎ 





Prats: Tl 





افيقيا 


Fonds arabe 50, f. 1o6b 


Between pp. oy and ev 





< 


Ὁ: ΤΠ 120. 


17 


aque 


yr 


onds sy 


- 


1: 





ἢ Ὁ كناب‎ οἵ 
. فاولدها يوسيا . يوسيا تزوجح حمطول بنت ارميف فاولدها يواخز‎ 
امراة فلم يكن له مهنبا بنون > وملك يواقيم بعل‎ mos يواخز‎ 
Hig Vole Say odd يقال ليا‎ δ] موت الشيه وتزوح‎ 

. الياقيم فاولدها زربابل‎ τὰ Slee ؛ سلاييل . وسلاييل تزوج‎ rath 
5.8» EI ὦ Δ ἢ τὰν το زربايل تزو.‎ 
فاولدها ياقيم . وياقيم تزوج حلى بنت‎ Golo اوارقيث بنت‎ 
ال يي‎ a a οὐ τοῦ 
delet τ᾽ τ τοῦ SY pA ea Glo . جاوود‎ 
يوتيد اسبم تزوج حاسجاب بنت يولى فاولدها ليود .599 تزوج‎ 
To شبشتين بنت حوبابالليا فاولدها العازر . العازر تزوج هنبث بنت‎ 
فاولدها‎ ae يولى فاولدها ماتان . ماتان تزوج سيراب بنت‎ 
بنت العازر فاولدها يواقيم‎ τῶν يعقوب . ويعقوب تزوج‎ 
المعروف بيوناخر . يواقيم تزوج حنة فعود الى بيت العازر . وبعد‎ 
ستين سنة التزويجه اياها اولدها مريم البثول التى تجسسل منها‎ 
15 ما وقعت قرعته‎ Wig المسيح . وكان يوسف النجار ابن عمبا لحا‎ 
لما ان رام كاهن بنى اسرايل يسلمها الى رجل يكفل بها‎ μὰς 
وغامض معرفته انه لا بد من‎ jog وكان فى ساتر عمل الله جل‎ 
المسيح . فلربنا‎ hem البيوة بسيت‎ po الظاهرة.‎ pe ان تعير‎ 
والاهنا وسيدنا يسوع المسيح السبح والقدرة والعظمة والوقار والسجود‎ 
يي‎ lol ا‎ isto OT Ce ل‎ wil ae 
Peal الداهرين‎ 


' Cod. جشريحه‎ Con. ورح‎ 


f. r40b 


222 


كتاب المجال οο‏ 
σεις.‏ بروج τὸ‏ فقيل ἀχὸ‏ تامور ناحور 
تزوج SI pol‏ عاقرس بدت اروع فاولدها εν‏ ارس تزوب امراتين 
احداهما يوتا والاخرى سلمات wold‏ من يوتا ابرهيم ومن سلمات 
سارة Ὁ‏ ابرهيم تزوج سارة Cy‏ سلمات زوجة ἀμ}‏ هذه فاولدها 
اسحق . اسحق تزوج امراة يقال لها رفقة بنت ules‏ فاولدها 
يعقوب . يعقوب pops‏ ليا بنت لابان فاولدها يبوذا . يبوذا اولدب 
من po‏ فارص . وتزوج فارص بن يبوذا' افضيب بنت لاوى 
Coren, Fee‏ ترون ΠΣ‏ بحت a) Ἀπ‏ 
aN ae ae Nes Neath ERS cen) DE peel at) 0‏ روج 
ee Ne ee,‏ 
فادها πὲ get‏ نزو rt‏ بنت عيياذات SEW ἀρ»‏ 
ee‏ ل eS‏ ا ا راج اي 1 
بنت شيلا فاولدها اسى .اسى تزوج امرات بنت عاتان فاولدها 
Sols‏ . داود Ξ‏ بالسبيع Cw‏ يوتان بن شيلا فاولدها سليمن . 
سليمن ele‏ نعما Cy‏ ماحيل فاولدها رحبعام (GH!‏ لم يكن له 
سوا . رحبعم تزوج ناحير بنت ال فاولدها ابيا . ابيا تزوج Keo‏ 
بنت ابيشالوم فاولدرها اسا . اسا تزوج عوزبا بنت شالج فاولدها 
يوشافاط . يوشافاط تزوج نعمنا بنت امون فاولدها يورام . يورام 
تزوج تلعيا بنت عموى فاولدها اخاز. اخاز تزوج صوما بنت usr‏ 
فاولدها اموص . اموص تزوج كاما بنت قارام فاولدها عوزيا . عوزيا 
تزوج يروسا بنت صاذوق فاولدها يريام . يريام تزوج يعفات بنت 
هانى فاولدها اخاز. اخاز تزوج احير بنت زكريا فاولدها ὅλο.‏ . 
.5 و ee‏ ساد ىا τ‏ 
ارتيدا بنت عازوريا فاولدها امان . امان تزوج تارب بنت مورقا 


' Cod. adds ناعاز .000 * تزوج‎ 5 Cod. حنصيه‎ 


10 


τ 


20 


ΤῸ 


15 


20 


of‏ كاب المجال 


GS il‏ غلبت غزريا 'مغلي gel‏ كله el‏ حفظه 


وجدده 25 << فلسدكدن OVI‏ افواه اليبود الملاعين ويوقنوا ان مريم 


الطاهرة من نسل يبودا ثم من نسل داود ثم من نسل ابرهيم وانه 
ليس لبم على الانساب التى علمتناه روح القدس ولا بقى فى 
:يديبم كتاب* يقفون منه على نسب اذ كانت كتببم احترقت 
اثلث IgM lass‏ لحن ايام انطباهوس: الذزى) eed‏ شيكل الرب 
GUS τυ pols‏ © والبانية aching) lye τὸ dary‏ 
والثالثة فاسمع al‏ الابن المبارك ما “البمنيه روح القدس فى الثلثة 
والستين: UY‏ المدونة . apg plow!‏ كان ب Gui‏ إلى القبيلة 
التى تجسى منها الاهنا المسيح : ابتدا LI!‏ ادوم Wg‏ شيث . 
ف و ee‏ ال ا ee‏ 
يقال لبا حيت SY‏ مبموما من we‏ حار بن شيث فاولدها قينان . 
قينان تزروج قاريث τῶ‏ كرشم بن ميال فاولدها مبلالاييل . 
II‏ تزوج تصحب فاطر بنت انوش فاولدها يرد . يرد تزوج 
eel ee) Oe Oe ΘΑ.‏ اروس 
τὸ τ‏ طربات ابن مبلالايل” δ δ δ‏ بروج 
راح se a ee ee‏ تيقار 
ee pe a ee ee ee‏ 
ماشاموس بن اخنوخ فاولدها سام . سام تزوج ليا بنت ناصح فاولدها 
ارفحشد . ارفخشى تزوج فردوا بنت سلوى بن يافث فاولدها شالخ . 
جالع اتروع مولدات [πῇ‏ خاهن بن سام فاولرها عوبين . عوبيد 
تزوج رسدا اخكت ملكيسدراق بنت eu‏ بن needy!‏ فاولدها فالغ . 
قالخ اتروع τὸς‏ يلس ρον Δ‏ درو eo‏ 
λυ * Cod. ahs‏ كاب lees! = Cod.‏ :5000 
تاروع e Cod. lass} 7 Cou.‏ اليه Cod.‏ * 


f. 22 


f. 139 a 


f. 139b 


كاب الميجال ov”‏ 


وكل عيد عيده 'بنو اسرايل ثلثة . الاول de‏ موسى بمصر. 
والثانى عيى يوسيا . والثالث بعد رجوعبم من بابل ايام كورش 
الفارسى . وكان عدد سنى “السبى التى ذكرها ارميا النبى سبعين 
سنة . وابتنا 'بنو اسرايل هيكل الرب باورشليم وتم بناه we‏ يدى 
زربابل ويوشع بن يوزاداق الكاهن وعزرا كاتب الناموس فى “ست 
واربعين سنة . ولما هلكت كتب الانساب تحيروا الابا فى النسب 
“وتحيروا بعدهر فى ذلك حتى وقفت على Yew‏ من كتب 
τ»‏ ونا τυ ele δου‏ انها 
صار زربابل الى اورشليم تزوج ملكا ابنة عزرا المعلم فاولدها ابنا 
سياه ابيود وفن كانتا هذه من كبذك زوحعة'” رواهين ‏ فلها نشا 
dec!"‏ روح راغيب بنت يوشع بن يوزاداق الكاهن . فاولدها ابنا 
سماه يواقيم . فتزوج يواقيم امراة فاولدها ابنا . فلما نشا δ"‏ الفيت 
بنت حصرون فاولدها صادوق . وتزوج صادوق فلبين بنت راحاب 
Leadels‏ انين . .)»5.3 اتين حسخيب بذت دواع فاولدها تور. وتزوج 
تور سلسين بنت حاسول . فاولدها العازر . فتزوج العازر هبيث بنت 
oe‏ فاولدها مانار . وتزوج مانار سيراب بنت فينحاس فاولدها ابنين 
فى بطن . احددما يعقوب المسمى باسمين يواقيم بن co ae‏ 
يعقوب حى بنت العازر فاولدها يوسف . وتزوج يواقيم حنة بنت 
قعردال فاولدها مريم التى io‏ تجسس سيدنا المسيح 07 فين 
اجل معرفتنا يا ابنى اقليمس بنسب السيدة مريم وانساب Gall‏ تبدا 
اليبود بالدرعاوى علينا انا لا" 2,8 الانساب ولا نعلمها وتجروا على 
κς‏ لاا ره اموي ees Ol‏ الى الرراء لقت وله Cre‏ 
ان روك Lele Ie stl λυ‏ معشر LOY!‏ عشر فى Cisse ASE‏ 
هى التى علمتنا جميع ما احتجنا الى علمه من الانساب وساير 


* Cod. بو‎ " Cod. التنيوا‎ * Codi dias 


* Cod. وتحيرا‎ > Cod. yey! ὁ Cod. يواحير‎ 


Io 


T5 


20 


5ه كناب Gl‏ 

عن كيلة الفلتين ولا وقف على نسب القوم ἀνθ 55 οὐ‏ 
ot”‏ اسرايل ولا من اين كان ابتدا الكبنوت . ولم يزل clan”‏ 
اسيرا بارض بابل ومحبوسا فى السجن “سبع وثلين سنة . فعند 
ذلك alg‏ لمردول ابن سماه “مردحى واطلق الملك *يواخين من 
السجن وزوجه حلموت بنت الياقيم . فولدت مذه بارض بابل ابنا 5 
يقال له "سلاثاييل . ثم map‏ اخرى يقال لبا ملكت بنت عزريا 
المعلم ولم يرزق Salo” Lo‏ ببابل . وملك بابل فى ذلك الوقت 
كورش . فتزوج بمسخت اخت زربابل عظيم اليبود على diet?‏ 
الفرس وملكبها امره فسالته ان يرد بنى اسرايل الى اورشليم ففعل 
لمحلبا كان من قبدله . فامر مناديا ينادى لا يبقى Bel‏ من بنى TO‏ 
اسرايل او يحضر عند زربابيل صبره . فلما اجتمعوا امره ان يشخص 
ببم الى اورشليم وان يبنيها . فرجع st”‏ اسرايل الى اورشليم فى 
Cro ASW 2}‏ الت ري الا ل .59 LS‏ ال ا AI‏ 
الخامس من الابتدا + وبقوا بنى اسرايل بعد رجوعيم الى اورشليم 
بغير معلم يعلمبم ناموس الرب او 'سفرا من اسفار الانبيا . فلما راى 15 
عزريا ذلك wad‏ الى poll‏ التى كان الناموس موضوعا فيه . فكشف 
aic‏ ذوجى البارم مملوا نارا وبخورا ووجى الاسفار قى بليت فلم 
يكن فيبا حيلة . فالبمه الله ان يتناول بيديه Yio‏ فتاتى فرمى به 
الى فيه Spe‏ وثاذية وثالثة. فاسكن الله فيه قوة روم النبوة فحفظ 
جميع الاسفار وتلك النار الى كانت فى البارم فى البير هى من 20 
نار الفردوس التى كانت فى بيت الرب . وصار زربابيل باورشليم 
كالملك عليبها . وتم (يوشع بن يوزاداق راس الكبنة ولعزرا كتبة 


Coe ce يعن رجوعيم‎ ele) أبنو‎ Jats. el النوراة واسفار‎ 


1 Cod. الفلسفين‎ 7 (30a; يواحير 0000 بدوا‎ 
4 Cod. سبعه‎ ἢ Cod. مورحى‎ 7000. Jest. 


ΠΟΥ 4 8 Cod. سته‎ ° Cod. سفر‎ 


f. 138 a 


f. 138b 


كتاب المجال ١ه‏ 
بعدره صدقيا عم يواقيم وهو ابن 'احدى وعشرين سنة . وكل مللوك 
بنى اسرايل OS‏ كرسيبم اورشليم واسم ام صدقيا حمطول وكان 
آخر obo‏ بنى اسرايل . فبعد *احدى عشرة” din‏ من ملكه سار 
بخت ANG dass κοῦ‏ الى المغرب ليصلح مدنه ومدن الفرات واليبحر 
5 الاعظم. فجعل طريقه على جزاير البحر فسبى اهلها وخرب صور 
وضربها بالنار : وقتل *حيرام ملكبا كما قلنا متقدما . ودخل pos‏ 
لطلب من هرب من بنى اسرايل وقتل فرعونها . وكان eel‏ فى 
البحر الى اورشليم فظفر ببا Spo‏ اخرى واسر صدقيا وقتل أبنهه | fr3za‏ 
يربلى ورحموت وحمله اعمى موثقا بالسلاسل الى بابل وذلك 
τὸ‏ عقوبة من الله له لفعله بارميا النبى ما فعل من ALU‏ فى جب 
الحماة ووكل بخت ناصر *يوزدان صاحب حبسه باورشليم حتى 
خرب سورها واحرق هيكل الرب الذى بناه سليمن δ‏ ونقض ساير 
منازل اورشليم وحمل كلما وجده من آلة الحديى والنحاس والكسوة 
التى كانت Sed‏ الرب الى بابل . وكان بين User?‏ رييس كبنة 
τς‏ اورشليم وبين يوزدان صاحب حبس بخت κοῦ‏ مودة ودالة . فساله 
ان يبب له slat‏ العتيقة ففعل . فحملبا سمعون ἀπὸ‏ وهو فى 
جملة السبى . فراى بيرا فى طريقه مما يلى المغرب فوضع الاسفار 
فيبا وجعل معبا بارما من نحاس *مملوء pom‏ نار وفيه بخور 
طيب الرايحة وطمر ذلك البير ومضى الى بابل . وتم خراب اورشليم 
20 وصارت قفرا . ما ببا احى ولا" عمارة غير قبر ارميا النبى f. 137 b lS».‏ 
ارميا فى dike‏ مقيما بموضع يسمى سمرين فاوصى ان يدفن 
باورشليم الى رجل يقال له اوريا ففعل ذلك . فلم يعلم بان ذلك 
الموضع قبر ارميا الا sic‏ خراب اورشليم . فاما الانساب . فان 
السريانيون يقولون لم يقف عليبا بعد خراب اورشليم الاخير الا 


' Cod. em! * Cod. عشر‎ rol > Cod. خيرات‎ 
4 Cod. بايوزدنان‎ Bod” سنت‎ 50000: leteo 


5 


10 


15 


20 


KS 66‏ اليجال 
وعشرين di‏ واسم امه مسلمات ابنة حاصون . فعمل Wheel‏ سيية 
بين يدى الرب واحرق اولاده بالنار . Shed‏ 'اثنتا عشر سنة وتوفى . 
وملك بعده ابنه يوسيا وهو ابن bed”‏ وستين سنة واسم امه ارنيا 
بدنت عزريا بن ترفيب ord.‏ صالحا *عيدا anal)‏ عيى لم يعبدون 
OV ach σὲ‏ ال ا πρό eS ne Tcl‏ 
وكسر الاوثان ونشرها بالمناشير وقتل سجادها 3,59 عظام انبيا 
'الكريم بالنار . وطبر اورشليم من الاوساخ . ولم يملك اليبود كيثله 
قبله ولا بعده . فلبث فى ذلك ثلثين سنة وقتله فرعون ملك مصر. 
وملك بعده ابنه ploy”‏ وهو ابن “اثنتين وعشرين سنة . واسم امه 
نطو ايه bey!‏ مر old. ed‏ اي ye‏ اللي ل IE‏ ااا 
من ἐμ‏ ترعون الأعر واؤئقه χρυ δον‏ 
ly‏ . وملك بعده اخوه يواقيم وهو ابن خمس وعشرين سنة . واسم 
امه "زوبيس ابنة يرقويا من بلك الرامة . ففى السنة ANG‏ من ملكه 
اقبل بخت ناصر الى اورشليم فملكبها واستعبدره “ثلث سنين . فمرق 
من بخت κοῦ‏ ولحقته الوفاة ':. فملك من بعده ابذنه "'يواخين وهو 
ابن 'ثمانى عشرة” سنة واسم امه تحسيب ابنة لوتانان من اهل 
اورشليم . فسار بخت κοῦ‏ دفعة اخرى الى اورشليم فاسره بعد “ثلث 
اشبر من ملكه وحمله وقواده واجناد عداكره الى بابل . وقد كان 
بخت ناصر فى كرته الاولى اسر امراة يواقيم وساير نسا عظما 
اورشليم واشرافها وحملبم الى بابل . وامراة ايواقيم يوميض حامل . 
فولدت فى الطريق دانيل . وكان فى السبى ايضا Wile‏ وعازريا 
وميسايل * بنو يوخنن . والسبب فى ذلك السبى ان يواقيم كان قد 


᾿ Cod. اثنا‎ * Cod. عق 6007© 5 ثمنيه‎ * sic in Cod. 
"Cod. يبراحر‎ “ἡ Cod. اثنين‎ ἡ 000. بن‎ "Cod. at 


0 08.. ay} COG: يوناس‎ Cod. bags. Cod. ينوا‎ 


f. 136a 


f, 136b 


f. 135 a 


f. 135b 


£4 المجال‎ US 

الرب . فلما علموه كفت عنبهم السباع وصاروا الى ارض بابل 
والى السامرية . فلما تمت له ست 'اعشرة ἅλω‏ توفى . وملك بعده 
حزقيا ابنه وهو بن mote”‏ وعشرين سنة . وكان اسم امه احى بنت 
لح letlo Jord‏ ودر πα τὰ Marly Oss‏ العيك 
التى كان موسى صنعبا فى برية التيه ὧδ‏ بنى اسرايل طغوا 
بسجودهم لبا . وذفى 5 من ملكة ον τα‏ 
ملك اتور. فسبى من كان بها من بنى اسرايل ونفاهم الى موضع 
خلف بابل تسمى مادى . وفى diw‏ ست وعشرين سار سنخاريب 
ملك الموضع الى مهن Wor‏ وسبى من وجي بها وبقراها سوى 
ارك ثانا تلفكت بضروة sie‏ اليلك ales‏ وليا عرض Bi‏ 
مرض موته حزن وبكى اذ لم يكن wo ad‏ يملك بعده وصلى بين 
يدى الرب Ss‏ رب ارحم عبدك ولا تميته بغير نسل فيبطل الملك 
Ὁ‏ بت sola‏ وترون البركات Sylo Co‏ فى που‏ 
فاستجاب الرب له واعلمه اذه KS‏ زاد فى عمره '"خمس عشرة” Aint‏ 
وعوفى فولى له ابن فسماه منسى . فلما تم من ملكه Cams‏ وعشرين 
ἅλω‏ وقى سر onlay‏ توفى . وملك ابنه بعره وهو ابن Spam Δ᾽‏ 
سنة واسم امه 'حبصيبة . فعمل سييا وتجاوز كفره من كان قبله 
من الملوك الكفرة فى فعل الشر . وابتنى مذبحا للاوثان وذبح لها 
crebs‏ أو رشليي ببالفساد وعبادة الاضاما Lynd! ἘΞ‏ الب فبشروه 
بمنشار خشب من وسط راسه الى بين قدميه من اجل انه كان 
يعاتبه على افعاله الردية . وعمر اشعيا Gyogy‏ ماية وعشرين سنة 
وتنبى وهو ابن تسعين سنة .ثم ندم على ذلك منسى فتاب الى 
ا قر ee‏ الصو الا ee‏ اكفاك الله 
توبته وتوفى + فملك بعده ail‏ امون وهو يوميف ابن “اثنتين 

خمسه عشر .0001 5 لا “Cou:‏ عشر ١ Cod.‏ 


* Cod. dius ® Cod. δὴ 6 Cod. حنصسه‎ 7 Cod. النين‎ 
G. 7 


Io 


15 


20 


2A‏ كتاب المجال 
واخررج الى بيت οδοι μι‏ حدقت به المقاتلة SAS! εν‏ 
فاجلسه يوداع الكاهن على كرسى آل sols‏ ابيه وهو ابن سبع 
Cee‏ خض Ol cee Wee asl‏ شبع ووصاه يوداع الكاهن ان يعمل 
صالحا بين يدى الرب . فلما توفى يوداع الكاهن نسى يواس وصاياه 
ولم يعرف Ge‏ ما خول من كرسى ال داود فاهراق دما زكية . 5 
وتوفى بعد ان She‏ اربعين dies‏ وماك OARS‏ ابنه وكان اسيم ao}‏ 
:يبواعران . Saas‏ كل من aml AS‏ من اهل And‏ واستبقى اولادهرم 
a5)‏ اتبع us?‏ ذلك ناموس الرب . وتوفى بعس ان ملك “تسع 
وعشرين سنة وملك بعده عزريا ail‏ وهو بن عشرين سنة . وكان 
“مجتريا على Sil”‏ . فيرص “من SUS Sel‏ وابطل الله πο pol‏ 
النبى من النبوة الى ان مات عزريا هذا لانه لم يعاتبه على 
يوثام ابنه بعده وهو بن خمس وعشرين سنة . وكان اسم امه 
يرسا fords = bods Cw‏ ضالصاء. وخانا) موه ew Asn‏ عشرة شبك δ᾿.‏ 


8 


6:4 وملك بعده ay!‏ اخاز وهو ابن عشرين سنة . وكان اسم dol‏ 
es ee νου,‏ 
الله عليه وقصدره تغلب بن قردك ملك اتور فحاصره . فكتب اخاز 
oly lane a} dent‏ اؤرشلييز: }3 crested!‏ : وسيل WAS‏ كان ف 
هيكل الله من ذهب وفضة الى pail‏ بلاد تغلب .59“ عصره سبى 20 
بنى اسرايل فاحدروا الى بابل . وبعث “ملك اتور قوما من اهل 
ا ب ee) τ‏ ل رود رادا امير ل بعري 
BL‏ الييم ياوريا ἀνθ el‏ بنى اسرايل حتى علميم ناموس 


١ Cod. نبراعران‎ 2 Cod. تسعه‎ 5 Cod. يوخانيان‎ 
* Cod. متجريا‎ 5 Cod. الكبنوه‎ ° Cod. منجل‎ 
” Cod. تجريه‎ 5 Cod. يوحام‎ ”* Cod. واللاتان‎ 


NG الم ا‎ HOG... بور‎ 2 Cod. (yl 


[1518 


£V τς 

داود وصار فى فرقتين . وفى الخامسة من سنيه سار 'سيساق ملك 
مصر الى اورشليم فاحتوى على جميع ما كان فى خزاين بيت 
الرب وخزاين داود وسليمن من آنية الذهب والفضة وقوى بذلك 
على امره . وقال لليبود ليس هنذا من اكتسابكم . وانما هو مما 
اخرجه اباوكم من poo‏ وقت هربهم : وتوفى رحبعم بن سليمن 
كافرا : بعد ان ملك سبع “عشرة ἅλω‏ : وملك بعده *ابيا ابنه بن 
عشرين سنة : فخبل اورشليم ودمر عليبا وكانت امه معكا ابنة 
ابيسالوم تزين }4 افعاله . فتوفى بعس ثلث سنين وملك اسا : فعمل 
صالحا وبطل عبادة الكواكب والاصنام والزنا من اورشليم. ونفى امه 
عن ملكه لانها زنت وبنت مذبحا للاوثان : وقصده “ازاراح ملك 
البند فيزمه اسا وملك اربعين سنة ثم توفى : فملك بعده ابنه 
glad . blige!‏ بسيرة ابيه فى الصلالم واحب اهل بيت اخاب . 
وصارت له معبم شركة : فابتنى مراكبا : ووجه بها الى My‏ *اوفير 
يحمل الذهب من Whe‏ : فغرق الله مراكبه وغضب عليه وامه 
سيم بنت عوريا بنت شالوم : ولما توفى ملك ابنه يورام وهو ابن 
اس κυ Ses‏ الف AN eee ey es Os‏ 
poss‏ ابن اخت اخاب . وتوفى كافرا . فملك بعده اخاز وهو ابن 
عشرين din‏ فكان كافرا عاثيا . فاسلمه الرب الى اعدايه فقتلوه 
din uzy‏ من aol Sips. athe‏ اليبا الملك فقتلت اولاد الملوك 
لتبيىد به ملك آل داود. فلم يسلم Ge‏ الا يواس فان “يوشبع بنت 
يورام ابن ”يبوشافاط اخفته . واكثرت فى اورشليم الزنا والكفر . فتوفيت 
بعد سبع سنين ففكر اهل اورشليم فيمن يملكوه وعلمت "يوداع 
بذلك فلم يقع اختيارهم الا على يواس الذى اخفته plage”‏ . فطلب 
ازاذاخ ΠΟ ΤῸΝ > Cod. cy! * Cod.‏ مساق Cod.‏ 
passim‏ يوراع CoG.‏ فرشافاط .7000 يوشيع Cod:‏ > تي 700 


Io 


15 


20 


Io 


Gee £1‏ بطل 
ls‏ نجاف اللذان وجه bey‏ النمرود الى بلعام الكاهن لما بلغه 
تعاطيه النجوم فابتنى هناك هنا المفبح للشيس δὼ‏ بحجارة . 
فابتنى هناك سليمن مدينة سماها مدينة الشمس . ثم ابتنى ارواد 
التى داخل البحر وعلى pol‏ سليمن وكثر مادحوه لحكمته . وصارت 
اليه ملكة سبا وانقادت ἀρ‏ . وساعدره على امره حيرام ملك صور. 
واخلص محبته وقى كان صديقا لداود قبله . وكان ملكه فبل 
شلك ald‏ وتيك إلى الشر ملك Creede amily. το‏ الف "αἰ‏ 
كما قدمنا القول فيه فافسدن عقله لما افرظ فى “محبتبن وتمكن 
من البزو به وازلاته عن عبادة الله قفرم للاوثان وسجى لها من 
دون الرب : وتوفى بعد ان ملك اربعين سنة حنيفا كافرا τ‏ ثم ان 
حيرام ملك صور طغى ونسى “بشريته وكفر بالله وادعى بالربوبية : 
ونال انى nile‏ فى قلب البعار Sold. I) Gaal‏ خيره رقت 
pol‏ فصار اليه حتى ak‏ . وفى اخبار العبرانين يا بنى اقليمس 
ان فى ايام حيرام هذا ظبر صبغ μόν!‏ وذلك [ان] راعيا وغنمه على 


شاطى البحر . فراى كلبا له قد قض على شى خرج من البحر 15 


20 


بفمه Wools.‏ فمه من دمه. فنظر الى دم لم *ير مثله . فاخف صوفا 
ιν νυν‏ عيفر اا Scarred‏ عل راسي 
فكان له بريق كبريق الشمس او glad‏ النار: fled‏ خبره حيرام . 
فاحضره وكثر تعجبه من حسن صبغه . فجمع صباغى مملكته 
alte 2.‏ اع (cm WS‏ ظغر Gary‏ هنبا زمالم ‏ بزايه 
الفرفير . فصنع له Lory‏ الثياب فسر بذلك سرورا عظيما . وانت يا 
بنى وجميع اليونانين يخالفون العبرانين فى هذا الحديث . وملك 
بعد سليمن #رحبعم aul‏ . فطمث الارض بسجود الاوثان وكثرة الزنا 


اط 


1112 


' Cod. صديقا‎ * Cod. محبتبم‎ *. Cod. bps pil pry 
+ (αν برق‎ 5 Cod. يوربعر‎ 1 


1.120 


f. 131a 


$0 سال‎ i 

الرابع من الابتدا . ثم تولى تدبيرهم بعده ما بين المعروف 'يبيين 
عشرين سنة οὐ.‏ تولت ذلك دبورا وبراق اربعين سنة . ثم تغلبت 
الماديون علييم واستعبدروهم سبع سنين ثم تخلصبم الله على يد 
جدعون . فتوالى جدعون تدبيرهم اربعين سنة . ثم ابنه ἐπε"‏ اث 
سنين . ثم يوفع بن فرعا عشرين سنة .ثم بنت الجلعذى اثنين 
وعشرين سنة . ثم قبر اهل عمون بنى اسرايل فاستعبروهم silos?‏ 
عشرة” سنة . ثم تخلصبم الله على يدى *يفتام الذابح ابنته "فقرب 
alll Us Oe‏ ف از سنك ued. iret‏ من sony‏ الون ين 
'ازبلون “عشر سنين .ثم *يفدون "ثمانى سنين . ثم حارب الافلشتانيون 
بنى اسرايل فقبروهم واستعبدوهم اربعين سنة ἡ‏ فتخلصوم الله 
على يدى شمشون . فدبرهم عشرين Ai‏ وبقيوا بعده اثنا عشر سنة 
بغير مدبر :. ثم نبض لسياستبم عالى الكاهن فدبرهم اربعين سنة . 
ثم اسموايل اثنين وعشرين سنة . وفى عصره عصت " gig‏ اسرايل الله 
وملكوا عليبم شاول . وهو اول ملك فى بنى اسرايل . فدبرهم اربعين 
سنة . ونبغ فى ايام شاول غولياث الجبار فاجلى بنى اسرايل وقتل 
شان ثم ارسل الله عليه ذاوة النبى فقثله وعلى شاول EAM‏ 
فقتلوه لات شاول ترك الاستغاثة بالله δια‏ بالشياطين . وملك 
داود بن cowl‏ بنى اسرايل اربعين سنة . ثم ملكيم من بعده 
سليمن . فصنع عجايبا كثيرة . منبا توجيبه الى مدينة “اوفير فاستخرج 
الذهب من le‏ . فاقامت المراكب تحمل من جبالها الذهب 
ستة وثلثين γὼ‏ وبنى مدينة تدمر من داخل البرارى . وعمل فيها 
اشيا مغربة كثيرة . فلما اجتاز سليمن بسبد وهو مبتنى ابتناه قوردى 


* Cod. بعر‎ 6 ὁ! اشمالخ‎ 5 Cod. ثمنيه عشر‎ 
* Cod. ened * Cod. ly pis ° Cod. Qyedyy! 
7 Cod. عشره‎ 5 Cod. يغرون‎ * Cod. ἄμα) 


اوقير Cod.‏ 2 عليه Margin‏ ,عليبمر Lead 21 Cod.‏ ال 


1 


15 


20 


5 كاب Nee‏ 
ولد wily lio‏ كان لسليمان ستماية حرة واربع ماية سرية . فلم 
يرزق من واحدة 'منبن ولدا' . لان الله جل اسمه شا الا يخلط زرع 
129b‏ ؟ كنعان بزرع الشعب المختار الذى dio‏ تجسد يسوع المسيح . وساير 
نسا سليمان من ولد كنعان . واما خبر موسى نبى الله فان «θοῦ‏ 

المضمنة اخبار بنى اسرايل تخبر ان لاوى لما دخل مع ابيه 5 
يعقوب الى wo poo‏ له ببا aul‏ عمران ابو موسى . فلما Ne‏ موسى 
“قزف به من امه فى نيل مصر ΛΑ‏ به من الغرق سفيرا *ابنة 
فرعون ملك مصر وربته فى منزل Lael‏ + فلما كبر وتم له اربعين 
OS anv‏ قاسوم المصرى ريس سيفا فرعون . وهرب الى رعوايل الى 
كاهن مدين خوفا من فرعون وذلك ان سفيرا توفيت قبل ذلك . 10 
ولو كانت باقية لما خاف موسى من فرعون . فتزوج موسى صفورا 
بنت *يثيرون كاهن مدين . وولى له ابنان وهما جرسون والعازر فى 
وقت ولادة يوشع بن نون . وكان عمر موسى اثنين وخمسين سنة . 
ولما تمت له ثمانين سنة كلمه الله من العليقة فتللجلج سانه 
من ἅμ)‏ الله وكان يقول يا رب فى الوقت GM!‏ كلمت عبدك 15 
1.2 تلجلع لسانه . وكان جميع سنيه ماية وعشرين سنة . اقام prod‏ 
اربعين وبمدين اربعين . ودبر بنى اسرايل اربعين سنة فى البرية . 
فلما توفى دبرهم يوشع بن نون dole‏ وثلثين سنة . ثم دبرهم 
كوسان المنافق بعده giles”‏ سنين . ثم اتاسايل بن قيناز اخو 
كولاب اربعين سنة οὐ.‏ استعبى *الموابيون بنى اسرايل giles?‏ عشرة” 20 
dw‏ . ثم تبيا خلاصبم من يده . فتولى تربيرهم *اهود بن 'جارا 


ثمانين سنة . وفى سنة ست وعشرين من ملك sgl?‏ هذا تم "الالف 


" Cod. ولق‎ Jeo τ Cod.-csa5 3 Cod. Cw! passim 
+ Cod. ثيروت‎ * Cod. Agios 6 Cod. الموابون‎ 


lod. ننه عشر‎ τὰ اهور‎ ١ 5١ Cod. جانا‎ 215 Cod: can! 


f. 128b 


f. 129 a 


كتاب المجال ἄχ‏ 
واسحق ١‏ تخلط بنا زرع كنعان . فلم يقبل منه . واولدها عير 'وانن 
Sets‏ . وزوج يبوذا ابنه عير من pol‏ بنت قيدر بن لاوى . فكان عير 
يفعل فعل اهل سدوم فعاقبه الله فى فعله. فقتله الله “استجاب 
دعا يعقوب فلم يخلط زرع كنعان بزرعه . ثم تنكرت ثامر هذه 
وجلست bag‏ الطريق فغشيها يبوذا وهو ا يعلم انها كنته . فحبلت 
sic‏ وولدت فارص 202 . وفى ذلك الوقت سار يعقوب وولده الى 


مصر واقام MS‏ يوسف سبيع عشرة” سنة . فلما gd‏ عمره ews’ dle‏ 


واربعين سنة توفى . ولهوسف يوميف “ست وخمسين ἅλω‏ . فحنطه اطبا 
فرعون الحكما . ومن بعد ذلك نقل يوسف جسده فالحقه باجساد 
ابيه وجده ابرهيم. allo‏ فارص بن Ibo‏ حصرون Nolo‏ حصرون ارم 
واولك ارم عاميناذاب وعاميناذاب wel‏ “"نحسون فكان هذا احيل ولد 
لت وا ازا هو ارو الخازو بن ارون dere CAS‏ فاولدها 
فنحاس الكاهن الذى بصلوته ارتفع عن الامة الموت والذى فعله 
ao‏ ا أن 7 Sgt SHI? Ξε πο‏ فى ἡ ST‏ 
ومن نحسون صار فيبم الملك . فانظر يا بنى اقليمس كيف من 
بوذا طارت الكبنوت والملك فى بنى اسرايل . فاولن نحسون"” Legh”‏ 
ας‏ ب يي لي الا ا ل ييا κὰν‏ الت ص الي 
الموابية وفيبا كان الملك لانبا من نسل الملوك . وهى من ولد 
Gums colo. bo!‏ الله “لوطا لوطية ابثيه ‏ ولك الحقة Ng. Wyle SURI‏ 
ارخص فعله الحسن بمعاونته ابرهيم عمه فى الغربة وقبوله الملايكة 
bol‏ . بل جعل الملك فى راعوث التى من نسله حتى صار تجسد 
سيدا πότοι‏ .من نسل اترفيم . قرى: زوجة سليين بن ذاود البى 


7000 pls > Cod. افتجاب‎ 5 Cod. سبعه عشر‎ 
= Cod, وسبعه‎ © Cod. سبد‎ ° Cod. يحسون‎ 0 
” Cod. الكبنوه‎ 5 Cod. لناعر‎ * Cod. ناعر‎ 


Ὁ Cod. wetly passim ™COd. Joa) 


Io 


15 


20 


Nes كات‎ ἊΣ 

2 كانت ἀν‏ العينين والثانية ἄς‏ الوسه يلك الحينيث 
وكان وجه الاولة مغطى ايلا ينظر أبنو اسرايل الى حسنه والاخرة 
مكشوفة الوجه منيرة ببية الخلقة جميلة فالجارية السمجة العينين 
صاحبة يعقوب هى مثال الامة التى كانت فى ايامه وكان يروسها 
وكان فى عصره انبيا وقدريسين واطبار. وكانت الخطية فيبم قليلة . 5 
والعجوز الفانية التى حصل موسى عليها هى dol‏ بنى اسرايل الآى 
dole cab‏ الاصنام وتركت عبادة الله . والجارية التى وجبها 
مغطى حتى لم يتبيا لبنى اسرايل النظر اليبا هى القبيلة التى 
كانت مقيية على الجبل المقدس الذى لي" تغلطت gine‏ اسرايل 
ولا نظرت اليبم ولو كانوا نظروا اليبا لعملوا مثّل اعمالها الحسنة . TO‏ 
والجارية الاخيرة الببية فى" CAS gt LoS‏ سين πων lle‏ 
arcs‏ بلاهوته . فانار قلوبنا بقدسه Ὁ‏ ولما اتت ليعقوب “تسع وستون 

2 16 سنة Wo‏ له روبيل . ثم تلاه اخوته Ce!‏ اخرجبم الله من ظبر 
يعقوب وهم سمعون ولاوى ويهوذا جد مريم وايساخر وزابلون 
ويوسف وبنيامين ابنا راحيل الجميلة وجاد واشير ابنا Wy‏ . ودان 15 
ونفثالى ابنا Wy‏ جارية راحيل org.‏ تغرب يعقوب بسنين رجع 
الى ابيه Gael‏ . وعاش بعد ذلك تمام احدرى peg‏ سنة من 
حياة لاوى . ولما اتت له ماية وعشرين di‏ توفى ابوه gal‏ 
وبعد ذلك SIL"‏ وعشرين سنة سار من حران الى الارض المرتفعة 
وكان *يباع يوسف فى حياة اسحى وكان مشاركا ليعقوب فى 20 
jm‏ . وبعد بيع يوسف توفى اسحق ودفنوه οἷ!‏ يعقوب وعيسوا 
الى جانب قبر ابيه ابرهيم . وبعد تسع سنين توفيت رفقة ودفنت 
ὦ‏ من قبر ابرهيم . “وتزوج يبوذا هوشاع الكنعانية فحزن يعقوب 
لزلك *من اجل* انها ليست من بنى اسرايل وقال له باله ابرهيم 


* Cod. بنوا‎ * Cod. تسعه‎ * Cod. athy 
= Coa. ex 5 Cod. واجاز‎ ® Cod. Jeo 


f. 126b 


f, 1274 


كتاب المجال 5١‏ 
وامر هذه }99 يا ابنى اقليمس غير مشكل على اهل المعرفة انها 
نبوة على مجى سيدنا المسيح ‏ وان السلم الذى oly‏ يعقوب كان 
رسما للصلبوت والملايكة A‏ من السما بالبشارة الى زكريا ومريم 
والمجوس والرعاة . ومكان جلوس الرب فى اعلى السلم مثل لنزول 
ا te med σέ‏ لازنا τ τον‏ رام Sige‏ 
مثالا للكنيسة التى فسرها بيت الله . والاحجار مثال للمذبح . ومسحها 
بالزيت “تماسح اللاهوت بالناسوت . والنذر الذى نذره من phe‏ ماله 
مثال القرابين . وسار يعقوب من موضع الرويا حتى slo‏ الى My‏ 
alle‏ لابان . فراى بير ما وعليها ثلث قطعان من الغنم ربضا وعلى 
المي سي متي el, los‏ برت ails esas le‏ ناك 
مع الغنم. فدنى يعقوب من البير واقتلع الحجر عن فم البير وسقى 
الغنم التى كانت مع راحيل . ثم استدنى راحيل فقبلها τ‏ وكان 
كشف يعقوب للبير مثالا للمعمودية التى كانت مغطاة من قدريم 
الدهر وكشفت فى τ opel‏ وكانت التى يعطيهبا الكاهن لمعموديه 
συλ"‏ ال و اضر ور Ned‏ ولحل ايا لل لي الها 
يقدم يعقوب على تقبيل راحيل الا بعد كشفه البير وسقيه غنمها 
منبا . وكذلك اقول انا انه لا يجوز فى ناموس المسيح Ba‏ من 
الناس الدخول الى الكنيسة الا بعد معموديته AY‏ ان اعتمس صار 
من خرفان المسيح . وقال موسى النبى فى كتابه ان يعقوب عمل 
مع Ob)‏ خاله سبع سنين براحيل التى احبها يعقوب من بنات 
τσ τοῦ ον cin)‏ , الجيال dete oles‏ هين Mase‏ 
Nis,‏ كانت dad‏ موسى مع اليبود الذين خلصبم الله من 
عبودية فرعون . فانه لم bay‏ من اجلبم الجارية الشابة بل اعطى 
التى عجزت وفنيت + وان الجارية الاولى Coll‏ دفعت الى يعقوب 

التماسح 3 الريا Cod.‏ ' 


10 


15 


20 


10 


15 


20 


$ كان Seng!‏ 
ay!‏ يفطور' ملك البرارى . ولما اتتا لاسحق بن ابرهيم اربعين 
aw‏ سار العازر اجيره فئ طلب dy‏ المسماة كانت Ὁ Gow)‏ 9 
بلغ ابرهيم ماية وسبعين سنة توفى . فدفنه ابناه اسمعيل واسحق 
الى جانب زوجته سارة . ولما اتى لاسحق ستون سنة حبلت امراته 
ake ts,‏ سو لل ارما Δ‏ ص ال ihe‏ 
فبارك وصلى عليها τ‏ وقال لبا ان الله قس صور فى بطنك ذكرين 
يكونا ريسين على امةين عظيمتين . والكبير منيم يكون تحت الصغير . 
وكل واحد منبما يكون aed ἰδὲς‏ والاكبر يعبد رجلا من نسل 
Lily po!‏ خادم ey! SUN‏ الذى اتفعن ἀν] τ‏ الاله الس ”ورعلو 
على قضيب اللعنة من اجل من عصهه . ولما مضت من usw‏ 
Gow!‏ ستون din‏ ابتنى مدينة سماها ايل . وفى “اربع وستين من 
سنيه بنيت ايريحا على wy‏ سبعة ملوك ملك الحيثانين وملك 
الامورانين وملك اليبوساذين Mog‏ الكنعانين وملك الجرجسانين 
وملك اليوانين وملك الجريانين . وابتنى كل واحى منبم لبا سورا 
+ واما القرية التى poo (cri‏ فابتناها ملك القبط واول من 
عدر انها eel ll‏ .وكانت: Mile, miss Acie ee‏ 
وثلثين diw‏ من سنى اسحق وهى من سنى يعقوب سبع وسبعين 
aun‏ بارك الله على يعقوب وقبل بركات اسحق وبركة عيسوا اخيه 
بالخداع . وسار الى ارض المشرق . فبينما هو ساير اذ اخذه وسن 
النوم فبيا تحت duly‏ سبعة احجرا ونام ale‏ فراى فى منامه سلما 
من تار اغلاة فى اليا وابفله فى الارض ages.‏ ملايكة تتحدر 
منه وتصعى وراى الرب جالسا فى اعلاه . فلما استيقظ قال لست اشك 
ان هنا المكان بيت الله Js.‏ الاحجار التى تحت راسه فبناها 
مذبحا ودهنها بزيت ونذر هناك ان يعشر جميع ماله قربانا لله . :. 


' Cod. يعطور‎ Cw! * Cod. ويعلوا‎ * Cod. اربعه‎ 


15} 


is 


126a 


f. 124 Ὁ 


1 252 


كتاب المجال ry‏ 
وسمعوا كلامه عظموه وبجلوه وسالوه ان يسير معبم الى بلدانهم. 
فاعلمبم انه KS Ν‏ له ان يبرح من مكانه الذى أمره الله بالمقام 
فيه . فاتفق رايبم على ان تبنى له مدينة من اموالبم ويملكوه اياها 
فبنوا له duro‏ القدس وسلموها اليه . فسماها ملكيسداق اورشليم :. 
ثم ان معوالون ملك التيمن صار الى ملكيسداق لما اتصل به 
خبره واهدى اليه هدايا شريفة جليلة . واعظمه اما 'راه وسمع كلامه . 
وكان ply‏ “الملوك والامم يعظمونه *ويسمونه اب الملوك Ὁ‏ وقد ظن 
قوم ان ملكيسداق Ν᾽‏ يموت واستشيدوا بقول sols‏ النبى فى زبوره . 
انت الكاهن الى wl‏ كشبه ملكيسداق . ولم يرد sols‏ بقوله هذا 
انه So Ὁ‏ وكيف ذلك وهو بشر. ولاكن: الله شرفه وجعله كاهنه 
ولس aol‏ ذكر" May‏ فى 'التوراة SURE.‏ زمر Lee cola‏ زمر 
HY‏ ولم يذكره موسى فى ay aS‏ انما نسب UY‏ ولكن 
اعلمنا سام eye Cy Gitano ol bles! τι τ᾿‏ 
بن ارفحشاد بن سام بن نوم . وامه يوزاذق . وفى ماية من سنى 
ابرهيم ملك فى المشرق ملك يسمى كرموس هو الذى بنى شمشاط 
واملورية وقاريم ولموذا . وكان له بن يسمى قاران وثلث بنات اسم 
الواحدة Qe Vo bored‏ هرذيا Spe Vio‏ ليوذا . فسمى هذه المدن 
باسماييم. ولما اتت itil‏ خمسون سنة سار نمرود الى ناحية الجزيرة . 
فبنى نصيبين والرها وحران . وجعل على كل مدينة سورا وسمى 
سور حران باسم حرتيب زوجة سيم كاهن “جبال البها ‏ وصنع 
اهل حران تمثالا على صورة سيم هذا فسجدوا له :. وعشق بفلسمين 
نلقيز امراة نمروذا وهرب نمروذا من بين يدى بفلسمين ومن 
اجل ذلك بكت ot?‏ اسرايل على نمروذا واحرقوا مدينة حران 
غضبا له . ولما توفيت سارة تزوج ابرهيم الجليل امراة تسمى “قنطورا 

[1 Cod. oly! ? Cod. الميلكوك‎ 5 Cod. ويسموه‎ 
* Cod. QheJ! * Cod بنوا‎ “ Cod. منطورا‎ 


το 


15 


20 


Io 


15 


20 


7 


tA‏ كتاب المجال 

فاسم الاخرى نبديف وهى ام سارة . ولذلك استجاب ابرهيم. ان قال 
لملك مصر لما اراد اغتصابه سارة . فقال انها هى اختى . ولما اتت 
لابرهيم 'تسع وتسعين سنة نزل الله الى بيته . ووهب لسارة πον‏ 
ble‏ اتلك له ماية Gime! a) wo din‏ الاين COM)‏ وه الله له من 
كارة all‏ ولها se ol‏ اننا فشر ato‏ اقريط ὑπ pap!‏ 
ل لحن اي اد ee er‏ ور 
المعروف بالجلجلة . وفيه خلق ادم . وفيه نظر ابرهيم الى الشجرة 
الحاملة للحمل الذى Gad‏ به اسحق من الذبح . وفيه وضع جسد 
ادم . وفيه مذبح Gl‏ ونه نر sls‏ اليه aU‏ سافن 
tae‏ نلك Sle ele sl‏ كان اصعاد ابرهيم Gow!‏ على المذبح 
شاك al ite‏ المسيح لسبب Gots‏ ادم وولده . والدايل على 
ذلك حون ee) ee ee‏ الى σον‏ يرل 
ابوكم ابرهيم مشتاقا الى ان ينظر الى ايامى فلما راها فرح 
ly‏ . وكان الخروف الذى oly‏ ابرهيم “معلقا على الشجرة مثالا 
لقتل المسيح tently‏ الماخوذ منا. وصلبه ايضا لان الخروف 
لم يكن بن نعجة فيستحق الذبح .وفى ذلك الموضع راى 
ابرهيم ما كان من خلاص ادم بصلب المسيح . وفى الساعة 
التى ἀπο‏ ابرهيم اسحق على المذبح (Gary!‏ تبنى اورشليم. 
وكان سبب ذلك ان ملكيسداق كاهن الله لما ظبر للناس اتصل 
خبره بملوك الامم فقصدوه من كل ناحية للتبرك <:. وممن قصده 
(αλονοι‏ ل ا ee ee‏ 
alla So‏ ملك عذيم *وتدعيل ملك الرجليات وبرعوا ملك سدوم 
وبريسوع ملك عامور او سمعان ملك الامورانين وسماير ملك صبا 
gins‏ ملك بلع وخيار ملك دمشق ويفطر ملك البرارى . ولما عاين 
يا بنى اقليمس هولا المذوك لملكيسداق ملك السلامة وكاهن الله 

7 Cod. ax > Cod. ine 3 Cod. الجيدر‎ 
* Cod. وارنوج‎ * Cod. ἐν ἜΡΙΝ 


f. 123 b 


f.124a 


f. 1224 


1 122b 


[1238 


كتاب المجال ry‏ 
وقوم يقواون هو لسان النبط . فكل من استعمل شيا من هذه العلوم 
فذنيه عنس الله عظيم . واما العلم COA!‏ تعلمه نمرود من بونيطر 
فان بونيطر بن نوح تعلمه من الله je‏ وجل . لانه حساب النجوم 
والسنين والشبور. واليونانيون يسمون هذا العلم اصطرونوميا . والفرس 
يسمونه اصطرولوجيا . وابتنى نمرود فى المشرق مدنا عظيمة وهى 
حدانيون والراسر وسلق وقطسفيون وروحين ومدن 'ادربيجان وتلاللان 
وغير ذلك مما اصطفاه لنفسه . ولما اتت لتارخح ابى ابرهيم ميتان 
وثلث سنين توفى . ودفنه ابرهيم ولوط فى مدينة حران . وامره ان 
يصير الى الارض المقدسة . فحمل ابرهيم سارة زوجته ولوط بن 
اخيه وصار الى ارض الامورانين . وكان ابرهيم البار اذ ذلك ابن 
خمس وسبعين سنة . ولما اتت له ثمانون سنة حارب الامم وهزمها 
Leyte byl ων τον‏ ول يكز )4 .8 IY. Wy Sol SUS‏ سارة 
especie espe ula ls tec‏ الام اضرم الله يالك را قات 
يجتاز بطور مانوس . فلما بلغ هناك تلقى ملكيسداق كاهن الله :. 
فلما oly‏ ابرهيم سجد له وتبرك dio‏ . وقدم بين يديه خبز سميد 
نقى وشرابا . فبارك ملكيسداق على ابرهيم ودعا له ἢ‏ وعنى ذلك امر 
الله ملكيسداق ان يقللم اظفاره . وقدس ملكيسداق قربانا من الخبز 
السميى والشراب . وقرب ابرهيم منه وادى ابرهيم الى ملكيسداق عشر 
alle‏ + + تير GI‏ الله تقدس".ابتهاوة Cpl‏ أبرهيور Sg ASG‏ اله . 
ان اخرتك تكون عظيمة عندى Slo.‏ قى OLS‏ تبريك ملكيسداق 
وانت اهل ان تتقرب من يده بقربان الخبز والشراب :. فانى ابارك 
Sly te‏ نيلك 1 ونا Wo Ain Cygiledg Caw? erty Cul‏ لد 
اسمعيل من pole‏ المصرية الامة . وكان فرعون مصر وهبها لسارة 


زوجة ابرهيم وهى اخته من ابيه لا من امه لان تارح تزوج 


ΤΟ 


5 


20 


5 امراتين . احدهما Gee το!‏ - هى ام ابرهيم . فلما ولدته توفيت . 


' Cod. ادريتهان‎ > Cod. diw 


iS a‏ المجال 
الجبار نظر الى نار من السما ونار تطلع من الارض . فلما راها 
نمرود ew‏ لبا واقام فى الموضع الذى راها فيه قوم يخدمونيا 
ويلقون فيها اللبان . ومنف ذلك الوقت سجدت المجوس لنار لما 


راوها طالعة من السما ومن الارض . وصاروا يعبدونها الى اليوم . 


ووجد رجل ريس من المجوس يقال له ساسر بموضع من بلك 5 


'ادربيجان عين ما غزيرة . فنصب عليبا ὦ‏ ابيضا . فكان من استحم 
من تلك العين سجد لذلك الفرس . والمجوس تعظم الفرس ومنيم 
طايفة تسجد له الى اليوم :. وسار نمرود حتى بلغ الى بلى ماريون . 
فلما Jas‏ مدينة الطوراس وجد هناك بونيطر بن نوم الرابع . 


وكان عسكر نمرود على بحيرة ونزلبا Loge‏ ليستحم فيها . فلما *راى 10 


15 


20 


نمرود لبونيطر بن نوم فسجد له . فقال له بونيطر ايه الملك الجبار 
لم تسجى لى . فقال نمرود سجدت لك لقصدك اياى . واقام نمرود 
onic‏ ثلث سنين يعلمه الحكمة والحيل . ثم رحل عنه . فقال لنمرود 
لا تعودن الى ثانية ἰολδ‏ تجاوز نمرود المشرق وضع كتبا اودعها ما 
dole‏ بونيطر بن نوح ἡ‏ فعجب الناس من حكمته . وكان من 
القوم الموكلين بخدمة النار رجل يقال له اردشير. فلما *راى حكمة 
نمرود وجودة بصره فى النجوم + وكانت لنمرود قريحة كاملة 
فحسده على ذلك اردشير وتضرع الى شيطان كان يظبر له عند 
النار ليعلمه حكمة نمرود. فقال له الشيطان انك لا تستطيع ذلك 
حتى UG‏ دين المجوسية وكمالبا مضاجعة الامبات والبنات 
Sly Sy’‏ . فاستجاب له اردشير الى ذلك وفعل ما امره به :. SNS dog’‏ 
استحلت المجوس نكاح الامبات “والاخوات والبنات وعلم الشيطان 
اردشير علم الرجز والافك والفراسة والبحث والاختلاج والسحر وذلك 
من علوم الطاغوت . وتعاطى Sie‏ العلم الكذابون وهم السريانيون 
ومد Cod.‏ * والخوات Cod. Is > Cod.‏ 7 ادرينجان Cod.‏ ' 


f. 121a 


f. 12110 


f. 120a 


f. 120b 


to lel pls 

py‏ ظبر السحر. وكان بدوه ان رجلا موسرا توفى . فصنع ابنه صنما 
من ذهب ونصبه على قبره على رسم اهل عصره . ووكل به رجلا 
شابا يحفظه . فدخل الشيطان فى الصنم فكان يكلم الموكل به عن 
Old‏ الميت وصوته . فخبر الموكل لابن الميت بذلك arg.‏ ايام 
دخل اللصوص الى منزل الميت فاخذوا جميع ما كان لابنه . Mls‏ 
ajo‏ لذلك وبكاوه عنى قبر ابيه . فناداه الشيطان من الصنم بصوت 
كصوت والده . وقال يا IY Qe‏ واتينى بابنك الصغير حتى 
تذبحه لى . فانى ارد اليك جميع ما اخن لك . فاحضر ابنه الى القبر 
وذبحه للشيطان . فلما فعل ذلك دخل الشيطان فيه فعلمه السحر. 
وكشف عن سريره وعلمه الرجز 'والافك . ومنق ذاك قرب الناس 
للشياطين اولادهم . وفى تمام ماية سنة من حياة ناحور نظر الله 
dow! je‏ الى طغيان الناس وذبحهم اولادهم للشياطين وسجودهم 
ee νὰ Ὁ cle ire ean‏ ا Gisele mle by ΡΠ‏ 
الاصنام والذين كانوا يخدمونها . فطمرتبا فى الارض واسفت عليها 
تلالا عظاما وروابى شامخة فبى تحتبها الى اليوم . فزعم قوم لذلك 
ان فى زمان تارم كان طوفان ريح :. وقالت علما wi!‏ ان هذه 
JWI‏ حدثت فى ايام الطوفان . وقى ابطلت لان She‏ الاصنام 
كانت بعى طوفان الما ولم يرسل الطوفان yale‏ على عبادة الاصنام. 
وانما فعل ذلك لما كان على الارض من الفساد فى ولى قايين . 
والملاهى التى احدثوها . ولم يكن الناس يسكنون هذه الارض الوعرة 
الوحشة ولكن لما لم يستاهل ULI‏ مجاورة الفردوس طرحوا اليبا . ثم 
اخرجوا من السفينة الى هذه الارض فتفرقوا فى اقطارها . وقد ابطل 
من زعم ان هذه التلال المرتفعة لم تزل فى الارض . لانبا تكونت 
ire‏ وقت غضب الله لعبادة الاوثان . فصار اعلاها اسفلبا وليس فى 
الارض تل الا وتحته شيطان ظبر مع صنم :. وفى ايام نمرود 

1 Cod. والفاك‎ 


IO 


20 


25 


τὸ 


15 


20 


25 


5 كتاب المجال 

فرنفس . فملكبم ثمان وستين سنة . وفى ايامه ايضا تملك على مدينة 
سبا ملك وضم الى مملكته مدينتين 'اوفير Laos”‏ واسمه *فرعون . 
Ls‏ 'اوفير بحجارة OY Gril‏ حجارة جبالبا ذهب ابريز. ومن 
بعده ملك حوليا ملك يقال له حيول . فبناها وشيدها وصارت سبا 
بعد موت “فرعون يملكبا النسا الى وقت سليمن بن داود . ولما SI‏ 
له ماتان وتسع وثلثون سنة توفى . فدفنه سروج ابنه وناحور فى 
القرية المسماة باوعنان التى بناها اروع لنفسه . ولما اتت لسروج 
ثلثون سنة ولى له ابنه ناحور. وفى ايام سروج عبدت الاوثان 
وسجى لبا من دون الله وكان الناس يوميف متفرقين فى الارض . 
ليس منهم معلم ولا واضع ناموس ولا هادى الى طريق حققى ولا 
سبيل هدى . قفطغوا وتمردوا وصاروا شيعا :. فمنيم من كان يعبد 
الشمس والقمر . ومنبم من كان يعبى السما . ومنيم من كان يعبد 
الاصنام . ومنيم من يعبى الكواكب . ومنيم من كان يعبى الارض . 
ومنبم من كان يعبى الحيوان . ومنبم من كان يعبد الاشجار. 
ومنبم من كان يعبى الامياه والريام وغير ذلك . لان الشياطين 
اعمت قلوببم وتركتبم فى ظلمة ١‏ نور فيها . ولم يكن منيم احد 
يومن بالبعث والقيامة . وكان احدهم اذا مات صنع اهله صنما على 
شببه ونصبوه على قبره ليلا ينقطع ذكره . وامتلت الارض خطايا 
وكثر lus‏ الاوثان المصنوعة على تماثيل الزكران والاناث . ولما 
اتت لسروج مينان τ Δ τ hae‏ اتركنة اجوز naan‏ 
وابرهيم فى القرية التى بناها سروج وسماها سروج :. وكان ولد 
لناحور تارم لما اتتا عليه *تسع وعشرين tdi‏ وفى ثلث سنين 
من سنى ناحور نظر الله عن ذكره الى الخلق وهم يسجدون 
للاوثان . فارسل عليبم زلازلا اهلكت جميع الاوثان . فلم يرجع عابديها 
عن ضلالتبم وتمادوا فى طغيانبم. وفى سنة ست وعشرين من رياسة 


2000 padg! * Cod. وحولبها‎ > Cod. قربون‎ 4 Cod. تسعه‎ 


f. 119 a 


f. 11gb 


f. 118 a 


f. 118b 


كتاب المجال rr‏ 
الرصانى والكلدانى وهو لسان ادم وكلامه . وان لغة السريانى ملكة 
اللغات واوسعها والالسن LAS‏ منبا تشعبت . وادم فاسم سريانى . ومن 
زعم انه عبرانى فقد كذب . ولن يقف اصحاب اللسان السريانى عن 
شمال الرب بل عن يمينه OY.‏ كتاب السريانى يجر من اليمين 
الى الشمال . وغيره من سير العجم فمن الشمال الى اليمين . وفى 
ايام فالغ ابتنت الامم البرج ببابل . وعليه اختلفت السنتيم وتبلبلت 
وتغرقت . فلتبلبلبم سميت البلدة بابل . وحزن فالغ على ذلك حزنا 
شديدا لما راى sad‏ الشعوب فى اقطار الارض . وتوفى فدفنه Ais)‏ 
اروع وسروج *وناحور فى قرية ابتناها وسماها باسمه . وصارت الارض 
قسما بين ريسين للقبايل . وحلا لكل قبيلة ولسان ملكا ورييسا . فاقاما 
ف نسل Charcot‏ و lb rere,‏ وف ,تسا , سام ادق عت ملكا 
«υἱῷ‏ مملكة بنى τὸς‏ من حدس طور القدس وطور يون SH‏ 
فى sore‏ المشرق الى dles®‏ وجانب الجوف ومن مغطارس الى 
wh‏ الجزيرة τ‏ وكانت مملكة بنى سام من بلس فارس وهو من 
حدود المشرق الى بحر هردسلقس من حدود المغرب . وكانت لم 
ايضا فى وسط الارض سلطنة + ولما اتت لاروع اثنان وثلثون سنة 
No‏ له سروج وكانت مدة حياته ماتين واثنين وثلثين سنة ws‏ وعلى 
راس ماية وثلث وستين سنة من حياة اروع ملك نمرود الجبار 
الارض LIS‏ . وكان Inst!‏ ملكه من بابل .*وهو الذى راى فى }3{ 
dvd,‏ سودا واكليلا pools‏ ساسان ε Ὁ‏ وامره ان Pic‏ له اكليلا 
مثله ورصعه بالجوهر ولبسه . فبو اول من لبس الاكليل من الملوك . 
ولبذا السبب قال من Y‏ علم له ان تاجا نزل عليه من السما. 
وكانت مدة ملكه Rui?‏ وستين سنة " وتوفى فى ايام اروع وتم 
الالف الثالث من ادم. وفى ايامه اقام اهل مصر عليبم ملكا يسمى 


1 Cod. السير‎ > Cod. وناحون‎ * Cod. رحله‎ 
Cod. tes 5 000. تسعة‎ 


Io 


15 


20 


rs‏ كتاب المجال 

اب البشر. وبااجلجلة لانه Sle‏ عن الارض ومرفوض كان من بنيها . 
لان فيه كان راس الثعبان الخبيث الذى اطغى ادم. وسمى ايضا 
لان ال Wl ple‏ لذن اليه مشر Ue‏ قال اما 
الملكيسداق بن مالخ . اعلم انك انت كاهن الله المويد GH‏ 
اختارك من ساير الناس للتشمسة قدامه بين يدى جسد ابينا ادم. 5 
فاقبل انتجاب الرب لك ولا تبرح هذا الموضع الى الابى . ولا تتزوج 
امراة Yo.‏ تحلق لك شعرا. ولا تقلم لك ظفرا. ولا تبرق لك دما. 
ولا تقرب شيا من الحيوان . ولا تبنى بنا God‏ هذا الموضع . ولتكن 
قرابينك بين يدى الرب من الخبز السميد النقى والشراب من عصير 
الكرم . Seog‏ الرب معك الى KSI‏ . وسلم عليه وودعه والتزمه ورجع 10 
الى وطنه sles.‏ يوذادق gles‏ والدى ملكيسداق . *فسالاه عذه فاعلمهما 
انه توفى فى الطريق . وانه تولى opel‏ ودفنه . فحزن ابوه واهله عليه 
عزنا belo. Iva‏ اننا ge) eld‏ سبع ماية ἅλω‏ توفى . وتولى أمره 
ابذه ارفحشد ples ee,‏ ودفنوه . ولما اتت Deed)‏ ثلثون سنة 
ااا bold. ἀν}‏ تم اربع ماية وخمس وسئون ἅλω‏ توفى . وتولى 15 
شالخ رغابر opel‏ . ودفناه فى القرية التى ابتناها ارفحشى المعروفة 
باربلسربت . ولما SSI‏ اشالخ ثلثون سنة اولى غابر. فلما تم اربع ماية 
وثلثون سنة توفى . وتولى opel‏ غابر وفالغ ودفن فى قرية كان شالع 
ابتناها تعرف بسلحديب :. ولما اتت pl‏ ثلثون سنة اولى فالغ . 
bobs‏ تم اربع ماية واربع وثلثون سنة توفى . ودفنه ابنه فالغ واروع 20 
es‏ فى القرية التى ابتناها ple‏ وسماها باسمه . ولما بلغ فالخ 
ماتين وتسع وثلثون سنة اجتمعت القبايل كلبا *بنو سام Alas‏ 


ويافت وصارت الى الارض المرتفعة فوجدت فى المكان المعروف 


f. r16b 


7 a 


prom 1.2117‏ بقعة حسنة . فاقامت بها وكان كلامبرم جميعا سريانيا ويقال 


ΘΑΒΟ 5 0 COU. 6 yeas * Cod, tag‏ ان 


{ὙΠΕΡ 


f. 116a 


كتاب المجال r\‏ 
انبا وصية ادم لشيث وشيث لانوش وانوش القينان وقينان لمبلاليل 
ومبلاايل د لد eka aes τ πρὸ ee‏ ول ملت 
eo‏ واستحلفه الا يقف vel‏ على ما اوصاه به فى Aum‏ ادم. فلما 
oD!‏ وصيته توذفى وهو بن تسع ماية وخمسين سنة فى يوم الاربعا. 
فحنطه سام وجنزه ἀπὸ‏ ساير ولده 064339 . واقاموا عليه المناحة 
اربعين يوما .. ثم دخل سام السفينة سرا فاخرج جسد ادم . وختم 
السفينة بخاتم ابيه . ثم استحضر حام ويافت وقال لبم اعلما ان ابى 
نوح اوصانى ان اسير بعد وفاته الى الارض المرتفعة فادورها الى 
مكان البحر لاقف على حال اشجارها وثمارها وانبارها . وقد عزمت 
عل الك Cutlery?”‏ امرات" ey? Units LOLS Lor Delo‏ ال ولت 
*رجوعى . فقالا له فخف معك رجلا اذ aS‏ عزمت على ذلك . فان 
الارض التى وصفتبها ببا وحش وسباع ضارية . فقال bo‏ ان ملاك الله 
مع اوهو καίουν‏ فرعا ὦ‏ اهوته . وقال. له الرت معك حيث ما 
حللت تي قال ل ان ايان τα‏ عبرل ay‏ اله es!‏ وله 
اطلق sey)‏ ان Yow‏ السفينة . وقى قبلت وصيقه وختمتهبا بخاتمه 
فاياكما ان تدخلاها ولا wel‏ من اولادكما. فضمنا له ذلك τ‏ ثم 
1 الك che‏ دان وال ol‏ فال الما اح ان دقف poy‏ 
ملكيسداق لاسير به فى طريقى . فقالا له هو بين يدك فاذ اشيت 
ان تسير فخذه معك . ثم ان سام دعا ملكيسداق ايلا فاحتمل Aro‏ 
جسد ادم سرا وخرجا . والملاك ساير امامبما حتى بلغيما الموضع فى 
اسرع وقت . فقال لبما انزلاه فبذا وسط الارض . فوضعاه من ايديهما . 
فلما jlo‏ على الارض انفرجت له الارض عن باب . فاحدر الجسد 
اليه ووضعاه فيه . فلما استقر nut!‏ فى موضعه رجعت الارض 
فانطبقت عليه . وسمى الموضع بالجمجمة لان فيه وضعت جمجمة 


روجوعى Cod. is ἘΠ ΘΕ,‏ * لفيا ل 


Io 


15 


20 


KS τ.‏ المجال 
الخطية . فزاد فى لعنه لكنعان فلذلك صاروا اولاده عبيدا وهم الاقباط 
الكوشين والبنى والموسين وساير السودان . وكان حام منافقا محبا 
641 للشبوة النجسة ايام حياته هذا باستبزايه بابيه . وكانت نومة نوح 
ف oe‏ مثالا 'لصلبوت المسيج ورقدته فى القبر ثلثة ايام. كما 

قال فى ذلك ذاود al. gall‏ الرب من λον)‏ كالرول الضاح. من 5 
سكرته . ولما استيقظ نوم من نومة سكره لعن كنعان وجعل نسله 
مستعبدين . وكذلك المسيح لما قام من القبر لعن الشيطان واهلك 
ogo Guill‏ وبددهم فى الامم . وصار aly‏ كناعن nee‏ الى الابيد 
يحملون كاراتهبم على اعناقبم. وكل متدرف يتصرف فى حاجته راكبا . 
وولد كناعن يتصرفون فى امور مواليبم رجالة وقرا ويدعون To Aes‏ 
العبيد ales.‏ نوم بعد خروجه من السفينه ثلثماية وخمسين سنة . 
فلما ان دنت وفاته اجتمع اليه سام وحام ويافت Sliasrdyl9?‏ 855 
soy leas‏ واستعضر Lely‏ بكره قوضاه سرا؛ وقال. له .اذا gag Cue UI‏ 

4 فادخل الى تابوت الخلاص واخرج منه جسد ابينا ادم سرا لا يعلم 
بك احى من الناس واصع له جرنا عظيما واجعله فيه nolo”‏ لنفسك 1 
زاد من الخبز والشراب . واحمل الجرن الذى فيه جسى ὕω‏ . وخذ 
معك ملكيسداق بن مالخ . فان الرب 05 اختاره من ساير اولادكم 
يشمس بين يدى ابينا ادم . فاذا بلغت وسط الارض فاوفن الجسد 
هناك وانصب ملكيسداق فى الموضع لخدمة الجسد والتسبيح بين 
يديه . فان ملاك الرب يسير بين يديكم ايرشدركما الى موضم dell‏ 20 
فبو وسط الارض . ومنه تظبر قوة الله .. التامت اربعة اركان الدنيا 
وصارت ركنا واحدا ومنه يكون PSY GOSS!‏ وجميع ولده . كذلك 
كان مكتوبا فى lol‏ التى LAS‏ موسى من يف الوب وكسرها 
وقت غضبه على قومه . واكد نوم على سام فئ قبول الوصية واعلمه 


ὑπ δα: لصبوت‎ 3 Cod. وارفحصام‎ * Cod ses 


1 1 


[τα 


£4 τς Ὁ 

eal AGU τ ρος πὶ آنا‎ τὸν 
dsraero)! slew πὸ Πα dl) Sums (oll. 40] 
فى تمام ستماية سنة من عمر نوح البار. ومضى‎ ξεν وبشروا‎ 
Age) من نيسان يوم واحى فانكشف الما عن الارض . وفى هذا‎ 
خرجح نوم وامراته وبنوه ونسا 'بنيه من السفينة . وكان دئوايم‎ 
الحيوان‎ Reem بخروجبم‎ a 3} BUSY السفينة بافتراق وخروجبم‎ 
والببايم والطاير والبوام الذين كانوا فى السفينة . وابتنى نوح قرية‎ 
وسماها ثمانوا . هى باقية الى اليوم . وعدة من كان فى السفينة‎ 
نفر. وابتنى نوم مذبحا للرب وقرب عليه قربانا‎ ales مع نوم‎ 
اللله قريانه . واعطى‎ eld - SS التفى‎ polly من" الحيوان‎ 
ورفع‎ ٠ HY) يرسل طوفان ما على الارض الى آخر‎ Y انه‎ lage 
اسماوه منبم الرجز من قوس السحب . وابطل منها وتر‎ Caw nit 
قبل الطوفان. كان الناس ينظرون فى السما وتر عضب‎ oy الغضب‎ 
يه‎ ee eee ee ee ل يي‎ πε π΄ 
ON OR OY pt oe rel! Nats Woe lt 
عنى سكره وتكشفت سوته فنظر اليه حام فضحك وهما به . واستحضر‎ lis 
فلما علم سام السبب ويافت فى تكشف ابيبما جزعا‎ . ἀπὸ اخوته ليبزوا‎ 
يريا‎ ed القبقرئ‎ Log Lod le old Lio ists? . لذلك‎ 
اباهما متكشفا . ثم القيا عليه الكسا. فلما استيقظ نوم من نوم سكره‎ 
gabe Jig. :كان من بنيه  فغضب على حام‎ Ley ailpol Spe 
a) Aye Sg NS ood وي ورا واو وتيا لعزن‎ Woke 
ان كنعان اذا بلغ مبلغ الرجال‎ le قى‎ ay. sled والجرم كان‎ 
جدد ما كان قى اندرس من اعمال بنى قايين من الملاهى وغير‎ 
. ذلك . فلما بلغ مبلغ الرجال فعل ذلك كله . فاعلم ذومح بذلك‎ 
شيث فى‎ pty” ان بمثل اعمال كنعان سقط‎ aber) فاغتم له وحزن‎ 


' Cod. بنوه‎ > Cod. ΡῈ) * Cod.  لخلاو‎ 


ΤῸ 


55 


20 


25 


SiS vA‏ المجال 
الرب قايم يدبره . فشملة,.م الندامة وعلتبم الحسرة . ولم يكن ليم 
محيص من البلاك كما منعوا ايضا من الصعود الى الطور 
المقدس . فبلكوا باجمعبم غرقا واختناقا بالمياه الغزيرة والرياح 
العاصفة . كما زمر داود النبى لحالبيم حيث قال is!‏ قلت ΤΥ‏ 
طد:: f‏ البة جميعكم وبنى العلى تدعون . وببذا الرسم العظيم كنتم 'مرسمين 5 
فتورطتم Abst!‏ وخالفتم الوصية وطمثتم ابدانكم ببنات قايين 
الحنيفات فانتم تموتون كميتتبم . وتعذبون مع الاركون الساقط 
من المرتبة السماوية . وارتفعت السفينة من الارض . على ارتفاع 
الامياه وهلك بالطوفان كل ما كان على الارض . وارتفع الما على 
روس الجبال خمسة عشر ذراعا بفراع القدس . وحملت الامواج 10 
السفينة حتى بلغتبا اسافل الفردوس . فتبركت من الفردوس وانطوت 
روس الامواج . فسجدت قدامه . ثم انطفت الامواج راجعة عنه لبلاك 
من بقى على الارض . وطارت السفينة باجنحة الريح فوق الامياه من 
المشرق الى المغرب ومن التيمن الى البحر. كرسم الصليب واقامت 
على الامياه ماية وخمسين يوما وهدت الامواج واخذت فى السكون 15 
عند تمام pct?‏ السابع من say”‏ الطوفان . ووقفت السفينة على 
2 6# الجبال جبال قردى وانفرجت الامياه ary‏ من بعض . ورجع كل 
الى مواضعه . ولم يزل ينقص قليلا قليلا. حتى الشبر العاشر. وكان 
شباط . فنظر الى روس الجبال من السفينة . وفى عشرة من اذار δ‏ 
τυ‏ السفينة من ناحية المشرق وسرم الغراب (يعرف برجوعه خبر 20 
الارض . فلم يرجع اليه وارسل الحمامة فدارت فلم bem ed‏ 
موضعا Cress.‏ عند غروب الشمس . فلما كان ὑπὸ‏ اسبوع ارسل 
نوم حمامة اخرى . فرجعت اليه وفى bed‏ ورقة زيتون . فمن الحمامة 
كون الاير daniel‏ فيثلت الشيامة τ‏ بالوضية LS τ}‏ 


' Cod. موسمين‎ 5 Cod. السيرو‎ * Cod, بدوا‎ 


1111 م 


1112 


vy Sled! كات‎ 

وباركوا وتضرعوا Leos)‏ يا قديسى الاله ومرضيه . السلم على شيث 
راس الابا . السلم على انوش مدبر قومه والحاكم فييم بالعدل . 
السلم على قينان ومبلاليل المدبرين لقومبما بالطبارة . السلم على 
مسوشات ayy‏ ولامك Saree sll spa. aN! ἀπ godly‏ أن 
تشفعوا فى خلاصنا vis‏ منعنا النظر الى ميراثنا بعس هذا الوقت 
الى الابى . ثم انحطوا من الطور وهم يقبلون حجاره ويعانقون 
لجار الات عر سر ارو الي ا ee‏ توس من 
ἰῷ‏ السفينة ews‏ وادخل جسد ادم وجعله فى وسطبها والقرابين 
على صدره . وكان ذلك فى يوم الجمعة فى ἄπ‏ عشر يوما من 
fo!‏ . وثالوا: πὸ ἀρ‏ عن Nim‏ اليوم بكرا ادهل Nenad!‏ 
τ‏ راع as ae‏ وك قاف πῶ et jy‏ 
وجميع الحساس واسكنيم الطبقة الوسطى . وعند غروب الشمس دخل 
نوم وبنوه ونسا 'بنيه . وسكنوا الطبقة العليا وكان التابوت قد بنى 
على صورة الكنيسة التى يمنع فيبا ان يختلط الرجال “بالنسا . وكما 
ان السلامة والمحبة بين الرجال والنسا والكبار منبم والشيبان . 
CIS deol WIS‏ بين ناير “load!‏ والطاير Guleadls‏ اف 
πες ον ee dee‏ 
والنعاج متسالمة فى التابوت . وجميع ما كان فيبا من الحيوان 
النقى “سبع ازواج ومن الحيوان النجس زوجان . ولما حصل نوم واهله 
lah ge Solel‏ انيما وابوات ig)‏ ف للك 
بالمياه وظبر البحر المسجون المسمى Ul”‏ وهو المحيط بالارض 
LIS‏ وانيبعشت الرياح العواصف من كل جانب + فلما راى ذلك 
"بنو شيث اقبلوا الى مكان التابوت وتضرعوا الى esi‏ ليحملهم . 
فلم 'يجببم الى ذلك لان التابوت قفلت وختمت poly‏ الرب . وملاك 
سبعة ὃ Cod. adds lbs» 4 Cod.‏ بانسا Cod.‏ * بنوم Cod.‏ ' 

5 Cod. بالبانوس‎ Cod. وا‎ 7 Cod. يجيديم‎ 


1 


15 


20 


a‏ كاب ال جال 

الموضع GH!‏ فيه يكون خلاصه وخلاص ولده وليرتب حيث يدفن 
rem‏ رجلا من ولده يخدم بين يدى الجسس ويشمس . وليكن 
تقيا كل ايام حياته ويامره الا يسكن Ee‏ ولا يبرق دما ولا يحلق 
له شعرا ولا يقلم له ظفرا ولا يقرب هناك قربان من الحيوان بل 
تكون قرابينه دين يدى الرب من الخبز السميد النقى الابيض . 5 
οὐ Gs) νυ:‏ الى الوقن الذف قاف ادلم 
فيه بامره οὐ.‏ ملاك الرب يسير امام الرجل المختار للتكبن بين 
يدى Bem‏ ادم حتى donde‏ على وسط الارض وحيث ينبغى دفن 
الجسى :. وليومر هنذا المختار ان يكون لباسه من جلود الحيوان 
فانه يكون متفردا كتفردها . فانه كاهن الله الببى . ولما فرغ متوشلخ 10 
من هذه الوصية ودموعه تنحدر من عينيه لما فى قلبه من الحزن 
توفى . وقى استتم تسع ماية وتسع وستين سنة وذلك فى اذار يوم 
الاحى وجنزه ذوم وسام Sidley‏ ونساوهم بالبكا والرنين . فاقاموا عليه 
مناحة اربعين يوما وكفن وحنط وجعل مع الابا فى مغارة الكنوز. 
وتباركوا من ساير “الاجساد التى كانت هناك . ثم احتمل نوم جسى 15 
ادم LY! slots‏ من المغارة وجعلبا فى توابيت مقدسة ἢ‏ واحتمل 
سام من القرابين الذهب وحمل حام poll‏ وحمل *يافت اللبان . 
وفارقوا مغارة الكنوز LL‏ والرنين . وارتفعت οὐ‏ ضجة سمعت من 
الفردوس lant‏ وتلبفا على مفارقة الطور لما علموا انيم تركوه Y‏ 
محالة . ورفعوا روسبم الى الفردوس وتنبدوا وبكوا . وقالوا عليك 20 
السلم ايبا الفردوس المقدس مسكن ابينا ادم وا خسرنا على جوارك 
الذى منعناه ثم على انقلابنا الى Godt‏ الملعونة نقاسى بها LY‏ 
ونعانى فيبا الاعمال . عليك السلم يا مغارة الكنوز منا ومن جميع 
Call Gel A lle οὐ slat‏ البى وميراك UY‏ الاطبار 
الى *“الابى . عليكم السلم ايبا bel LY!‏ الله واصفياه . صلوا علينا 25 

' Cod. وياقت‎ 7 + Cod; ΚΈΡΑΣ 


3 Cod. SSL passim 5000: jo 


f. 110b 


f. 2113 


خاب المجال To‏ 
ان يملا الارض من نسلكم وان يعضركم ويقويكم ويخلصكم من 
الرجز الاتى البايل على هذا الجبل وان يجعل لكم حظا من 
الموهبة التى اعطاها ابانا ادم.وان يجعل البركات فى دياركم 
ويخولكم النبوة والملك “والكبنوت . ثم قال og‏ ايبا المبارك من Ὁ}‏ 
اسمع قولى واعمل بوصيتى . اعلم انى خارج من هذا العالم كما (رهد؟ 
خرج ato‏ الابا الاطبار. وان الرب سيرسل طوفانا يغرق الارض لكثرة 
خطايا الناس . وانت Datong‏ تخلصون . فاذا انا مت bind.‏ جسمى 
coin bo oy‏ بد YY) slim!‏ "افاضين ادقن "فى Slee‏ الكنوز 
iss‏ امراتك وبنيك ونسا بنيك وانزل من هذا الطور واحمل معك 
جسد ابينا ادم والقرابين التى خرجت ἀπὸ‏ من الفردوس وهى 
او ار ور لكان الو اح قط الا وف الى 
جسد ادم كالجسر الذى هو ابدا وسط . واجعل القرابين على صدره 
ls‏ راتت اونوك ذف yc τυ μοι‏ 
حتى يكون teem‏ ابينا لبم سدا يمنع الرجال من التخطى الى 
ال οι πε pees‏ 


ولا شراب الى ان تخرجوا من التابوت . فاذا انصرف ما الطوفان ‏ 211:02 


Pipe ABs ig esa al Cae‏ عه من كرد 


عن الارض وخرجتم من التابوت وسكنتم الارض” فاجتمعوا حينيذ 
على الطعام والشراب ولا تعطلوا الخدمة بين يدى جسد ابينا ادم 
ولا التشمسة بين يدى الله بالتقا والقدس فى التابوت . وحين 
خروجك ic‏ واجعل القرابين التى خرجت من الفردوس فى مشارق 
Urals. Slag! Span 196 τον Co Gayl‏ "وضيتك! :الى -انيك 
سام وامره ان يحمل جسى ابينا ادم ويدفنه فى وسط الارض OG.‏ 


os * Cod. ains's‏ لوت © μον‏ .01 هالكجوة لا 
are here erased.‏ وحين خروجك The words‏ > 


IO 


τς 


20 


eh كاب‎ τς 

من السنين مدة ادم كما ترجم المترجمون السبعون . وقالوا من 
ادم الى الطوفان الفا سنة . ولما عاش لامك سبعة ماية وسبعة 
وسبعين سنة توفى منوشلم ابوه وذلك قبل الظوفان GU‏ ستين . 
ثم توفى لامك بعده . وكانت وفاته فى احدى وعشرين من ايلول 
سنة ثمان وسةين من حياة سام بكر نوم . فكفنه ابنه نوج وحنطه 5 
ووضعه فى مغارة الكنوز :. وحزن عليه اربعين يوما وبقى من جميع 
UY‏ القن بين نوم Ola)‏ وفعيل ينات كارين من )395 يمت 
وولدن بنين جبابرة . وانما توهم من توهم ان الكتاب خبر وقال ان 
الملايكة نزلت الارض واختلطت ببنى البشر ان التازل والمختلط 
ببنى البشر هم ملايكة على الحقيقة . وانما قيل ذلك من اجل بنى 10 
شيث واختلاطبم oly‏ قايين لان الله جل اسمه كان قى سماهم 
لمحبته اياهم LS‏ قلنا فيما تقدم بنى الله وملايكة الله .وقد اخطا 
من ظن ذلك .اذ كان ليس الاختلاط اعنى المباضعة فى prom‏ 
الروحانين ولا من طباعبم ولو كانت فيبم كبى فى PIN‏ لم 
تدع الشياطين sel‏ فى العالم الا افسدته حتى لا يبقى على 5: 
الارض بتول لان الشياطين نجسة تحب الفساد والزنا . فلما لم تقدر 
على ذلك تحول Lab‏ منه زينته wl‏ وحبته الييم. وعاش 
متوشلح تسع ماية وتسعة وستين سنة. فلما حضره الوفاة اجتمع 
اليه لامك ونوم وسام وحام ويافت ونساوهم لانه لم يبقى على 
الجبل المقدس غيرهم . فبارك متوشلخ عليبم ودعا لبم وهو باكى 20 
حزين . وقال لبم انه لم يبقى على هذا الطور من جميع الشعوب 
ان كانت Sully Spe ade‏ اله GY Gem GR LUI‏ اوضر 
وامنا حوا وبارك عليبما حتى امتلت الارض من نسلبما وهو يبارك 
عليكم ويكثركرم وينمى اثماركم ويكون لكم حافظ وراعيا . وله اسل 

١ Cod. ونساهم‎ 


f. 1608 


f. 82 


f. 108 a 


vr المجال‎ SUS 

لا موت فيه :. ثم ان we‏ شيث طرحوا من الطور المقدس الى 
ἅλω...‏ قايين وولده . فلم 'يبقى eyo‏ على الطور غير الثلشة الابا 
τὰ.‏ اام cr aed en! Tank eds merc τ roared τοῦ‏ 
1 ونا WIS‏ بعد ذلك اجاء Cpertell all‏ على اهل اطاعنه , 
aap” Ol epels‏ اضرا الال Ly‏ شبكلا انف του‏ 
اخى متوشلخ . وكشف الله له امر الطوفان الذى هو مزمع على 
ارساله على الارض . واعلمه ان ذلك كاين بعد ماية سنة . وامره ان 
Jay‏ التابوت وهى السفينة لخلاصه وخلاص ولده . وامره ان يقطع 
الخشب من الطور المقدس وان يصنعه فى محلة بنى قايين . وامره 
ان يجعل Web‏ ثلثماية ذراع بذراعه . فى عرض خمسين ذراع . فى 
ارتفاع ثلثين ذراعا بذراعه وليكن عرض راسها من فوق ذراع واحي . 
ويصنعبا ثلث طبقات . لتكن السفلى للحيوان *والوحش والببايم . 
yi eels‏ وما dt Giles ἐπ‏ زلوليه Peet τ‏ 
وان يصنع فيبا خزاينا للما وخزاينا للطعام والعلف . وان يتخذ 
ناقوسا من aoe‏ الاشكرعا طوله AG‏ اذرع وعرضه ذراع . وليكن مرزبته 
arc‏ ناذا Slay‏ تعيل dit‏ تدق به ثلث CBs‏ فى كل يوم . 
واحدة وقت الصبح . والثانية عنى lad!‏ النبار ليحضر الصناع 
ea og ee ee ae ie)‏ نشاف فال Ce πο‏ 
صنيعك . فاعلمبم ان الله باعث طوفان ما ليطبر الارض وانك تصنع 
السفينة لتخلصك وولدك Gad‏ . فقبل نوم وصية الرب فتزوجبا . وولد 
له فى مدة الماية A din‏ بنون ذكورة . شام وحام ويافت . 
وتزوجوا وهم ايضا من بنات προς arate‏ نوح ἰῷ‏ السفينة 
ودخلبا مع من امره الله بادخاله معه فيبا oS τ‏ 'الالف الثانى 

| Cody iss > Cod. يتزوخ‎ > Cod. swish 
* sic in Cod. 5 Cod. للاصراف‎ ° Cod. العم‎ 


TO 


15 


20 


Sene!l شان‎ ay 
ماية واثنان وسبعين سنة حضرته الوفاة . فاجتمع اليه اخنوخ 'ومتوشلخ‎ 
ولامك ونوح . فصلى عليبم ودعا لبم . وقال اما انتم فلن تنزلوا من‎ 
ὧδ. هذا الطور المقدرس . ولكن اولادكم ونسلكم سيطرحون منه‎ 
ASS اولادهم‎ poled ثم قال‎ . ΟἹ blog الله لا يدعبم فيه لتجاوزهم‎ 

ستصيرون الى الارض الترابية المنبتة الشوك والدردار . فمن خرج 5 
منكم من هذا ἀπὸ Gels worded! hd!‏ جسد ابينا ادم وان 
قدر على اخف جميع اجساد الابا فليفعل Holy‏ معه كتب 
الوصايا والقرابين من الذهب والمر واللبان وليضع ذلك مع 
جسد ابينا ادم حيث يامره الله . ثم قال لاخنوخ واما انت يا 
بنى Ws‏ تفارق التشمسة والتسبحة بين يدى جسم ابينا TO . pa)‏ 
rarely‏ بين يدى الله بالتقا والقدس ايام حياتك . وتوفى usr‏ 
AU del!‏ من .وه te OY αν‏ حلت من ged‏ 
ἀν‏ تلنيماية pg?‏ من" ay) Ὄπ. Sham‏ وكفزه 
وجعله فى مغارة الكنوز. وارذل الله بقية 09 شيث لمحبتم 
الخطية . فالتاموا سبعين ومالوا الى النزول . فلما راى ذلك ξ:315:}‏ 5: 
ee 0000000 0 0 τς‏ 
تشمسته بين بدى الرب خمسون di‏ وذلك سنة ثلثماية وخمس 
وستين سنة من عمره وقفا على منزلته عنى الاهه . فدعا بمتوشلخ 
ee‏ عن ييا روي ee ee)‏ 
Lary‏ عليه دكما ليست فيه رحمة :. وانتئم بقية الابا والاجيال 20 
المقدسة فلا تدعون التشمسة بين يدى الرب وكونوا طاهرين اتقيا. 
واعلموا انه لن يولالد فى هذا الطور المقدس بعدركم انسان يكون 
ابا وريسا على قومه nr‏ ولما استتم اخنوخ وصيته هذه τ‏ رفعه 
الله الى ارض الحياة وجعله مقيما حول الفردوس فى WAI‏ الذى 
Cod. hasta‏ ® وستنين .000 * وميشا Cod.‏ ' 


f. 106] 


Γ 107 


كتاب المجال v\‏ 
dp!‏ من الجبل المقدس الى الارض الملعونة ونقلبم من جوار 
الله وملايكته الى جوار الشياطين . فاختاروا الموت على الحياة. وه 6 
ورفضوا الاسم الذى انحلبم الله ay. oll‏ تقدرست اسماوه دعاهم 
بنى الرب كقوله المفضل فى نبوة داود حيث يقول انكم جميعا 
البة “وبنو العلى تدعون . فلما اساتم ونجستم ابدانكم بالحنيفات 
بنات قايين مثلهم تموتون فى الخطية . وحرصوا على اللذات 
oe ee το‏ ذلك ها ول اغضاضة. 
فى hia) oc‏ بكر احير انقرف ردم من 
ولد غيره . “فاحثوا الشيطان علييم وبعثهم وخصبم على كل 
بلية . وكانوا باعماليم فرحين . تسمع لم ضحك بشع كصبيل 
الرماك . وكانت ضجتبم تسمع فى الطور المقدس واجتمع من ولد 
τι cro Jey aul Sut‏ التي علا ركد 
ἐλ‏ ذلك sp‏ . فاغتم غم شديدا واستحضرهم واستحلفيم بدم 
هابيل الزكى الا ينزلون . وذكرهم الايمان التى اخذها علييم 
اباوهم الماضون . وحضر اخنوع الصديق فقال od‏ . اعلموا يا f.ro6a ust‏ 
شيث ان من اطرم وصية الاب وخالف الايمان التى استحلف بها 
وجعلبا ورا ظبره ونزل من هذا الطور المقدس . انه ل" يعود اليه 
ابدا . فلم يلتفتون الى موعظة يرد *ولنواهى اا ونزلوا . فلما 
نظروا الى Oly‏ قايين *وجمالبن “وكشفين ابدانيم بغير حيا “ززذوا 
ببن . فاهلكوا انفسبم .. ولما فعلوا ذلك راموا الرجوع الى الجبل . 
فصارت حجارته نار موقدة. فلم يستطيعوا ذلك . وتشوقت بعرهم 
طايفة اخرى الى Goat!‏ بهم . ولم يعلموا ما كان من امر 
الحجارة . فانحطوا Loyal!‏ وتنجسوا بنجاستهم x‏ ولما COI‏ ليرد تسع 


' Cod. ويدوا‎ > Cod. فاحتوا‎ * Cod. τ» 
* Cod. وجمالبم‎ " Cod. وكشفبم‎ © Code, τ 


10 


15 


20 


1 كتاب المجال 

sob‏ قايين Wo‏ تنزلوا من الطور المقدس . وذكرهم عداوة ما بينم 
لقنل هابيل . واستدنى قينان ابنه مذه . وقال له كن يا بنى لقومك 
واهلك كما كنت انا od‏ ودبرهم بعد وفاتى Ὁ‏ واوصى ابنه مبلاليل 
برعاية شعبه بالتقا والطبارة . ولا يبطل عن التشمسة بين يدى جسد 
ابينا ادم مدة حياته . وتوفى انوش بعد ان Col‏ تسع ماية سنة 5 
وخمس سنين يوم السبت لثلث SLY‏ خلون من تشرين الاول 
.4 يلت وفييين من غير αὐ οὖ τρο‏ قينان . وكان 
بكره . وكفنه وجعله فى مغارة الكنوز. ودبر قينان قومه بالتقا والقدس 
وحفظ وصايا ابيه :. وعاش تسع ماية وعشرين سنة . ومات يوم 
الاربعا لثلث عشر τὸ ald‏ من خزيران . فتولى مبلاليل دفنه TO‏ 
ووضعه فى مغارة الكنوز مع ابايه Liles‏ مبلاليل ثمان ماية سنة 
وخمسة وتسعين din‏ . ولما حضرته الوفاة 'اوصى dog‏ بمثل وصايا من 
تقدمه من ابايه . وقدم يرد ابنه على الشعب .. وكانت وفاته يوم 
se)!‏ لليلتين δ‏ من نيسان فتولاه يرد ووضعه فى المغارة مع 
ابايه :. ولما اتت ليرد خمس ماية سنة he‏ بعض بنى شيث 15 
Zell bles’‏ ونبذوا ايمانيم ورا ظبورهم . وبدا الاول فالاول بنزل 
eel! Cpe‏ المفدس bel Cdl‏ ولك Ὁ‏ وكا gd erred‏ ذلك 

انه تبع للامك الاعمى ابنان يقال لاحدهما توفيل والاخر توبلقين . 
فعملا القيثارات وهى العيدان . والنايات والطبول وساير الملاهى . 
το‏ الشياطين Lleol Gd‏ شجية :. ولم يكن فى بنى 20 
قايين sel ad‏ يامر بمعروف ولا ينبى عن منكر. وكان كل 
واحت pio‏ تفيل بحسب σοφὰ‏ فكادء! “مشتغلين بالملاهى 
والاكل والشرب x x x τοί»‏ فاصطاد الشيطان بنى شيث حتى 
اخلطبم ببنى قايين بتلك الملاهى οὖν‏ كانوا يسمعون اصواتها . 

مشتاغلين Cod.‏ * ووصايا اباهم Cod.‏ > واصا Cod.‏ ' 


fol. 104 


fol. IO: 


[τοῦ a 


14 lene! كاب‎ 

علييم ودعا لبم وبركبم وقال لهم . Gay‏ دم هابيل GSH)‏ ان نزل 
اشن مك من هذا الجيل Goa)‏ ول bel‏ بولق قابين PNG‏ 
فانتم تعلمون عداوة ما بيننا منض قتل هابيل الزكى . ثم ادنى ابنه 
الوش عله ay‏ اله انك سين قومك. قاذا انا مك فالرم العرمة 
بين يدى الرب وبين يدى جسد ابينا ادم المقدرس . واستحلفه بدم 
Sale‏ الزكى ان يحسن تدبير شعبه وان يسوسبم بالتقا والطبارة . 
ولا pty‏ من الخدمة بين يدى جسد ادم :. ومات شيث وهو بن 
تسع ماية واثنا عشر سنة يوم 'الثلث لاربع وعشرين ليلة خلت من 
ا اسل لسر عر Grell coil pel‏ حيط Os polly‏ 
Fae hg oe‏ ابه ور ا ل بول الل وا مادا ch NE‏ اقبي بن 
قومه اربعين يوما. ودبر انوش بعس وفاة ابيه ἀπὸ‏ بالطبارة والتقا 
امتثل ما اوصاه ابوه به فيبم:. ولما عاش انوش ثمان ماية وعشرين 
YS au‏ لامك الاغمى Law Cre‏ قايين القاتول فى الغابة المعروفة 
بنون . وكان السبب فى ذلك ان لامك كان مجتاز على الغابة 
متوكيا على بن له شاب . فسمع حركة فى الغابة وكانت حركة 
قايين OY‏ كان ل" يتبيا له ان يقر فى مكان واحى dic‏ قتل 
ال فظن الدمل إن تلك الشركة aes‏ الوحوضش ‏ طاول من 
الارض حجرا ورمى به :نحو الدركة . فوقع الحجر بين عينئ قايين 
alias‏ . فقال ابنه انا لله CS‏ برميتك Lgl?‏ قايين :: فرفع لامك 
الاعمى كفيه ليسفق ببما اسفا على قتل قايين . فاصابت راس ابنه 
فقتله . ولما اتت لانوش تسع ماية وخمس سنين مرض مرضه GA‏ 
مات فيه . فاجتمع اليه ساير WI‏ وفييم يرد واخنوخح ومتوشلخ 
ا nor‏ سوسم ومبلاليل ونساوهم وبنوهم وبناتهم . فبركبم ودعا 
ليم وصلى عليبم وكد عليبم الايمان بدم هابيل الا تختلطوا 

1 Cod. LAY! Cod. lens 5 Cod. ὕ 99 


Io 


15 


20 


\A‏ كتاب المجال 
وساير اليبود مومنين بذلك . وكانت فيربا اشيا كديرة غير ما بينته 
لك لم يتبيا Yep‏ فى هذا الوقت . ولا wy‏ ان اخبرك بها بعر. 
واكشف لك جميع ما وقفت عليه من السراير Ὁ‏ وكان سبب تسمية 
الله ole‏ شيث بن ادم بنى الله كما يقول الكتاب ما كان اعلنه 
الى شيث من التقا والطبهارة . فخصبم الرب بهذا الاسم . وهو اجل 5 
الاسما لفضلبم عنده . وخوابم ان 'يبدلوا الطغمة من الملايكة التى 
تشيطنت وسقطت من السما + فاقام شيث وشعبه فى اسافل الفردوس 
وحوله على الجبل المقدس مسبحين للرب ومقدرسين لاسمه . فى 
كل سلامة لا يدخلبم الفكر فى شى من امور العالم:. اكثر abet‏ 
التسبيح والتبليل مع الملايكة Les)‏ كانوا يسمعون اصواتيم 10 
بالتسبيح والتبليل فى الفردوس لانه كان مرتفعا فوقيم ثلثين شبرا 
pty » το‏ روم القدس . ولم يكونوا يقاسون شيا من الاعمال البتة Ὁ‏ 
{τ τὰν‏ بقيدون 20 slay!‏ اهار الجر النابة فى اغالى طور 
الفردوس . وكانت تلك الاشجار تطيب ثمارها نسيم الفردوس الذدى 
كان Wh,‏ :. وكان هذا الشعب تقيا قريسا . لم يكن فى Del‏ منبم 15 
غضب ولا حسد ولا محك وتكبر ولا rime‏ . ولا ينطقون لفظا فاحشا 
وكذب ولا نميمة ولا وقيعة ولا يحلفون على GE‏ . ولا باطل . 
وكانت ايمانبم bend‏ بينبم *بزكا دم هابيل النحى © wre lS,‏ 
ان يبكر جميعبم الكبير والصغير والذكر والانثى فيصعدون الى 
اعلى الجبل فيسجدون هناك بين يدى الله ويتبركون من جسد 250 
ادم ابيبم. ثم يرفعون اعينبم الى الفردوس ويسبحون الله ويقرسونه 
وينصرفون الى مواضعبم τ‏ فعاش شيث بن ادم التقى تسع ماية 
واثنا عشر dis‏ ثم مرض مرضه الذى توفى فيه. واجتمع عنده 
f (1‏ أنوش وقينان ومبلاليل ويرد واخنوخ ونساوهم وبنوهم وبناتهم . وصلى 
بذكا Cod.‏ : يدلوا Cod.‏ ' 


f. loza 


f. 102b 


كتاب المجال \Y‏ 
الملايكة لكرامته على الله فحنطه شيث وكفنه وتولى وولده . ووضعه 
فى مشارق الفردوس حيث نام عند خروجه من الفردوس بادنى القرية 
التى بنيت قبل كل بنيان المسماة a‏ فى المسكونة . ولما توفى 
ادم اظلمت الشمس والقمر سبعة ايام وسبع ليال ظلمة صعبة :. 
Jams‏ شيث الصحيفة التى كتب Und‏ وصية ابيه ادم فى مغارة 
الكنوز مع القرابين التى كان ادم ἀπο ἰγλοο‏ من ارض الفردوس . 
وهى الذهب polly‏ واللبان التى اعلم ادم شيث وولده انها ستصير 
الى ملوك ثلثة من المجوس ويصيرون بها الى مخلص العالم 
المولود فى مدينة يقال لبا بيت لحم بلس يرودا ولم يبقى 
ws cro‏ اذه aildg Und Crdotqct!‏ لجل Nb‏ اجتمع اليه ذودعوه . 
وصلى عليبم ودعا لبم بالسلامة Ὁ‏ ثم توفى سنة تسع مية وثلثين 
سنة من حساب 'ابى شيث ::. وهو الابتدا وكان خروج ابينا ادم 
ee‏ الال εν ον‏ قار بوم dee‏ الي لون 
من نيسان . وفى اربع “عشرة ليلة من البلال Ὁ‏ وفى fro‏ هذا اليوم 
اسلم سيدنا coe‏ نفسه فى يى ابيه ::. :. فاتصل الحزن على ادم 
من ولده وولى only‏ مايه واربعين يوما لانه اول ميت مات على 
الارض . وانقسمت الشعوب بين اهل قايين القاتول بعس وفاة ادم . 
فاخف شيث اولاده واولاد اولاده ونساءهم واطلعبم الى الطور الببى 
المقرس . الموضع الذى دفن فيه ادم. وبقى قايين واهله واولاده فى 
اسفل الجبل بالموضع GH‏ قتل فيه هابيل slog Ὁ‏ شيث مدبر اهل 
زمانه بالتقوا والطبارة والقدس + وكان وقوفى يا بنى اقليمس على 
خبر ادم ووصيته هذه من المجوس الذين صاروا الى السيدة 
مارتمريم بالقرابين وقت athe‏ يسوع المسيح الاهنا المخلص . فانا 
وجدنا معبم صحيفة فيبا ذلك كله . فتفردت بالاحتتّفاظ . وكنت 


' Cod. ابو‎ * Cod. عشر‎ 


Io 


15 


20 


5 


ΓΟ 


15 


20 


1\ كتاب المجال 

اجلك يا ادم بالسوط اجلد. من اجلك يا ادم الخل اذوق .من 
اجلك يا ادم يسمر كفاي . من اجلك يا ادم بالحربة اطعن . من 
We!‏ يا ادم للعلا ارعد. من اجلك يا ادم للشمس اظلم. من 
ὦ ἰὼ‏ ادف الصبدور اشقق. نن BU!‏ يا اورم tg?‏ السيا اأركس-” 
من εὐ τω αὐ ee)‏ امن لعللد يا اذم للقبور 
!99 صر ee ee‏ اذم ارضا 
Biol Sayre‏ ومن بعص ثلثة ايام اقيمبا فى القبر انبض الحسد 
(oi!‏ اخذته the‏ واصعده معى بلا افتراق منى واجلسه عن يمين 
لاهوتى . واجعلك الاها كما احببت τ‏ فاحفظ يا gy‏ شيث Liles?‏ 
الله ولا ترخص عندرك كلامى . واعلم انه لا بى للرب من المجى 
الى الارض . وياخذه قوم منافقين ويمدونه على عود الصليب . ويعروه 
من لباسه ويرفعونه بين لصين 4رديين . ويصعد بجوهر ناسوته على 
الصليب . ويقتل ويدذن الجسم الذى ياخن منا ::. ثم يقيمه بعل ANS‏ 
ايام ويطلعه ἀπὸ‏ الى السما :. ويجلسه ἀπὸ‏ عن يمين ١هوته Ὁ‏ )4 
التمجيى والوقار والتسبحة والعظمة والعبادة والسجود والتبليل و[ !الترتيل 
αν‏ وزو σον‏ من 50 تلن (وان وال πα‏ 
والازمان امين :. واعلم يا بنى انه ليس بد من ان يجى طوفان 
يغسل الارض YS‏ من اجل اولاد قايين الرجل الردى KS SH‏ 
اخاك لغيرته على اخته Udo)’‏ . وبعد الطوفان *بسوء بيع كثيرة يكون 
اخر العالم ويتم الحدود وتتكامل الاشيا وتنقطع المدة التى جعلت 
للبرايا . وتاكل النار ما تلحقه بين يدى الرب orig‏ الارض πο‏ 
فكتب شيث هذه الوصية وختمبها بخاتم ابيه ادم (GH‏ كان ano‏ 


من الفردوس وخاتم حوا وخاتمه Ὁ‏ وتوفى ادم فاجتمع لتجنيزه اجناد 


Cod. sisi) 2 Cod. للبريه‎ : Cod. واصايا‎ 


᾿ οὔτ) > Cod. tbo © Cod. νυ 


f. 101 


[ΤΟΙ 


f. 1000 


كتاب المجال \o‏ 
لولدى ان يبخروا بين يدى الرب ابالياسمين . فان فيها يكون “هدوء 
5 فى السما على Prom‏ السماو بين . τσ‏ اعلم يا بنى شيث 
وانصت لكلامى . تيقن ان الله سينزل الى الارض كما قال لى . 
وفبمنى وعرفنى وقت تعزيته اياي بخروجى من الفردوس فانه 
جلت اسماوه كلمنى وقال . فى اخر الزمان يتجسد من جارية بكر 
تسمى مريم κοὐ ming‏ . ويلبس جلدى .0.95.9 كولاد الانسان 
بقوة وتدبير لا يفيمه غيره ومن يطلعه على ذلك ويسعى مع الاولاد 
ذفن النشق والبنات SUVs Guleall ors OL SUS 6d Lod‏ 
ظاهرا . ويمشى على امواج البحر كمشيه على الارض اليابسة . وينتبر 
oly‏ علانية فتنقاد لامره . ويصوت بامواج البحر فتستجيب طايعة 
له :. وبامره يبصرون العميان ويتطبر البرص Bos‏ الاصم ويتكلم 
الاخرس وينبسط الاحدب وينبض المقعدون ويقوم الزمنى فيمشون . 
فييتدى كثير من الطغاة الى الله <:. ويسترشل δῶ"‏ ويطرد 
الشياطين + وكان bend‏ عزانى به الرب ان قال لى . يا ادم لا تحزن . 
تان Mele UI WG. grog Bisley KF GY Creed YI‏ في 
غير هذا الوقت يعن So‏ من Creal‏ = وقال Cd‏ .الوب col Legh‏ 
اخرجك من ارض الفردوس الى الارض المنبتة الشوك والدردار esr‏ 
تسكنها واحنى صلبك . وارعى ركبتيك من الكبر والشيخوخية ::. يا 
تراب الى الموت ابلك وهيك طعاها للنوس الجعله δοῦν‏ 
الدودة . وبعد خمسة ايام ونصف من ايامى اتراوف برحمتى عليك Ὁ‏ 
واليك انزل وفى بيتك اسكن وجسمك البس :. "ومن اجلك”: *يا ادم 
طفلا اكون “من "Met‏ يا ادم فى الاسواق “احبو . من اجلك يا ادم 
اربعين يوما اصوم. من اجلك يا ادم اقبل المعمودية. من اجلك 
يا ادم على الصليب ارفع :. “من اجلك” يا ادم الفرية اقبل. من 


: Cod. باليسمين‎ ١ Cod. هدوا‎ : Cod. الظالون‎ 
* Cod. Kote " Cod. ومنجلك‎ 5 Cod. يادم‎ passim 


7 Cod. منجلك‎ * Cod. احبوا‎ ° Cod. منجلك‎ 71 


10 


15 


20 


10 


15 


20 


١‏ كتاب المجال 

الشياطين وفى تلمك الساعة ساعة عبادتهبم ليس ياذون vo!‏ ولا يفزع 
منيم شى حتّى وقت انصرافيم من عبادتهم . وفى الساعة الثانية 
عبادة الحيتان وما يكون على الما وما فى داخله من الدواب . وفى 
gill sll dale  ةثلاثلا χε‏ اسفل التهوم . وفى هزه dell‏ ليس 
Ghy Ol ved yy‏ .9 الساعة الرابعة تقرس" السرافين PE.‏ 
كنت اسمع ذلك فى هذه الساعة وقت مقامى فى الفردوس قبل 
مخالفتى الوصية . فلما جاوزت الوصية صرت لا اسمع تلك الاصوات 
ولا حركتبم واضطراببم كما كنت اسمع . ولا نظرت الى شى مما 
كنت انظره من القدس قبل الخطية : وفى الساعة anole!‏ عبادة 
الما الذى فوق السما ولقد كنت اسمع والملايكة فى هذه الساعة 
من" اليا الى فىء glad!’‏ اصواتا وضجيجا كضجيج المراكب 
والعجل العظام وتصرع بالامواج وتبيجبا “للتصويت بالتسبحة للرب . 
وفى الساعة الساوسة تضرع السحب الى الله وهى فزعة موتعرة τ‏ 
وفى الساعة السابعة تبدى قوات الارض وتسبح وتنام الامياه وتبدى . 
فلو خطف انسان شيا من الما فى هذه الساعة وخلط فيه الكاهن 
زينا مقدسا ودهن به المرضى والذين لا ينامون الليل لبروا المرضى 
ولنام اصحاب السبر . وفى الساعة الثامنة يخرج العشب من الارض . 
وفى الساعة التاسعة تشمسة الملايكة ودخول الصلوات بين يدى 
الله :: وفى الساعة العاشرة تفتح ابواب السما ويستجاب دعا اولادى 
'المومنين ويعطون ما يسلون من الله عز وجل واحتكاك: اجنحة 
السرافين فبقوة احتكاكها يصيح الديك بالتسبحة للرب . وفى الساعة 
الحادية pre‏ تكون فرحة وببجة على الارض كلها . وذلك ان الشمس 
تدخل الى فردوس الله وتشرق ضياوها فى اقطار الارض . فتضى 
البرايا LAS‏ بوقوع شعاع الشمش Gale‏ . وفى الساعة الثانية عشر ينبغى 

' Cod. العلوا‎ * Cod. للنصوات‎ > Cod. المومين‎ 


f. 99 


f. 10¢ 


كتاب المجال 0 
ويصير به الى وسط الارض ويضعه هناك OW.‏ 'فى" ذلك الموضع 
يكون لى ولجميع ولدى الخلاص . وتكن يا ابنى شيث (GIR?‏ 
مدبرا لشعبك بمخافة الله arly‏ نفسك ' وولدك جميعا وافردهم 
من ولد قاين القاتون τ slg‏ يفال ,ماغات  sulle, Sell‏ 
واسماها وما يسبح الله تقاف انوماء نت اند تدعو الودريك عدت 
حلونا 689( weed dole U6)‏ الطلبة والتضرع Yad‏ . فقد علمنى خالقى 
ذلك وفيمنى اسما جميع حيوان الارض وطير السما واوقفنى الرب 
على suc‏ ساعات الليل shitty‏ وامور الملايكة وقواتبم وكيف هم . 
واعلم 'لى' ان فى الساعة الاولة من shal‏ ارتفاع تسبحة اوالى" 
الى aul! del! (639. aU!‏ تكون ,صلوات ALY‏ ووعاهر . والباعة 
ASI‏ يمسي الطاير: والساعة  Sole dash)‏ الووهانين ‏ والساعة الضامية 
Sole‏ نامر الحيوان.. واسباعة السادسة: Ale‏ الكرزويين) ἜΝ‏ 
gc! dell aclu‏ الى aU!‏ والخروج من عنده . لان فيها 
ترتفع الى الرب صلوات كل حى . وفى الساعة الثامنة عبادة السماوين 
والنورانين . وفى الساعة التاسعة تشمسة ملايكة الله الذين يقومون 
بين يدى الله وكرسى 0159 . والساغة العاشرة للما. ففيبا. ترقرف 
روح القدس وتطلع على ساير الامياه وتنفر الشياطين Yet‏ : 
فلو ل οὐ‏ اروب الفزسن وعلولا لى الحردر الساعة Ὁ‏ لكان الو 
على المياه لما شرب احى ما الا كان هلاكه فيه من الشياطين 
المفسدين :. ولو خطف الما فى تلك الساعة خاطف وخلط معه 
احد كبنة الله زيتا مقدسا ودهن به المرضى والذين بهم الارواح 
الدنسة Sop‏ من اوصاببم. وفى الساعة الحادى عشر تكون بيجة 
لصي ا الا | poe ae‏ صرح a‏ وال مفيون 
بين يدى الله . τ‏ واما ساعات الليل (ad.‏ الساعة الاولى عبادة 


' يكون‎ is inserted at the foot of the page. 


Io 


15 


20 


55 


20 


١5‏ كتاب المجال 

ذلك . فبينما هم يصعدان الجبل اذ دخل الشيطان فى قايين 'وبعمه 
على قتل هابيل . ثم قربا قرابينبما بين يدى الرب . فقبل الله قربان 
هابيل ورفض قربان قايين لان الله جل وعز علم بنية قايين وما 
اجمع عليه من قتل اخيه . فلما (σὺ‏ قايين قبول الرب جل dow!‏ 
قربان هابيل دون قربانه ازداد حسدا لهبابيل وعليه غيظا . فلما نزلا 
من الجبل شد قايين على هابيل فقتله بحجر محدد ::. ولعن الله 
قايين ونزل به حكمه . فلم jy‏ مروعا فزعا ايام حياته :. وقردم الله 
به من الجبل المقدس مع امراته الى الاكسوريا الارض الملعونة 
فسكنا هناك . وحزن ادم وحوا على هابيل *<زنا عظيما ماية ἄμ‏ - 
ودنى ادم من حوا فحبلت وتم الحبل وولدت شيث الرجل الجميل 
الجبار الكامل التام. فكان فى كماله كادم ابيه وخوله الله لما بلغ 
ΡΣ ole ΠΡ sisal I‏ تقار ل مال wig! ΤΡ‏ 
وانوش ws‏ قينان . وقينان Wo‏ مبلاليل . هاولى ولدوا فى حياة PSS‏ - 
نعاش Cry di φῦ τ‏ سبة الى الوقت GH‏ افك لببلاليل 1109 
وخمسة وثلثون سنة . فلما حضر وقت وفاته استحضر شيث وانوش وقينان 
ومبلاليل . وصلى عليبم وبركبم واوصى الى ابنه شيث هذه الوصية 

5 :.وصية اوم ot‏ 
اسمع يا ابنى شيث ما اوصيك به. واحفظه وتفيمه #واوص به WE‏ 
وفاتك ابنك انوش ليوصى May‏ انوش لقينان ويوصى قينان مبلاليل . 
وليعمل ببذه الوصية وتعلمبا ساير اجيالكم جيل بعد جيل وشعب 
بعد شعب . فاول ما اوصيك tay‏ اذ Cool‏ تحنط جسمى بالمر 
والسليخة . وتجعله فى مغارة الكنوز من الجبل المقدس . ولتعلم 
من يعيش من عقبك فى الزمان الذى يكون فيه خروجكم من هذا 
الجبل المقدس المحيط بالفردوس .على ان. يحمل جسمى معه 
The side of folio 98 is cut along its whole length.‏ 


' Cod. atays Cod: cya Codi eosis 


f. 98 


f. 97a 


f. 97 b 


كتاب المجال ١١‏ 
ذلك جميعا وقدسه فى داخل المغارة . وكان قى جعلبها بيت صلاته . 
وكان الزهب الذى ALS‏ من كر الفردووس تماثيلا عددها LS‏ 
وسبعين تمثالا . فدفع ذلك مع poll‏ واللبان الى حوا. وقال هذا لك 


صداق فاحتفظى به . ولا we‏ من ان يبدى جميعا الى بن الله فى 


IN GL Aled علامة‎ Ged فكونى‎ allel] ددنت معي الى‎ 


تداس oes eileen‏ سير الذي oes‏ ينا وركورن ذلك إشاهدا 
على ما بينى Sing‏ عند مخاصنا ان اتى الى العالم. وسمى ادم 
تلك المغارة مغارة الكنوز. فلما Cl‏ له بعس خروجه من الفردوس 
ماية سنة وهو وحوا حزينان باكيان YS‏ من الطور المقدس الى 
رك ا لز سح BG ss Dees‏ 
ولوذيا aia!‏ توم . وعاودها فحملت واستتم الحبل فولدردت هابيل 
واخته اقليما توم ايضا . ونمى الغلامان والجاريتان ولحقوا الادراك Ὁ‏ 
فقال ادم لحوا. ان الله قد انمى هاولى الفتيان 'والشواب ان تزوج 
قايين اقليما cae!‏ هابيل . وتزوج bdo)? Ὁ‏ اعت اكايين ων,‏ 
على ذلك . فقال قايين لحوا يا امه انا Gel‏ باختى التى ولدت 
معى . فلتسلم الي زوجة وتسلم الى هابيل اخته التى ولدت ἀπὸ‏ 
زوجة . وكانت *لوذيا اجمل من اقليما . كانت مشبية لامها حوا . فبلغ 
قوله NA ls v3!‏ وصعب عليه فقال ayy‏ "قارين انث" SI‏ 
تلتمسه يا بنى خارج عن" VY AY. οὐ‏ يحل "الك أن تتزوج 
hie!‏ الى Roly. theo Sy‏ قابين مدل sensed) τ LS‏ لايل 
وهم بقتله + ثم ان ادم قال a)‏ ولهابيل . اختارا اشيا من shed‏ الارض 
عن sain‏ الس lbs‏ هرا اسل ἢ ον sila te slap oat‏ 
عنا ee ie‏ رض" ess Nl‏ تشيلانه من الشيار Bigs‏ 
كنا فيلا قاذ es‏ ذلك πο‏ مكنا عاتن Mae‏ 
Cod. Sdoe) * Cod. S363‏ > والصواب Cod.‏ ' 


IO 


ἧς 


20 


٠١‏ كتاب المجال 

من ذومبما كلم الله ادم وعزاه وقال له تباركت اسماوه.'يا ادم لا 
تحزن فانى رادك الى ميراثك GMI‏ اخرجتك aio‏ معصيتك واعلم 
ان *من “Yel‏ محبتى SN‏ لعنت الارض ولم ἱμὰς GAO‏ وذلك *من 
الك خطيتك det! lal Cs),‏ التى هيا اطفيت وازشلت قوابييا 
فى Libs‏ . وجعلت طعامها التراب . ولم العنك وحكمت على حوا ان 5 
تكو نشت خدرمتك Ga‏ انك اذا استييت rab (60) slag)‏ 
ان تقيمه فى الاكسوريا وهى الارض الملعونة اتجاوزك وصيتى بعثت 
ابنى الحبيب فانه ينزل الى الارض ويلبس جسما من عذرا ترعى 
مريم من نسلك وانى اطبرها واصطفيها وانقلبا فى pb‏ جيل بعد 
جيل الى وقت هبوط الابن من السما . ففى ذلك الحين يكون اول ro‏ 
خلاصك ورجوغك الى ميراتك ‏ “فاوصن ISG, GILT rie arg!‏ الت 
Cote’‏ بها عليك اذا توفيت ان يحفظوا جسمك بالمر والسليخة 
ويضعوه فى المغارة النى ιν‏ اليوم حتى الوقت ON!‏ فيه خروج 
Sus‏ من جوف الفردوس وجوازه الى الارض الترابية Ὁ‏ فاذا كان 
ذلك الوتت غلم من رعش اليه من Jy‏ على حمل جيك 15 
معه ووضعه فى الموضع الذى اوقفه عليه OW.‏ ذلك الموضع الذى 
يوضع فيه جسمك هو وسط الارض ومنه وفيه يكون لك ولجميع ولدرك 
الخلاص + وكشف الله له جميع ما يصير اليه من الاحزان والالام 
وامره بالصبر على ذلك . ولما اخرج ادم وحوا "من" الفردوس اغلق باب 
الفردوس ووكل به ملاكا من نار. وسكن ادم وحوا على الطور 20 
المقدس الذى عليه اساس الفردوس فى الموضع المعروف بمطاريمون 
LLG‏ رسكنان فتاك فى مغارة كانت فى اغلى الجيل متترين يا 
مويسين من الرحمة وكانا 515 ذاك بكرين طاهرين :<:- ثم هم ادم 
بمباضعة حوا فتناول من اساس الفردوس ذهبا ومرا ولبانا + وترك 


1 Cod. نادم‎ * Cod. Jamo * Cod. فاوصى‎ αν, 
* Cod. We τ 61.515] 


f. 96 


f. οὔ 


f. 95 b 


كتاب المجال τ‏ 
ولا يشك انه طير من جنسه يكلمه فيصغى اليه وينصت للغته . 
فيلتقفها ويتكلم ببا فى ساعة . فان الشيطان اللعين لما دخل الحية 
nod‏ 'نحو حوا لما تفردت فى الفردوس عن ادم αἰδὼ‏ باسمها. 
لالد τ‏ فرت الى مانا من ورا gals GELS, Slee‏ 
فاطغاها بكلامه لان طبع المراة *رخو وهى لكل كلام مصدقة 
فخاطبها فى pol‏ الشجرة المنبى Wie‏ بمتابعتبا على شبوتها ووصف 
νυ!‏ هداقتنا انبا متى ما اكلت Sess UN σις‏ ييا 
رغببا اللعين فيه ولم تكن سمعت من الرب Caw rR‏ اسماوه ما 
كان اوصى ادم فى امر الشجرة . فبادرت مسرعة نحوها فخطفت 
pe‏ دمونيا elke‏ ذعك δυο‏ فاسرع نحوها فاعطيته من الثمرة 
واعلمته انه ان YAS!‏ صار الاها . فاصغى الى مشورتها وللان يكون 
الها WE LS‏ فليا gt US!‏ الثيرة Areal!‏ دشلها من Lope‏ 
ونزع عنبما مجدهما وصارا متعريين من النور الذى GIS‏ لابسيه Ὁ‏ 
τ του‏ تعريا من dg‏ النى كانا ابيا ريت 
لبما سواتبما صنعا لانفسيما ميازر من ورق rel‏ واستترا bey‏ وصارا 
ذى حزن ser‏ ثلث ساعات . فلم يستتم ببما المقام فى النعمة 
داكا اللذين. hk Lem‏ اناه فيل Cee 2 Cae‏ 
نزع منبما وادحضا واهبطا وقت غروب الشمس من ذلك اليوم فقبلا 
حكم الله فى العقوبة . ولبسا من بعد لياس ورق التين لباسا من 
sole‏ وهو هذا الجلد (gill‏ يعملوا اجسادنا pare‏ الناس وهو لياس 
الاوجاع :. فكان دخول ادم الفرودوس على ثلث ساعات . وجاز هو 
دجوا SUIT,‏ العطيي ذى Gey lel SYS.‏ تلك ils‏ وفى الساعة 
التاسعة كان خروجبما من الفردوس مكروهين بالحزن الكثير والبكا 
العظيم والندب والزفير :. ورقدا فى مشارقه بقرب المذبح . فلما استيقظا 


رخوا 0 نحوا Cod:‏ 


1© 


5 


20 


10 


15 


20 


4 كتاب المجال 

خلاص σὺ‏ البشر اذكر يا رب “(الشجرة كانت الصليب المغروس فى 
وس aay (Lay!‏ التق care‏ قبل gota‏ اف ارذلك dea!‏ 
التى احب الرب ان يبسطها على جميع بنى البشر وعلى جنسنا 
الضعيف :. فعدن هى كنيسة الله . والفرووس Med GA‏ مذبح 
δ 9‏ “ ومدة الحياة التى ANS leusl‏ لجميع القدريسين :. 'ومن 
اجل' انه كان ادم ملكا كاهنا ونبيا ادخله الله الى داخل الفردوس 
بعرم فى دشل عدن كيسة الله الرب GS dae‏ رشبي على 
ذلك موسى النبى Cel‏ اذ يقول .ان تخدم وتعلن بالتشمسة 
النبياة الفاخرة وتحفظ الوصية gl‏ بها ادخل ادم وحوا كنيسة 
الله Ὁ Ὁ Ὁ‏ ثم نصب الله شجرة الحياة وسط الفردوس وهى 
صورة الصليب (GAN‏ مديدة ἱμὰς‏ فبى شجرة الحياة والخلاص”* 
واستمر الشيطان على حسده لادم وحوا على النعمة التّى 
خولبما الرب اياها . فاحتال ان دخل فى الحية وكانت Som!‏ 
الحيوان وكان Wile‏ على خلق البعير. فحملبا حتى صار بها فى 
البوا الى اسافل الفردوس . والسبب فى استثار ابليس اللعين فى 
الحية سماجته. لانه لما نزع من كرامته صار فى نباية السماجة 
حتى لم يكن يقدر nol‏ من المخلوقين على النظر اليه مكشوفا. 
واو كانت حوا نظرت اليه غير مستئر بالحية لما كلمته ولبربت 
av‏ ولم Ly‏ له فيبا حيلة Yo‏ مكيدة .الا اذه Yel‏ بالاستتار بالحية 
كالمحتال لتعليم الطير المدور اللسان كلام الناس باليونانزية وغيره ὁ‏ 
ails‏ تحضر Slo‏ واسعة كثيرة “الضوء ساطعة الشعاع فيضعبا بينه 
وبين الطير Ὁ‏ ويتكلم bey‏ يريد ان يعلمه الطير واذا سمع الطير ذلك 
الكلام نشوف نهوه ونظر فى ,المراة (ὧν‏ صورة طاير مثله فيفرعانه 
The words in brackets are written upside down at the top of f. 94b.‏ * 


' Cod. ومنجل‎ * Cod. adds وتلك‎ above the line. 


f.g4a 


حاب Υ Me‏ 
نزع arc‏ الوقار. وبينما ادم مسئممعا لخطاب ayy‏ اياه وواقفا على 
مكان الجلجلة وقى اجتمع ساير الخليقة لتسمع مناجاة الله له اذ 
athe‏ سحابة من نور فصارت به الى الفردوس وكانت طغمات 
الملايكة تسبح بين يديه والكاروبين bre‏ يتباركون والسرافين 
يقدسون الى ان وصل ادم الى الفردوس :. فدخله على ἀλλ‏ 
lel,‏ من يوم الجمعة واوصاه الرب له التسبحة بالوصية . “و<خره 
Lisle.‏ . ثم ان الرب له التسبحة . القى على ادم dats‏ النوم 
فنام فى الفردوس نومة حلوة . فاختاع الله من جنيه الايسر ضلعا 
وبرا aie‏ هوا + Ld‏ استيقظ وراى Nom‏ فرم يبا وسكن Gell‏ وهى 
عون العم من Ls το‏ الله سحا وبا ὑπ‏ 
يتباهيان بالتمجيد الذى GIS‏ البساه . وكللبما الرب للتزويج واستبشر 
OlS, ἀν 10}‏ فاك فرح لم يكن مثله ولا يكون الى اليوم 
Gall‏ يسمع فيه الصوت الببج من الرب لاصحاب اليمين << 
فمكث ادم وحوا فى الفردوس ثلث ساعات . ومكان الفردوس Share‏ 
فى البوا وارضه سماوية متعالية على جميع الجبال والروابى الشامخة 
ترا ie‏ الي OR) eo eS‏ اا 
رودي تددر من ee OMe rey‏ الب EIA Ce‏ 
πε Στ CoS! Gall ab gil dal‏ 
فبى نبعة الله المتوجه نحو المشرق على ارتفاع ثمان درجات من 
les‏ ون ا ai ee‏ رضي كان pee ee‏ 
ا Ἐς Coe Jase I Ge ae ol‏ 
معرفته ما يفعله الشيطان بادم Ὁ‏ فجعل ادم ساكنا فى خزانة ر<مته 
So νος ols are‏ يا إلى yeaa‏ نا رد 
اسكنا Salts‏ رحمتك . وقال ايضا المغبوط داود فى طلبته من اجل 
las‏ ا م المشرق Cod. opens ” Cod.‏ * 


10 


18 


20 


1 كتاب المجال 
صورته وشببه . ليقبل الحكمة والنطى والدركة الحيوانية وللمعرفة 
بالاشيا :. فلما نظرت الملايكة الممجدة المسبحة ἀλλο‏ فى ادم ارتعرت 
les‏ اليبا العجيب الذى كان قى علا وجبه وتبينت صورته مضية 
بالنور الابى الذى كان افضل من 'ضوء الشمس وكان ἀνα.‏ مضيا 
يرا SIS‏ راكب البغروف Gulley SV)‏ - وليا امرت قامة ادم 0 
وثب قايما . فكان فى وسط الارض وبسط يمينه Allens”‏ وصف قرميه 
το το ee eee ee‏ ا ا τ τ‏ 
مخلصنا Ὁ‏ البس ثوب الملك وجعل على راسه اكليل alls Aamo!‏ 
Ἐν τς πο ποτ"‏ 
واجلسه الله على كرسى الكرامة Ὁ‏ واجتمع الى ما هناك ساير الحيوان 10 
ells‏ *والاطيار وكل ما خلى الله فوقفت بين يدى ادم . وطامنت 
روسبا وسجدت له وسمى كل Lio rele‏ باسمه . فاطاعه جميع 
الطبايع واقنعت امره Ὁ‏ وسمعت الملايكة والقوات صوت الله جل 
jes‏ وهو يقول لادم *يا ادم انى قى جعلتك ملكا وكاهنا ونبيا 

؛ ومولى وريسا ومدبرا لكل الخلايق المصنوعة . فلك تسمع كل 15 
الخليقة Wolly‏ تتبع . وتحت قبضتك تكون . ولك وحدك اعطيت هذا 
السلطان Weems‏ جميع ما خلقت τ‏ فلما سمعت الملايكة هذا القول 
من الرب ازدادت لادم اكراما وهيبة Ὁ‏ ولما gly‏ الشيطان الموهبة 
التى اعطيبا ادم من الرب Rio orm”‏ ذلك اليوم. واعمل المارق من 
الله الفكر فى الاحتيال عليه ليطغيه بجراته ولعنته وانه لما كفر 20 
بنعمة الرب التى كانت عليه صار وقاحا حربا فنزع الله تقرست 
اسماوه عن الشيطان ومنه لباس السبح والوقار. ودعا اسمه شيطانا. 
تشيطن على الله وساطانا ais)‏ *“شطن من طرق الرب وابليس لاذه 
وال افا δοῦν‏ > .. واكرامة ليو Codvialleus ٠.”‏ * + ضوا Coda‏ 
(σα, sly passim. 7 Cod. otwm ° Cod. οἱ,‏ والظاير Cod.‏ > 


f. g2b 


f. 93a 


0 a, كناب‎ 

وفى: اليوم الخامس pol‏ الله الامياه ان wed‏ اجناسا مختلفة الالوان 
والاشباه . منبا ما يطير فى جوف الما Ὁ‏ ومنها ما يطير ذوق الما :. 
وان bad we‏ التنانين ولوبايا وببموت البايل منظرهما وطاير البوا 
وطاير الما Ὁ‏ وفى اليوم السادس خلق الله من الارض جميع il‏ 
والحيوان والحساس sleds’‏ الرجاف Vids.‏ اليوم يوم الجمعة . وفيه 
خلق الله ادم من التراب وجبل حوا من ضلعه :. وفى اليوم 
السابع استتم الله جميع الخليقة وسماه سبتا . وكان خلق الله لادم 
فى الساعة ANU‏ من يوم الجمعة ساوس ALY!‏ وكان ادعى ابليس 
الربوبية GU!‏ دخلته فى dell‏ الثانية من هذا اليوم ذاهبطه الله 
من السما الى الارض Ὁ‏ وقبل أن Shey‏ الله الرب ادم. وقع *البدو 
على arom‏ القوات + وقال الله :. تعالوا نخلق انسانا كمثالنا وصورتنا 
τ μὴ‏ فلما سمعت الملايكة هذا القول من الرب صارت فى فزع 
وارتعاد عظيم. وقال بعضها لبعض be.‏ هذا العجب الكبير الذى نسمع . 
وكيف يتبيا ان يظبر ὦ‏ صورة الاهنا وخالقنا . ثم ان الملايكة نظرت 
LAS‏ الى يمين الرب قى انبسطت فوق البرية كلبا فصار جميعبا 
فى يمينه . ثم نظرت الى يمين الرب وقى تناولت من الارض كلها 
قبضة يسيرة ترابا . ومن كل الامياه نقطة ما. ومن Nod!‏ نفسا وروحا. 
ومن النار قوة الحرارة glad.‏ فى قبضة الرب اجزا من العناصر الاربع 
الحرارة والبرودة والرطوبة واليبوسة . وانما خلق الله جل وعز PSY‏ 
من هذه العناصر الاربع الضعاف التى لا قوة Ramil. ly‏ )4 وتطيع 
جميع البرايا المخلوقة Yio‏ . التراب ليطيعه الناس . والما ليطيعه ما 
dio wed‏ وفيه . ؤالبوا ليثبيا a)‏ استنشاقه وشم نسيمه وليطيعه اطياره . 
والنار لتكون حرارة القوى المخلوقة منبا معاضدة له مقوية لحاسته Ὁ‏ 
وكان cw‏ خلق الله تقدرست اسماوه 2d)‏ بيده المقدسة على 


اطايره COG‏ البدوا 500000 والبيوام POG,‏ 


Io 


15 


20 


Io 


55 


5 كتاب المجال 

الامياه + على صورة الطاير + ليكون تكون كل ple‏ بجناحين على 
ذلك الشكل :. وفى اليوم الثانى خلق الله السما السفلى التى تدعى 
الفلك Ὁ‏ التى يقع نظر الناس عليبا لتعلم ان طبايع السماوات 
العاليات التى تحجببها سما الفلك 'الظاهرة كطبع سما الفلك الا ان 
السما التى تلحقبا LEW?‏ مفروزة من السماوات العاليات :. وكل 
السماوات ثلث سما :. الفلك الظاهرة + وما فوقها Ὁ‏ تسمى ذرونيقون 
وفوقبا نار dyke‏ . وسما تعلو النار والسماوات ممتليتان *ضوء ونورا . لا 
يستطيع الابصار المخلوقة ان تنظر اليه :. وفى اليوم الاثنين . الذى 
هو ثانى الايام افرز الرب الذى له التسبحة . بين الما الاعلى وبين 
الما الاسفل فان الما slo CoH‏ فى “العلو كان طلوعه فى هذا 
اليوم . كسحب مجموعة . ملبدة . وباقى المياه ساكنة فى البوا ليس 
منبا شى nor‏ الى deel‏ من النواحهمئ - وفى اليوم الثالك pol‏ الله 
المياه التى كانت اسفل الفلك ان تجتمع الى موضع واحى ليراى 
الييس . فلما كان ذلك اتكشف الغطا (OM‏ هو فوق الارض وتبينت 
الارض . ونظر اليبا وهى منبوبة رطبة . ترابا وما مختلطين . وكان الما 
فيبا واسفل bie‏ وفوقبا وكانت مخلخلة لاختراق الريام فيبا :. وان 
البوا كان يطلع من جوف الارض ويحل فى جوف الاخاقيق منها 
"والمجازات لتتكون فى تلك المغاير الحرارة . والبرودة لخدمة الارض 
وتثبيتها . وذلك ان الارض خلقت كسفنجة فبى قايمة فوق الما :. 


وذى هذا اليوم pol‏ الله الارض ان تنبع العشب "واليراع والاشجار 20 


والزروع والعقاقير وغير ذلك . وفى اليوم الرابع كون الله الشمس 
والقمر والكواكب bed‏ حرارة الشمس على الارض. فتشتد من 
رخاوتها ints‏ رطوبتها التى اكسببها الما (GH‏ كان عاليا πὰς‏ 


' Cod. الطاهرة‎ * Cod. العدات:‎ * Cod. φῦ 
: (δα: العلوا‎ ᾿ (δα: والبراع 00 5 والمجارات‎ 


f. 


f gla 


f.gtb 


كاب المكان 7 
غير محدود المتعالى God‏ العلا المستوى مع الععلى ليس له اسفل 
πὸ πὸ 5.‏ لظو كيل eS eee hee‏ 
له Yo vo‏ يلحقه عقل ولا يدركه تمييز ولا صفة . كان فوق 
الكون ومع الكون واسفل من الكون الجوهر الخالقى 'الضوء الببى 
الذى AQUA aims Y‏ انور الساكن فى Ὁ (GN soll‏ بلحقه 
الابصار. قبل الخلق كان وهو مكون المكونات (GA!‏ مجده منه وبه 
ailing‏ الخالق ما يسبحه :. لتعرف ربوبيته ::. واقتداره " صنع السها 
والارض + وخلق قبل ايقاع تفصيل الاشيا :. ملايكة يسبحونه 
عشرة طغمات جنسية ::. اعنى بذلك عشرة مراتب :. فكانت المرتية 
العليا Ὁ‏ منها القريبة الى كرسى الرب الله :. الفايضة للتسابيح Ὁ‏ 
مرتبة ساطانايل τ‏ الذى هو الاركون وكانت التسابيح ترتفع الى 
الله من جميع الملايكة فبى الابتدا فى اليوم الاول (GH‏ هو يوم 
rm!‏ المقدس راس الايام وبكرها خلق الله السما العالية والارضين 
ALM τὰν τ:‏ وغى agro‏ باطانايل وروا البإرايكة 
والقوات والروسا والكراسى والمراتب والمسلطين والكروبين والسرافين 
اواك والجار easly Savy‏ والها وانوا والثار وها كان شيا ينه 
OE τον‏ جميع ذلك dig S‏ الرب Corti‏ اسماوه باتثمام 
كلمته الازلية بلا نطق وفى يوم الاحى الذى خلقت فيه هذه الاشيا 
رفرف روح القدس على المياه وبرفرفته عليبا تباركت وتقدست 
وتكون فيبا التسخين OMI‏ به νος‏ الطبايع المايية واختلطت Nay‏ 
خماير الخليقة كالطاير GH‏ يحط البيض بجناحيه فيتكون من 
ذلك الطير الحيوانى لان من شان طبع حرارة النار الملببة ان 
She Sed‏ فى ἀρ Gael! ly be 1G bl ole‏ 
الفراخ فيه : *وانما كان سبب ترفرف البارقليط المقدس على 


ونا 001 الخو aod.‏ الخو 17000 


το 


15 


20 


Io 


15 


20 


0 كتاب المجال 

السراير التى اعطيبا من سيدنا يسوع المسيمح على طور ὩΣ‏ . وكان 
pl‏ الحواريين فى ذلك الوقت وجميع المومنين يلقون جبدا من 
الكفرة اليبود لان اليبود كانت تقتل كل من تبيا لها قتله من 
المومنين . وكنت ومعلمى الفاضل سمعان قى Lhe‏ بعض البلدان 
فلقينا ays lic‏ من مناظرة اليبود والمسلة عن نسب مريم الطاهرة 
اذ كانت allie‏ فيبا انبا ليسدت من ولى Ibo‏ ليبطلوا Wy‏ مجى 
سيدنا المسيح الى العالم وتجسده io‏ . وكانوا يكثرون الرشى من 
الاموال وغيرها لليونانين والروم حتى يعاونوهم على هلاك المومنين 
وابطال امرهم ويمنعوا السليحين من قراة التوراة ليلا يقفوا Lio‏ 
على حال الخليقة وكيف كانت فى البدى . ولما رايت ما كنا فيه 
من الشدة مع اليوود طلبت الى معلمى الفاضل ان يعرفنى كيف 
كانت الخليقة فى الابتدا وان يتمنى على الاسباب لانه قد كان 
على خل حى من الرب يسوي ἄρ) ὦν κα θυ ον‏ 
وكتببم عالما بسرايرهم وقد اودعت ما كنت وقفت عليه من اسرارهم 
كتابى المدعيين #بالسابع والثامن . واعلمت معلمى ما يتداخلنى من 
الكيرة δ...)‏ در ΝΟΣ ἃ‏ بعيين البيوة الا Bed pee et‏ 
بالتوراة . وكثرة مسلتبم اياى عن Ghee‏ ابينا ادم . وما اسمعه باذنى 
من شتمبم للسيدة مارتمريم والافترا te‏ من غير ان يتبيا لى حيلة 
ادفعبم بها عن شنيع قولبم GAS.‏ المعلم لقلقى وداخله لما خبرته 
به الغيرة Ὁ‏ فقال انا Gals‏ عليك Qo ott‏ كما سالتنى ἀρ‏ 
وموقفك على الامور Gre‏ ابتدا الخليقة ومعرفك نسب ام الرحمة 
مريم الطاهرة وصحته وانها بغير شك من نسل يهوذا بن يعقوب 
وسبطه . ومخبرك سراير والسبب كان فى سقوط الشيطان الاركون 
من السما . اعلم يا بنى ان الرب هو الابتدا وقبل الابتدا (GI‏ هو 

' Cod. جللنا‎ _ Cod. بالسبيع‎ 


f. 89 Ὁ 


f. goa 


كتاب المجال 


بسم الاب والابن وروح القدس اله واحد الرب الرحوم . هذا USI‏ 
احد كتب اقليمس القديس السليح ἀφοῦ‏ سمعان الصفا المكتومة 
التى امر القديس اقليمس ان يسترها عن العوام ويدعى منبها 
ὧς‏ المجال وفيه τῶν! SMe‏ واشيا من السراير التى اوقف 
الاهنا ومخلصنا يسوع المسيح عليها سمعان ويعقوب تلميذيه وما 
يكون من الامور فى اخر الزمان وكيف يكون مجى سيدنا 
افر FGI‏ ضر الك pep ree Seen Sry‏ 
COS yo wall gay. JUS‏ اللي السشرروة dees Ayko (oh‏ 
Jiro‏ زمان الحواريين . قال اقليمس القديس اذه لما ان طفع اللاهنا 
يسوع المسيح Seo ιν τ gl‏ فى SLEW Sy ght‏ 
ولذعا الصليقة Cdl‏ الايمان والصبغة بالمعمووية . gist‏ تلامين 
انتجبوهم واختاروهم ليكونوا repre‏ وينصرفون الى البلدان بالايمان 
LUE. pamelly‏ (اتعرى Ul‏ سيعان الضفا Geel aunt‏ قاميت dp‏ 
وبمن ارساه Ge‏ الايمان . وايقنت اذه ريس الرسل الذى اعطى 
مفاتيح السماوات والارض وبنيت عليه كنيسة الله الجامعة الرسولية 
التى لا Gee‏ ابواب الجحيم. كما قال الاهنا يسوع المسيح فى 
الانجيل المقدس . وبعد مدة طويلة اتخف اخوتى فسطس وفسطينا 
له Laz!‏ تلميذين . وبعد عشرين ἅμ‏ من اتخاذه اياى Sold‏ جمع 


بينى وبين والدى ووالدتى المسماة مطروديا واوقفنى على جميع 
G. I‏ 


Io 


15 





كناب البجال 








δ 
cae ra: 
eee 























University of Toronto 
Library 


---- 








DO NOT 
REMOVE 
THE 
CARD 
FROM 
THIS 
POCKET 








Acme Library Card Pocket 
Under Pat. ‘Ref. Index File” 
Made by LIBRARY BUREAU 

















































































































5 Pye wt ris 
ST et Rene) 
er Sets 





























Spc ا‎ eer 







































































عر 




















Pobre gril 








ets 
































000 -. 











vo 














vaunted 











a ee ع‎ 7 5 ed 
1: هج ببس‎ unin مجهي جهيوها بيو تو سبج ومن طوف‎ 
ν ᾿ 3 





























































































































Se Sam Lash NE IGS NTS eens 
نوا‎ RNC τιν برسلا حمسي‎ aN Gene 1 : 
































"τὰ 





5 


















































































































































































































































