





CORNELL 


U_N I V ERS ITY 


LIBRARY 








The Robert M. and Laura Lee Lintz 


Book Endowment for the Humanities 


Class of 1924 








CORNELL UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 


Cornell University 


Library 





The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 


There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924096083336 


The Ethiopic Didascalia 





1ES4] TRANSLATIONS OF CHRISTIANES 
IN] LITERATURE. SERIES IV 


THE 
ETHIOPIC 
DIDASCALIA 


By J M-HARDEN,B-D..L-LD. Ne : 





SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING 


| CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE. London |@ 





The Macmillan ant NewYork 
1920 








LIST OF SYMBOLS AND ABBREVIATIONS 
EMPLOYED, CHIEFLY IN THE FOOTNOTES 


A. B. C. D. E. represent the five MSS. of the Ethiopic 
Didascalia in the British Museum, viz. :—Orient. 


Nos. 752, 793, 797, 798, 799- 
P=The MS. used by Platt. 
Pl = Platt. 
AC=Apostolic Constitutions. 


{ii. 3].—Numbers so prefixed indicate the corresponding 
chapter of AC (according to Funk’s numeration). 


Arabic (I), Arabic (II) refer to the first and second recensions 
of the Arabic Didascalia. 


The letters a, b after the number of a chapter refer respec- 
tively to the first and second parts of the chapter in 
question. 


cf. before a biblical reference indicates that the Ethiopic 
version only agrees partially with the original. 


In O.T. references I have followed the LXX. (Swete’s 
edition) except in the names of the books of Samuel 
and Kings. 


INTRODUCTION 


GENERAL CHARACTER OF THE WORK. 


Tue Ethiopic Didascalia, the concluding part of 
which is translated in the present work for the first 
time, is one of the least known of a number of more 
or less similar documents that have come down to us 
from comparatively early times. It has been preserved 
for us by the Christian -(Monophysite) Church of 
Abyssinia, whose liturgical language to the present 
day is that which is generally known as Ethiopic, but 
more correctly as Ge‘ez. Bishop Wordsworth, in 
speaking of an earlier form of the Didascalia, has 
described it as ‘‘a somewhat rambling discourse on 
Church life and society.’’ The same description well 
suits its later descendant. 

After a brief Introduction, in which it is said that 
the work is a message to the Church from the Twelve 
Apostles assembled in Jerusalem, together with Paul, 
the Apostle of the Gentiles, and James, the Bishop of 
Jerusalem, it proceeds to deal with questions of 
morality, laying special stress on the duty of studying 
the Scriptures and on the strict observance of the 
Seventh Commandment. Next comes a statement as 
to the mutual duties of husband and wife, which is 
followed by several chapters dealing chiefly with the 
offices and duties of Christian ministers (Chapters iv.- 
xii.). A chapter follows in which Christians are for- 


vii 


viii INTRODUCTION 


bidden to take part in any of the assemblies of the 
heathen, or to be spectators in theatres. In Chapters 
xiv.-xxi. the duties of widows, and of the Church towards 
them and orphans, are the chief subjects mentioned, 
but certain regulations are incidentally introduced 
describing the method of baptism, and forbidding 
laymen and women to baptize. The duties of fathers 
towards their children and of masters towards their 
servants are next dealt with in Chapters xxii.-xxiii., 
and then cames a brief chapter about vows of 
virginity and the age at which they should be made. 
A long chapter follows, which commences with instruc- 
tion as to the duties of the faithful towards martyrs 
and confessors, but ends with a long disquisition on 
the final resurrection. Another chapter (xxvi.) also has 
as its title, “Of the Martyrs.” The next two chapters 
contain general precepts of morality, with’ special 
warning to avoid all connection with idolatry. The 
observance of the feasts of Christmas and Epiphany, 
and of the fasts of Lent and Holy Week; is then 
enjoined in a long chapter, into which is introduced an 
account of our Lord’s trial, sufferings, and death. This 
is followed (Chapter xxx.) by instructions as to the 
proper method of calculating the date of Easter. 
Warnings against heresy are the subject of the next 
three chapters, and these are followed by a chapter 
which begins with injunctions about the respect that is 
to be shown to the faithful departed, and ends with a 
statement of the Christian Creed. 

Up to this point, our work, speaking generally, runs 
on the lines of the earlier works which are similarly 
named, but from this on, its subject-matter is additional. 
The remaining chapters contain the substance of Book 
vii., 1-46, of the Apostolic Constitutions in an abridged 
form. There is one fairly long omission (Book vii., 
18-26) which, as we shall see, is probably due to 
accident. This means that the first part of these 
chapters contains an expanded version of the 
beginning and end of the Didache, but that the middle 
part of that treatise, which deals with the “way of 


? 








INTRODUCTION ix 


death,” ! and with the administration of baptism and 
the eucharist, is omitted. The rest of the work, except 
the final chapter, is almost entirely liturgical, consisting 
of prayers, some to be used at baptism, and others on 
occasions not specified. The last chapter contains a 
list of the bishops who were ordained by the Apostles, 
followed by a brief doxology. , 

This brief outline of the contents of the work, which 
does not attempt to do more than touch on its salient 
features, will be suflicient to show that Bishop Words- 
worth’s description is quite applicable. 


The Church Orders in General. 


It has been already mentioned in the preceding 
section that the Ethiopic Didascalia is only one out of a 
large number of kindred documents. These are all 
similar to one another in dealing with certain phases 
of Christian instruction and worship. From this they 
are generally known by the common name of Church 
Orders. Their respective dates are often very uncertain 
and their mutual relationship is in many cases a matter 
of dispute. Though they are similar, they do not all 
cover the same ground, but certain types may be dis- 
tinguished amongst them according to the subject- 
matter which they contain, or rather, according to the 
way it is presented, for the subject-matter frequently 
overlaps. 

The Church Orders which are the representatives of 
the first type are distinguished from those of the other 
types by being, not continuous treatises, as the others 
are, but rather collections of canons on divers points, 
and of forms of prayer for use on different occasions. 
It is a common opinion that the Church Orders of this 
type have as a basis a lost work of Hippolytus, Bishop 
of Portus, who is known to have written a book, 
entitled The Apostolic Tradition. Whether this opinion 


‘Tt is a remarkable coinci- Ckurch Order also omits the 
dence, but posipty an accidental ‘*way of death"’ (ef. Maclean's 
one, that the Ethiopic Apostolic Handbook, etc., p. 27). 


x INTRODUCTION 


be correct or not, it is generally admitted that the 
various members of this group which are now extant 
are all descended from some one original. The best 
known representative of a second, but a much smaller, 
group of these Church Orders is the Didache of the 
Twelve Apostles, which was discovered nearly half-a- 
century ago, and published by its discoverer in 1883. 
The Didache is in itself a composite work. Its first 
five sections incorporate an older document, a Treatise 
on the Two Ways. This treatise is no doubt the 
ultimate basis of the Church Orders belonging to the 
second group. . 

A third group includes those works which are extant 
in various languages bearing the common title of 
Didascalia. It is to this group that the Ethiopic 
Didascalia, or, at least, the greater part of it, belongs. 

The most comprehensive of all the works to which 
the name Church Order may be applied is the Apostolic 
Constitutions. This in its present form consists of eight 
books, which date probably from the last half of the 
fourth century. It belongs to no special group, but 
contains elements which cover the same ground as all 
the groups already mentioned. That this is so can be 
seen at a glance from the following list, which is given 
by Bishop Maclean in his valuable handbook on The 
Ancient Church Orders (p. 2) :— 


“‘(a) Canons of Hippolytus. 
Egyptian Church Order. 
Ethiopic Church Order. 
Hauler’s Verona Latin fragments, part 3. 
Testament of our Lord. 
Apostolic Constitutions, viii., 3-46. 
Constitutions through Hippolytus. ; 
Appendix to Arabic (and Ethiopic?) Didascalia. 
Sahidic Ecclesiastical Canons, 64-78. 
Syriac Octateuch, Books iv.-vii. 
Ethiopic Statutes, 53-72. 

(b) Didache, or Teaching of the Twelve Apostles. 

Apostolic Church Order. 
Apostolic Constitutions, vil., 1-32. 











INTRODUCTION xi 


d) Didascalia, early forms (Syriac, Latin). 
Apostolic Constitutions, i.—vi. 
Ethiopic Didascalia. 
Arabic Didascalia.” 


(i Apostolic Constitutions, vii., 33-viil., 2 


This list is quoted, not only because it shows that the 
Apostolic Constitutions contain elements of all the 
groups, but because it requires alteration in some not 
unimportant details. 

Assuming that it is correct in other respects, it must 
be corrected in some of its references to the Ethiopic 
Didascalia and to its sister, or perhaps parent, version, 
the Arabic Didascalia. The two points that need 
correction are (1) that it takes no notice of the second 
recension of the latter; and (2) that it labours under a 
misconception as to the contents of the former. 

It will be seen by what follows in the present 


Introduction that the changes that are necessary are 
these :— 


(1) Under (a), the eighth line should read— 
Appendix to Arabic Didascalia (1). 

(2) Under (b), two additional lines should be added— 
Ethiopic Didascalia, xxxv.—xxxvia. 
Arabic Didascalia (II), xxxv.—xxxviia, 

(3) Under (c) again two additional lines are needed— 
Ethiopic Didascalia, xxxvib—xliii. 
Arabic Didascalia (II), xxxviib—xliv. 

(4) Under (a), the last two lines should become three— 
Ethiopic Didascalia, P-xxxiv. 
Arabic Didascalia (I), i.-xxii., xxiv.-xxxiv. 
Arabic Didascalia (UI), i.—xxxiv. 


The Church Orders Known by the Name Didascalia. 


It will have been noticed from the list already given 
that treatises are extant in various languages, called 
by the name of Didascalia. These are the desccndants, 
directly or indirectly, of a Greck work now lost, ‘which 
belongs in its original form probably to some part 


xii INTRODUCTION 


of the third century a.p. The earliest of these is the 
Syriac Didascalia. This was described, and parts of it 
were translated, by Bickell in 1843, in his Geschichte 
des Kirchenrechts (I., pp. 148-159), but the Syriac text 
was first published in 1854 by P. A. de Lagarde, who 
also attempted to restore the original Greek.2 A Syriac 
text of another recension has more recently (1903) been 
edited and translated by Mrs. Gibson.® This edition is 
based on a manuscript discovered in Mesopotamia by 
Dr. J. R. Harris. The Syriac Didascalia is also 
accessible in the Latin version given by Funk in his 
Didascalia et Constitutiones Apostolorum (1905), in the 
French version of F. Nau (1902), and in the German 
version made by Flemming (1904). 

The Syriac version is not divided into books, but into 
chapters. In Lagarde’s edition the number of these is 
twenty-six, in Mrs. Gibson's twenty-seven, the differ- 
ence being due to the fact that, in the latter, one chapter 
is sub-divided. The subject-matter of the Syriac 
Didascalia is the same as that of Apostolic Constitu- 
tions, i.-vi., with some additions and changes of order. 
A “preface,” which is not found in the Constitutions, 
is contained in Mrs. Gibson’s edition, but not in 
Lagarde’s. ; 

Some fragments of an old Latin version of the 
Didascalia, which contains about one-third of the whole 
work, were published by Hauler in 1900.4 These Latin 
fragments lack any division into chapters, which would 
seem to show that the original was without any such 
division. They correspond with portions of Apostolic 
Constitutions i.—vi., and viii. ; 

Of the Arasic Didascalia, there are two recensions 
in existence. The first,5> which is divided into 
thirty-nine chapters, corresponds with the first six books 
of the Apostolic Constitutions, with some omissions, 


2 Analecta Antenicaena, II., fragmenta Veronensia latina. 
225-238. Lipsiae, MCM. 

? Horae Semiticae, 1. and Il. * I refer to this as Arabic (1) 

‘ Nidascaliae Apostolorum and to the second as Arabic 


(11). 





INTRODUCTION xiii 


notably v., 13-16 and vi., 7-29, and many changes in 
the order of the subject-matter. It contains, however, 
the “preface” and six additional chapters. Of these 
latter more will be said further on. This recension, in 
some form or other, is found in all the manuscripts 
of the Arabic Didascalia, with one exception. This is a 
manuscript belonging to the Museo Borgia, discovered 
by A. Baumstark, who has described it at some length 
in the Oriens Christianus, III. (1903), pp. 201-8. The 
recension in this manuscript follows the Apostolic Con- 
stitutions exactly as to order of subject-matter, con- 
taining the first six books complete, and also the whole 
of the seventh book with the exception of Chapters 47 
and 48. It lacks the six extra chapters found in the 
other recension, but, like it, contains the “preface.” 
It is divided into forty-four chapters. This manuscript 
is also important because it contains at the end the 
information that the Didascalia was translated from 
Coptic into Arabic by AbQ Ishaq in the year 1295 A.D. 
As some of the manuscripts of the other recension are 
known to have been in existence shortly after this date, 
it is probable that we have to do with two independent 
versions of a Coptic Didascalia. 

No Arabic text of the Didascalia has as yet been 
published, though Platt, in his edition of the Ethiopic, 
printed the Arabic of the ‘‘preface’ and the first 
chapter. This “preface” and the six additional chapters 
above-mentioned as belonging to the first recension are 
given by Funk in a Latin version made for him by 
Socin. The extra chapters are not found in either 
recension of the Syriac Didascalia, though the 
“preface” is found, as already noted, in Mrs. Gibson's 
edition. 

The Etnioric Didascalia, or rather a portion of 
it, was published by T. P. Platt with an English trans- 
lation in 1834.6 He obtained the Ethiopic text, which 
he edited and translated from a single manuscript, 

© The Ethiopic Didascalia, or the Church of Abyssinia, Lon- 


the Ethiopic version of the Apos» don, 1834. 
tolical Constitutions received in 


xiv INTRODUCTION 


which had been brought from Jerusalem by the Rev. 
William Jowett, and presented to the British and 
Foreign Bible Society. This manuscript was, unfor- 
tunately, defective. Not only is a leaf lost in the middle 
of its sixteenth chapter, but also it breaks off abruptly 
in the middle of a word in Chapter xxii.’ 

It is perhaps not unnecessary to emphasise the fact 
that Platt’s edition contains little more than half of the 
Ethiopic Didascalia, as its imperfection in this respect 
has been somewhat overlooked in recent references to 
the work. For example, in the edition of the Syriac 
Testament of Our Lord, published in 1902 by Cooper 
and Maclean, the Ethiopic Didascalia is alluded to 
(p. 18) as if the whole work were known. Similarly, 
Dr. O'Leary, writing in 1906,* not only says (p. 24) 
“an Ethiopic version of the Didascalia was published 
by T. P. Platt,” but even speaks (p. 25) of the “two 
last chapters of the Ethiopic,” as if the work were 
complete in Platt’s edition. Also, in Bishop Maclean’s 
handbook, already referred to, though it is mentioned 
on pp. 22 and 32 that the end of the Ethiopic Didascalia 
is wanting, yet earlier (p. 10) its publication is alluded 
to as if it were a complete whole. In reality, as already 
said above, very little more than half of the Didascalia 
is contained in the edition in question. 

Another misconception that has prevailed since the 
publication of Platt’s edition concerns the contents of 
the version. Platt had noted that the titles of the 
twenty-two chapters of his manuscript agreed in most 
cases ‘with the canons of the Didascalia as given by 
Ludolf from Wansleb,’’ and therefore not unnaturally 
drew the conclusion that his manuscript “contained the 
very document of which Ludolf had spoken” (Intro., 
p. ix.). Besides this, he printed in his Introduction 
(p. xv.) the table of the canons which Ludolf gives. 
Amongst the canons of this list are six whose titles 
agree with those of the six additional chapters of the 


' That is to say, chapters * The Apostolical Constitu- 
xvii and xxiii of the present tions and cognate documents. 
edition. S.P.C.K. 1906. 


f 














INTRODUCTION xv 


first recension of the Arabic Didascalia. Five of these 


are as follows :— 

(25) De structura Templi et ejusdem Heikel. 

(27) De ordinatione episcoporum. 

(28) De oratione episcoporum cum ecclesiasticis. 

(29) De jejunio episcopi. 

(30) Continet mystagogiam seu doctrinam occultam 

quam apostoli docuerunt. 

Five chapters® of the Arabic Didascalia (1) corre- 
spond with these titles. The conclusion has therefore 
been drawn that the portion of the Ethiopic Didascalia 
wanting in Platt’s edition would probably be found to 
contain these chapters. It will be seen from the 
present translation that this is not the case, and that 
the Ethiopic Didascalia follows the lines, not of the 
first, but of the second '® of the two Arabic recensions. 
It contains, that is to say, not the substance of Apostolic 
Constitutions i.-vi., together with the six extra 
chapters, but the substance of Apostolic Constitutions 
i.vii., with the exception of the three short chapters 
at the end of Book vii." 

From the foregoing description of the contents of 
these different versions, it will be seen that there were 
current in early times works of varying extent bearing 
the common name of Didascalia. Neglecting, for the 
sake of greater simplicity, the differences between the 
two Syriac recensions, we can put the facts thus :— 


DIDASCALIA. APOSTOLIC CONSTITUTIONS. 


Syriac. i.-vi. 
Latin (incomplete). iVi., Vili. 
Arabic (1) i-vi., and six extra 
chapters. 
Arabic (Il NA wa cts 
Die } rr 
* These five chapters are " The only omission of any 


closely akin to part of the 
Testament of our Lord, 

** Of this second recension 
Funk writes (Vol. I., p. xliii): 
Haec recensio haud dubie primi- 
genia es’. 


length isthe passage vii., 18-26, 
Tt will be seen below (p. xviii) 
that this is probably an acti- 
dental omission. 


XVi INTRODUCTION 


What conclusions are to be drawn from these facts 
with reference to the relation of these works to one 
another, and to the Apostolic Constitutions in their 
present form? Ina positive way there is perhaps not 
much that can be inferred, except the fact that the 
Syriac Didascalia, or rather its lost Greek original, 
is the basis of all. For further positive conclusions we 
need to know more about the two recensions of the 
Arabic; we need editions, or at least translations, of 
both}? to see how far they agree together in the part 
(Apostolic Constitutions i.—vi.) which they have in 
common, and also how each of them is related to the 
complete Apostolic Constitutions. 

In a negative way, however, it would seem that we 
can say that the end of Apostolic Constitutions vii. 
should not be considered, as it very often has been, the 
composition of the editor of the complete work. We 
find in Arabic (II) and in the Ethiopic not only those 
chapters (1-32) of Book vii. which are an expansion of 
the Didache, but also the concluding part, with the 
exception of some short chapters.’* Is it not then more 
likely that Books i.-vi., vii., 1-46, 49, existed as a 
complete work, an extension of the original Didascalia, 
and that this was afterwards joined to Book vii. 
by the editor of the Apostolic Constitutions? Baumstark 
is probably not far wrong when he writes (Oriens 
Christianus, 1903, p. 208): “I cannot help drawing the 
conclusion that the enlarged A:Sacxadia Trav ArooroAwy 
(i.-vi., vii., 1-46, 49), and the Auardéas TeV "ArooToAuv, 
that is, originally, only Apostolic Constitutions vin., are 
two fundamentally independent works, the latter having 
had its origin in Syria, the former completed in Egypt; 
and that we owe to the editor of the Apostolic Constitu- 
tions not much more than their union, the insertion of 


12 According to Baumstark, in 
the above-mentioned article in 
the Oriens Christianus (1903), 
Arabic (II) is wonderfully true 
to the Greek, so much so as to 


be of great importance for a 
critical edition of the Greek 
text. ¥ 

18 Three are wanting in the 
Ethiopic ; two in Arabic (II). 


aie 


ent a ee 





INTRODUCTION xvii 


vil., 47-8 and the division i.-vii. into separate 
books.’’ #4 


Details as to Contents and Divisions of the Ethiopic 
Didascalia. 


_ The Ethiopic Didascalia, complete so far as we know 
it, is contained in five 'S manuscripts of the Oriental 
Collection of the British Museum, viz., Nos. 752, 793, 
797, 798, 799. All these date from the early part of 
the eighteenth century. All but one (No. 798) agree in 
the division into forty-three chapters. With a few 
verbal differences, the titles also of the chapters agree 
in all the five British Museum manuscripts, except that 
No. 798 agrees with Platt’s manuscript in joining 
together under one title the chapters numbered iv. and 
v. in the other manuscripts. The titles of the chapters 
in the kindred Arabic (II) also agree on the whole with 
those found in the Ethiopic manuscripts. ** 

These forty-three chapters correspond, as has been 
already mentioned, with the first seven books of the 
Apostolic Constitutions, with the exception of the last 
three, or possibly only the last two, chapters of Book 
vii. This Book contains forty-nine chapters. Chapter 
46 ends with a quotation from Matt. xxviii., 20, “Lo, I 
am with you all the days, until the end of the world. 
Amen.” Chapter 47 gives a version of the Gloria in 
excelsis, beginning with ‘Glory be to God on high,” 
and ending with “by whom glory and honour and 
worship be to thee.” In the Ethiopic we find the same 
quotation from the Gospel, and following it are the 
words, “Glory be to God to whom be glory and honour 
for ever and ever and ever. Amen and Amen. So be 
it. So be it.’’ These words are most naturally taken 


© As has been already men- 
tioned, all the Didascaliae ex- 
cept the Latin are divided into 
chapters. But whether they 
were already so divided when 
the division into books was 


made can hardly now be known 
with certainty. 

" Dr. O'Leary (Ap. Const. 
and cognate documents, p. 25) 
omits No. 798. 

‘* For the differences see be- 
low p. xix. 

b 


xviii INTRODUCTION 


as a doxology concluding the work, but it is just 
possible that they are a fragmentary form of Chapter 

17 

In the body of the work the only chapters of Apostolic 
Constitutions i.—vii., 46, which have nothing to corre- 
spond in the Ethiopic Didascalia as it is now found, 
are: i., 9; ii., 48, 52; vii., 13, 18-26. Of these, the 
only long omission is vii., 18-26. Whatever may have 
been the cause of the omission of this section from our 
present texts, it seems clear that it was originally con- 
tained in the Ethiopic Didascalia, or, at any rate, in the 
version from which the Ethiopic is derived. The title: 
of Chapter xxxv. (Ethiopic) is “Of toil and thanks- 
giving.” The mention of “ thanksgiving” points to the 
fact that the chapter originally contained that portion of 
Book vii., namely, Chapters 25, 26, which treats of the 
eucharist. Besides this, Chapter xxxvi. of the Ethiopic 
version obviously requires something to lead up to it. 

If this deduction be correct, then the Ethiopic 
Didascalia runs almost exactly parallel with the first 
seven books of the Apostolic Constitutions. The only 
addition is the “preface,” found also, as already stated, 
in both of the Arabic and one of the Syriac versions. 
The portions which correspond will appear readily from 
the following table :— 


Ap. Const. MSS.ABCE."* Pratt. Arasic (IT) 
i. 1-4 i 


. Introduction i 
i. 5- il. i. 
i. ite iii. ii. ii. 
ii, 1-14 iv. v. iii. iii. 
ii, 15-214 vi. iv iv 
ii. 210-25 vii. v. v. 
ii. 26-308 viii. vi. vi. 
ii. 300-374 ix. vii. vii. 
ii. 375-534 x. viii. viii. 





Or of Chapter 49, in as to division and numeration 
which case the correspondence of chapters as far as Chap. xiv. 
with Arabic (II) would be even (Platt). From that to the end 
more complete. it agrees as to division, but not 

1" NS.D. agrees with Platt as to numeration, with ABCE. 


INTRODUCTION 


Ap. Const. MSS. ABCE. Pratt. Arasic (IT) 
ii. 536-540 xi. ix. ix. 

ii. 54b-61 xii. x. x. 

ii, 62-63 xiii. xi. xi. 

iii. 1-8 xiv. xii. xii. 

iii. 9 xv. xiii xiii. 

iii. 10-124 xvi. xiv xiv. 

iii, 126-20 xvii XV. Xvi xv. 

iv. I xvili xvii xvi. 

iv. 2-4 xix. xviii xvii. 

iv XX. xix xviii 

iv. 6-10 xxi. xx xix. xx. 

iv. 11 xxii. xxi xxi. 

iv. 12-13 xxiii xxii xxii. 

iv. 14 xxiv — xxii. 

v. I-7 XXvV. _— xxiv. xxv. 
v. B-vil.r7 = xxvi--xxxv.® — — XXVi.-XXXV. 
vii. 18-21 wanting. —_ xxxvi. 

vii. 22-35%° XxXxvi, xxxvii, = — XXxvii. 
vii. 36-46 xxxviii.—xliii. _ xxxviii—xliii. 
vii. 49 wanting. _ xliv. 


The titles of the chapters of the second recension of 








the Arabic Didascalia, in so far as they differ substan- 
tially ftom those of the present edition, are here 


subjoined :— 


ETHIOPIC. 


XXV. 


xxvii. 


Nothing parallel 


Arasic (II) 
Not reckoned as a separate 
chapter. 
{ xix. (title as in Eth. xxi.). 
_ ) xx. That the faithful should 
oS ! contribute for the main- 
tenance of the poor. 
xxiv. (title as in Eth. xxv.). 
xxv. That the whole human 
= race will rise at the resur- 
rection, both righteous 
and sinners. 
= xxvii. That we should shun 
evil deeds and _ lying 
words especially on days 
of public worship. 
xxxvi. Of the way of death 
that consists in evil deeds 





'’ The title of xxvii is differ- 2° Eth. lacks vil, 22-26, but 


ent in Eth. and Arab. 


divides the remainder into two 
chapters, 


xXx INTRODUCTION 


ETHIOPIC. ArapBic (II) 


and leads those that walk 
therein to destruction. 
xxxvii. Of baptism. 
xlii. The prayer which the 
newly baptized pray. 
xliv. Thanksgiving after 
meat. 


XXXVI. Xxxvii.™! .. 
xlii. (no title in Eth.) 


Nothing parallel 


The Method of the Present Translation. 


Of the five manuscripts above-mentioned, one has 
been selected as the basis of this translation, viz., Orient., 
No. 752. Since a critical edition of the Ethiopic text 
has not yet been published, since, indeed, only little more 
than half has been printed, it appeared better to follow 
the text of a single manuscript throughout. The 
manuscript named has been chosen for the purpose, not 
only because it is written in a very regular and clear 
hand, but also because, on comparing its readings with 
those of two of the other manuscripts in the earlier part 
of the unedited portion of the work, it was found to have 
what seemed a better text. The later comparison of 
its readings with those of Platt’s text secmed to 
confirm this opinion. 

The titles of the chapters have been collated through- 
out in all the other four British Museum manuscripts. 
Three of these have been found to agree in all the 
titles, with a few verbal differences; the fourth to agree 
in all but one. 

The translation divides itself naturally into two parts, 
each of which required somewhat different treatment. 
The first comprises that portion (Chapters i.—xxiiia) 
already edited and translated by Platt; the second the 
rest of the work, now translated for the first time. In 
the first part I had before me a double text—that 
already printed and the text of Orient. 752. I have 
followed the latter in nearly every case of divergence, 


.. These chapters, owing to the latter part of Arabic (IT) 
the long omission in the = xxxvii. 
Ethiopic version; contain only 











INTRODUCTION xxi 


mentioning in the footnotes those places where the 
printed text appeared preferable. For the convenience 
of those who have not a copy of Platt’s edition, I have 
also noted, except in trivial points, the variations of 
reading between the two texts. 

I have not followed Platt’s translation slavishly, even 
where there is no variant. It will be clear from every 
page to anyone who compares the two translations that 
I have used my own judyment—whether for better or 
worse, let others judge. 

In the concluding portion (Chapters xxiiib-end) I 
have translated directly from the manuscript, consulting 
the others (chiefly E.) in some cases of difficulty. Such 
comparison did not give much help. This is scarcely 
to be wondered at, considering the state of the Ethiopic 
text. Those who have worked through Platt’s trans- 
lation know that he frequently abandons the attempt 
to extract an intelligible sense from the readings o 
his manuscript. Some of his difficulties are removéd 
by the readings found in the manuscript from which I 
have translated. Many, however, still remain. Many 
must also remain in the latter part of this work. “Some 
of these may doubtless be solved, whenever a critical 
edition of the Ethiopic text is made, should it ever be 
thought worth while to make one. 

In spite of these uncertainties, which do not affect 
the main bulk of the work, the present edition may, it 
is hoped, be useful in at least two respects, the nature 
of which has been already indicated. It will show, first, 
what the contents of the Ethiopic Didascalia really are, 
and, secondly, the intimate relationship between it and 
one (the earlier) of the two Arabic recensions. 

I have not attempted to discuss the question whether 
the Apostolic Constitutions are the source of the 
Ethiopic Didascalia, or whether they are a compilation, 
one of whose elements was the Greek original of the 
Ethiopic. The latter opinion seems to me more likely, 
if only for the fact that the Ethiopic Didascalia contains 
no part of Book viii. Nor, again, have I attempted 
to decide from what version, if any, the Ethiopic was 


xxii INTRODUCTION 


made. Platt argues frequently in his notes as if it 


were made from the Greek, Funk holds that-it was 


made from the Arabic. The enigmatical word 
“nipilobanos,” which is found in the “preface,” points 
to the fact that a Coptic version lies somewhere behind 
the Ethiopic, and the same may probably be said of the 
equally strange word ‘“’&bibolosawi,” which is found 
in the title of Chapter xii. Both of these words I have 
referred to in the additional notes. | may add here 
that, whenever in the footnotes I have seemed to allude 
to a Greek original, I must not be taken as meaning 
more than that Greek original, which, somehow or 
other, lies behind the text. 

In the translation an attempt has been made to give 
a literal version of the original. This will account for 
some obvious deficiencies of style. The redundancies 
of Ethiopic in such matters as pronouns and connecting 
particles have been in nearly every case represented in 
the translation. Words that are enclosed in round 
brackets are those which, having nothing to correspond 
in Ethiopic, seemed necessary in an English version to 
convey the sense. Words or phrases marked tt are 
those in which some departure has been made from the 
reading of the original. Words have been enclosed in 
square brackets when the reading seemed out of its 
proper place, or the corruption so deep-seated as to 
defy any attempt at emendation. 

Some points of detail may be briefly mentioned. 
There is always a difficulty in translating from Ethiopic 
in the case of the divine name. The language has a 
word meaning literally “the Lord of the earth ” which 
is used for “Lord” and “God’’ alike. When the 
context does not make clear what the translation should 
be, sometimes the corresponding passage of the 
Apostolic Constitutions suggests the translation. 
When the word occurs in biblical quotations, I have 
followed the reading of the LXX. or the Greek 
N.T. In cases of doubt I have preferred to render 
“God.” In introducing quotations, the words “he 
said ” seem sometimes tq he used in an impersonal 


ene. on eee 





INTRODUCTION XXill 


way. I have therefore, when the context did not require 
something different, used the words “it is said.” The 
name given to the second order of Christian ministers 
is in some places “priests,” in others “presbyters.’’ 
Although the words seem to be used synonymously, I 
have adhered everywhere to the literal translation. In 
this 1 differ from Platt, as also in the point that follows. 
I have rendered the word ‘‘saitan,” wherever it occurs, 
by Satan, and the Greek word ‘“diabolos,” which is 
also used in Ethiopic, by “devil.” Proper names, 
biblical and other, often assume strange shapes in 
Ethiopic, as the language is not well adapted for trans- 
literation of Greek words. I have followed the usual 
forms, without, as a rule, giving any indication of the 
Ethiopic spelling. Somewhat similar has been my treat- 
ment of the word “fasika.”” It has become the fashion 
to translate this and the corresponding words in other 
languages by ‘“Pascha.” I have adhered to the trans- 
lation “ Passover,” which is morc intelligible and means 
precisely the same. I notice that Mrs. Gibson has done 
the same in her translation of the Syriac Didascalia. 

In some places the word “Law” will be found printed 
thus with a capital letter. In these it is a translation 
of the Ethiopic ‘’orit,” which answers in some ways 
to the Hebrew “Torah,’’ but has a wider reference, 
being applied not only to the Mosaic Law, but also to 
the books, collectively and separately, of the Octateuch. 

I have transliterated comparatively few Ethiopic 
words. In places where I have done so, the vowels 
should be considered long, unless marked short.?? 

For convenience of reference I have prefixed to each 
section the number of the corresponding chapter of the 
Apostolic Constitutions, enclosing each number in 
square brackets, e.g., [ii., 2].?5 

Scripture references have as a rule only been given 
when the words are introduced as a definite quotation. 


* This is contrary to the 33 As to these I have followed 
usual method, but seems more Funk's divisions. 
convenient as the majority of 
the vowels are long. 


. 


THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


CHAPTER I. 


THE DOCTRINE OF THE DIDASCALIA OF THE FATHERS, THE 
HOLY AND PURE LIGHTS OF THE WORLD, THE 
APOSTLES.! 

IN THE NAME OF GOD THE FATHER ALMIGHTY AND OF HIS 
ONLY-BEGOTTEN SON JESUS CHRIST, AND OF THE 
PARACLETE, THE HOLY SPIRIT, 


We,? the Twelve Apostles, ministers of His only- 
begotten Son Jesus Christ, being gathered together in 
one place in Jerusalem, the city of the great King, and 
with us our good and holy brother Paul, the Apostle 
of all the Gentiles, and James, the brother of our Lord, 
who is the bishop of this city? of Jerusalem, have 
ordained this right doctrine, and have appointed * 
degrees of offices® for the Church, according to the 
pattern of that which is in heaven; and we charge each 
one of you severally, with thanksgiving for that our 
Lord Jesus * hath called us to His glory. The bishop 
is in the likeness of the shepherd of the shecp, and the 
presbyter in the likeness of a teacher, and the deacon 
as a minister, and the sub-deacon, behold, he is as the 
same; and the reader also, and the skilful singers’ . . . 
and the rest of the people as those who hearken to the 
word of the Gospel, and, moreover, understand the 


A. adds: Their prayer and * P this one city. 
their blessing, and the mercy of “P this right faith, We 
their God be with their beloved have appointed. 
Wild Sdala, and with us for 5 P degrees (and) offices. 
ever and ever. Amen. * P adds: Christ. 

* See Add. notes. ' See Add. notes. 


2 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


word of admonition. For thus have we ordained * the 
law for the Church, (even) this book of admonition, 
which we have written, and have sent with Clement, our 
ministering brother, into the world, that men may walk 
according to the commandment of the Churches which 
are under heaven, and may have perfect understanding, 
that, when they have heard these commandments which 
are ® written thercin, they may find life eternal, honour 
and glory from our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath 
bestowed on us this mystery which is from Himself. 
But those who keep not His law shall be cast into the 
fire which is not quenched, and their abode also shall 
be in the fire of Gehenna for ever, as it is written. 

(AC. i.] But apostles and presbyters and all .the 
people, who have believed '° in the name of *! our Lord 
Jesus Christ and work righteousness and peace, shall 
find compassion and mercy from God the Father, the 
Ruler of the whole world, and His Son Jesus Christ, 
and shall come to knowledge of Him in the Holy Church 
of God. And those who serve Him shall be a pure 
and elect '? vineyard, and shall find life eternal by this 
faith, and victory by the Holy Spirit; and shall be 
strong by the power of Jesus Christ and the faith '® of 
Him who hath redeemed them by the sprinkling of His 
holy and precious blood, and hath bestowed on them the 
privilege '* that they should call on the Almighty, that 
He should be their Father and their God and their 
Friend, and that they should be fellow-heirs and joint- 
partakers of His Holy Son. Hearken to the holy 
admonition, ye who receive at the commandment of our 
Saviour the words of the Gospel and His glad tidings." 
which is full of glory. 

[i., 1.] O ye children of God, keep '* His com- 
mandments and do!’ His will; but if there be 
anyone that secketh’® to follow after sin and that 


" P found and ordained. Lit. glory. 

* P heard this which is. SP the glad tidings of His 
‘© P who believe. word. 

 P omits: the name of. © Po adds: His word and, 


'2°P adds: and holy. Po adds: His law and. 
* P fear. '* P desireth. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 3 


docth all things that are not pleasing to God, he 
shall be numbered with those who trangress His law 
and His commandment. And now I say unto you, keep 
far from injustice and oppression, and desire not to take 
for yourselves the portion which is greater and (to 
leave) to your neighbour the less. For it is written 
in the law, saying, “Thou shalt not desire thy 
neighbour’s wife, nor his field, nor his man-servant, nor 
his maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor anything ; 
none of the possessions of thy brother,” !® nor anything 
like thereto; it?° is adultery. But if there be anyone 
who desireth to do thus in the lust of his heart, he shall 
be far from God, (even)?! our Lord Jesus Christ, to 
whom be glory with His Father and the Holy Spirit, 
for ever and ever. Amen. For He teacheth us and 
giveth us understanding and strengtheneth us by the 
Holy Spirit, that He may fulfil 7? the law, in which it 
is written, saying, “Thou shalt not commit adultery, 
but I say unto you, everyone who hath looked upon a 
woman and lusted after her hath committed adultery 
with her?® already in his heart.’’?4 And he also who 
desireth to do thus shall be condemned with the 
adulterers. And, behold, he that thinketh in his heart, 
and desireth to take unjustly his (neighbour’s) ox, or his 
ass, or his field, and continueth so to do,** shall be 
numbered with the adulterers. For the prophet saith, 
“Woe unto them that join house with house and unite 
field with field, and hedge with hedge, that they may 
take what is not theirs.” 2 And again it is said, “ Know 
ye who dwell on the earth that this word was heard 
in the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth.”?’ And in another 
place ?* also it is said, ‘Cursed be everyone?® that 
stealeth his neighbour’s landmark, and the people shall 
say, So be it.’"?2° Wherefore Moses saith, ‘‘ Desire not 


Ex 20, 17; Dt 5, 21. 7” On this phrase see PI's 


2° P for this. note in loco. 


*) P and. * Isa 5, 8. 
22. P adds: the prophecy and. "Cf. Isa s, 8f. 
2 P omits: with her. 7 P in the law. 
7 Mt 5, 28. ” 7? he. 

ae * De ony 17. 


4 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


thy neighbour’s landmark and take not away the law 
which thy fathers ordained.” *' Because of these things 
come fear, and death, and trouble; and judgment from 
God shall find those who do thus. But such as hearken 
to the word of God, and keep His glorious *? law in 
faith, shall fmd compassion and mercy. For it is said, 
“What thou hatest for thyself, do not to thy neigh- 
bour.” *° And as thou dost not desire that any other 
should look upon thy wife to lead her astray in sin, so 
likewise do not thou look upon the wife of another with 
evil thoughts. And as thou dost not desire that another 
should take thy garment, so likewise do not thou take 
the garment of another. And as thou dost not desire 
for thyself cursing, and reproach, and beating, so like- 
wise do not thou thus unto thy neighbour. [i., 2.] But 
if there be anyone who hath cursed thee, do thou bless 
him; for it is written in the Book of Numbers, “ Blessed 
be those that bless thee, and cursed be those that 
curse thee.’’*4 And, moreover, it is written in the 
Gospel, ‘‘ Bless them that curse you, and pray for them 
that oppress you; and do good to them that hate you, 
and render not evil to them that oppress you, but bear 
with them  patiently.’""** For the Scripture saith, 
“Take not vengeance on thine enemy for the evil which 
he hath done against thee; and for this cause ‘the Lord 
will help thee, and bring judgment upon thine 
enemy.” 2 For it is said in the Gospel, “Love your 
enemies, and pray for them that persecute you, that 
_ ye may be the sons of your Father who is in heaven, 
for he maketh the sun to rise on the evil and the good, 
and sendeth rain on the just and unjust.” °7 — Beloved, 
let us understand these commandments, that we may be 
sons of light. 

[i., 3-] Bear patiently with one another, O ye*® 
sons of God. And let the husband also bear patiently 
with his wife, and not be haughty or false; but let him 
be merciful and upright, and cherish her alone in love 


"Cf. Dt 10, 14. *5 Mt 5, 44; Mk 6, 28. 
*2 Lit. bright. 2° Cf. Prov 20, 12. 
*. Tob 4, 15 (16). "' Mt «. 44f 


** Nu 24, 9- * P adds: sons of light and. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 5 


and humility. And let him not take pleasure in, nor 
desire, another woman, lest she lead him** astray 
unto evil. But if thou committest adultery, and 
doest thus, thou shalt surely dic, and the wrath of God 
shall come upon thee; and thou shalt be condemned with 
a bitter condemnation. But if thou thinkest evil ‘° in 
thy heart, and committest not‘! adultery with her, it 
shall be sin unto thee. And if thou hast prepared and 
adorned thyself, that the wife of thy neighbour may 
love thee, thou hast erred and hast become a stumbling- 
block unto her, and made her to commit adultery. And 
for this cause condemnation shall come upon thee, for 
God saith, ‘‘Thou shalt not desire,” and ‘Thou shalt 
not commit adultery.” ‘4? For‘? thou hast led her 
astray to love thee by the beauty of thy youth, and by 
the charm of thy face, and for this cause thou hast 
become a partaker with her in the work of sin and 
thy ‘* curse. Wherefore it is meet that thou shouldest 
pray to the Lord thy God, that all this sin find thee 
not out. But thou oughtest in purity to please God, 
that thou mayest find rest and life eternal before God. 
For it is said,*® Let not the hair of thy head grow long, 
but cut (it) and purify thyself, that thou mayest serve 
God and not be separated from Him. But do not thou 
anoint thyself with perfumed ointment, nor clothe thy- 
self with gorgeous apparel to Icad women astray, nor 
vaunt thyself, nor become an occasion of sin, but seek 
purity and well-doing. And thou, O man of God, let 
not the hair of thy head grow long; plait (it) not, nor 
curl (it), for all this is a sign of impurity and adultery. 
For it is written in Deuteronomy,*® “And thou shalt not 
put on a garment which is woven with wool and flax: 
thou shalt make for thyself a twisted fringe for thy 
garment.” 47. 4®. But we ought not to shave our beards, 
nor to change the nature of man into another fashion. 


3* P to lead her. ‘S This is a mistake. There 

“A omits: evil. is no quotation in AC. 

“| A omits: not “* P adds: saying. 

“7 Ex 20, 173 20, 13. ‘7 P omits: for thy garment. 
3 

“ P But if. “ Dt 22, rf. 

“P the. 


6 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


And if thou doest thus, thou art a trans ress 
law and far from God, who created tee ta His ee 
and His likeness. But if thou desirest to please God, do 
no evil, and put far from thee *® all that thy Goa hateth 
i., 4.) And be not a drunkard, and walk not in the 
streets with the adulterers without wisdom and know- 
Icdge, but labour and live by the work of thy hands; 
and seek to do all that is pleasing to God ; and remember 
the word of our Lord Jesus,*® and follow Him at all 
limes. For the Scripture saith, “And who readeth his 
law day and night; whether in the way, or in the house 
or while thou sleepest, love the Lord thy God with all 
thy heart, and with all thy mind and’ with all thy 
strength,” *! that thou mayest find from Him compas- 
sion and mercy. 


CHAPTER II. 


THAT THE RICH OUGHT TO SEEK TO KNOW ! THE PROFIT OF 
THE SCRIPTURES AT ALL TIMES IN THE STRENGTH OF 
THE HOLY SPIRIT. 

[i., 5] Bur if thou art rich, and hast no need of the 
art and labour of thy hand, wherewith to earn thy bread 
and livelihood, be not slothful, nor sit idle, but go to 
the faithful, and sit with them, (even) with them that 
are united with thee in faith; and speak with another 
of the word of life, and read what is in the Book of 
Kings ? and the Prophets, and sing a psalm of praise, 
and hearken to the word of the Gospel, which is the 
fulfilment of the whole law.* 

[i., 6.] And keep far from all service of the gods of 
the Gentiles; and take no heed of any * words of vanity 
which profit not, and seek no other law, nor false 
prophets who change and corrupt the faith. What then 
art thou unable (to find) in the law of God, that thou 


“ P adds: evil and. 


5° P adds: Christ. 
*' Ps 1, 2; Dt 6, sf. 
' P omits: to know. 


2 P the law of the Scriptures, 
the Kings. PI mistranslates. 

*> P omits: law. 

* P omits: any. 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 7 


shouldest seek after the learning of the Gentiles? But 
if thou desirest to know* the power of the interpre- 
tation of the Scriptures, seck out the Book of Kings: 
and if thou wishest to find out the power of the wise 
and their teaching, thou hast the prophets, Job and 
Solomon. These are they that are full of wisdom, and 
thou shalt find knowledge in them. These, more than 
all teachers, shall make understanding to increase, for 
their word is the voice of the Lord God, who alone 
is all-wise. And if thou desirest a song, thou hast the 
Psalms of David. And if thou desirest to seek® to 
understand the creation of the world and the generation 
of the first fathers, thou hast the Law.’ And if thou 
desirest to know wisdom and doctrine, thou hast the 
book of the law, which is full of the glory of the Lord 
God. Keep far, then, from ® works of evil, and from the 
doctrine of Satan, and the word of vanity, which is not 
in the law; but read what is in Deuteronomy,?® that thou 
mayest understand and know the glory of God, who 
hath saved thee from many snares of Satan. For the 
Saviour came not to destroy the Law and the prophets, 
but to fulfil them, and to loose the bonds which are in 
Deuteronomy, and to bring men to a spiritual teaching. 
Wherefore He callcth us, saying, ‘‘Come unto me all ye 
that are troubled and heavy laden, and I will give you 
rest.” !° And thou, when thou hast read the Law and 
the prophets and (the Books of) the Kings and the 
Gospel, shalt understand how many were the righteous 
men who have reigned |! and pleased God in their lives, 
and for this have found life eternal; and also thou shalt 
know how many evil kings have transgressed '? through 
lack of understanding. These have perished and been 
destroyed by the stroke of the judgment of God,’* and 
have lost eternal life. And knowing this, thou shalt be 


* A adds: to read. Mt 11, 28. 
* P omits: to seek. ' P adds: in righteousness. 
' Pl translates: Books of "Pp adds: the command- 
Moses. The word has a wider ments of God. 
meaning. '™ So P. A reads: of the 
* P adds: all. anger of judgment. 


* See PI's note. 


8 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


strong in the right faith, and shalt find grace and 
favour with our Lord '* Jesus Christ, for thou art one 
of His members. 

Moreover, when thou desirest to bathe, enter not into 
the bath where the women bathe, lest they see the 
beauty of thy youth, and the charm of thy flesh, and 
stumble because of thee, or thou thyself sin and fall 
by reason of them. 

{i., 7-] O my children, let us hear and understand 
the word of the Holy One, which saith, “Keep ye my 
commandment; say unto wisdom, Thou art my sister, 
and make knowledge thy friend,*® that she may keep 
thee fram the strange and evil woman, even if she 
bring unto thee words of allurement. For from the 
window of her house she looketh down on the streets, 
and if she see one of the foolish children, a youth that 
lacketh knowledge, who walketh in the corners of the 
ways of her -house, and talketh in the darkness of 
evening,’® when the quiet and darkness of night come 
on, then the woman lighteth upon him having the 
adornments of adultery, which excite '’ the hearts of 
the youths. She is flighty and wanton, and in her house 
her feet rest not; and for a short while she wandereth 
abroad, and for a while in the streets, and in every 
corner she lieth in wait. And she laid hold on him and 
kissed him, and with a face without shame said unto 
him, I have a peace-offering; to-day I pay my vow; 
therefore I came }® to meet thee; desiring thy counten- 
ance I have found thee. I have spread my bed with fine 
linen, carpets from Egypt I have strewn; I have 
sprinkled my bed with saffron, and my house with 
cinnamon. Come, let us enjoy ourselves with kisses 
until the morning, and let us revel in love. For my 
husband is not in my ’* house; he has gone on a far 
journey, taking a bag of gold in his hand; after many 
days would he return to his house. And she led him 
astray with many words, and drew him on with the 
‘© P omits: our Lord. 17 Lit. make to fly. A trans- 
18 Lit. townswoman. lation of wolel dlaracbai, 


 P of the night at evening. is y pace forth. 
s. 











THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 9 


snare of her lips, and he followed her in the wicked ?° 
blindness of his heart.” 2! And furthermore it is said, 
“Look not on an evil woman, for honey floweth from 
the lips of an adulterous woman, which for a time is 
swect to thy throat, and afterwards thou shalt find it 
more bitter than gall, and sharper by far than a two- 
edged sword.” 22. And again it is said, ‘Keep thy way 
from her, and draw not nigh to the door of her house, 
lest thou give thy life to others, and thy livelihood to 
them that are without mercy; lest strangers be filled 
with thy strength, and thy labour pass to the house of 
another; and thou shalt repent afterwards when thy 
flesh (and) thy body are ** weakened, and thou shalt 
say, How have I hated instruction, and mine ears are 
turned from reproof, and I have not hearkened to the 
voice of them that gave me commandments,”* who 
admonished me and taught me, nor caused mine ear 
to attend: I have been well nigh in all evil.” ?* And 
now also I say unto you, Choose out ?* all the good 
things which are written in the Holy Scriptures, that 
we may not neglect these witnesses,?”? and turn aside 
unto a multitude of words, but may be strong in a8 
faith, and in doing good. And let us keep far from all 
evil-doing, and be pure from all evil 2® (and) unclean- 
ness before God, that we may find life eternal. 


CHAPTER III. 


THAT WIVES OUGHT TO OBEY THEIR HUSBANDS AND WALK 
IN TRUE WISDOM. 


fi., 8.] Ler the wife obey and? be subject to her 
‘husband, for ‘the head of a wife is her husband,” 
and the head of the man that walketh in the 


2° P adds: desire of his soul ne Eyey 8ff. 
and the. adds: for you. 
‘a Pied 7, 4ff. *1 P this witness. 


™ Prov 5, 3f- % P adds: the right. 
%-P the flesh of thy body is. 2” P omits . evil. 
% P omits: that gave me ’ P omits: obey and. 


commandments. 


10 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


way of righteousness is Christ; and “the head of 
Christ is God” the Father, who is above all, who was 
und is to come, the Creator of all, with His Son our 
Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be honour, greatness, and 
majesty and glory.27 Ye women also obey your 
husbands, and be in subjection with humility and honour 
and the fear of God; and delight your husbands with 
good service, that ye may find favour with them, as 
we said before. For thus saith the wisdom of Solomon, 
“TE any man have found a brave* woman, she is more 
prectous than a jewel of great price. She that is such— 
the heart of her husband trusteth in her; she that is 
such-—good spoil‘ will not be wanting. She helpeth 
her husband with good in good, and not with evil in 
evil (in) her life; who cardeth*® wool and flax, (and) 
hath wrought with her hands (that which is) good. She 
is as a ship which tradeth afar; and she gathereth for 
herself all riches. And she riseth up by night, and 
giveth food to her household, and their tasks to her 
handmaidens. She saw a field and bought (it); with 
the fruit of her hands she planted a® possession. She 
firmly girded her loins, and put forth her hands to the 
work. She tasted that labour is good, and her lamp 
goeth not out all night long. She stretcheth out her 
hands to what doth profit, and her arm is strong to 
spin. And she opened’ her hands in mercy * to the 
needy, and the palm of her hand is stretched out® to 
the poor. And her husband hath no care about his 
house, even if he tarrieth long anywhere. All her 
household are clothed ;'° double cloaks of fine linen and 
purple she made for her husband, and for herself she 
made garments. And her husband becometh notable in 
the gates, when he sitteth in the assembly |! with the 


7? P greatness and glory and * P her. 
honour. ’ P stretched out. 

* Or, strong, LXX yuvaina * P omits: in mercy. 
avdpelav. * PT is open. 


“ P good is the spoil, it. 'e The punctuation follows 
5 This is the meaning of the the LXX. 
word according to Dillmann. "So P; A reads: in the 
UXX pnpvopérn, gates and the assembly. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 11 


elders of the land. Linen parments she made,!? and 
gave (them) away, and girdles for the Canaanites. And 
her mouth she opened acording to the law, and set a 
fence '* for her tongue. With strength and beauty was 
she clothed, and rejoiced in the latter days. They that 
enter her house are many: she hath not eaten the 
bread * of idleness. She openeth her mouth in wisdom, 
and according to the ordinance of the law; and her 
almsgiving hath brought up children and_ enriched 
(them), and her husband hath praised her. Many 
daughters have obtained riches,'® and many have done 
mightily, but thou excellest and hast surpassed them 
all. Flattery '® is deceitful, and beauty is despised, for 
a wise woman shall be blessed, and she that feareth 
the Lord shall be extolled. Give her of the fruit of 
her lips, and let her husband be praised in the gates,” 7” 
that ye, O women, may know that a woman who loveth 
her husband: shall find honour and blessing and com- 
passion with the Lord God. Take heed and understand, 
O woman, that desirest and '® wishest to be faithful, 
that thou mayest please the Lord, vaunt not thyself, 
nor adorn thyself for another man; and clothe not thy- 
self with gorgeous apparel, nor put sandals on thy feet 
for show, as the harlots do to lead (men) astray: but 
keep thyself from all evil-doing and adultery, lest by 
thee other men offend. Obey thy husband rather, and 
show kindness '® unto him. But if thou desirest to 
walk about in the assembly and the streets,?° to ensnare 
the souls of many, then judgment from God shall come 
upon thee, and thou shalt be as one that hath no hope, 
as when a wicked man falleth into great aMiction, and 
bringeth on himself disgrace, and dishonour,?? and 
sorrow. In like manner a wicked woman bringeth 7? 
on herself dishonour: and as,a lion that lieth in wait 


So P; A adds: for her Prov 31, 10ff. 


husband. '© P omits: desirest and. 
'* PL translates: rule. Greek " Greek dpdoxev. 

rakiv. 2 P in the midst of the 
" Lit. wheat. streets. 
‘6 P omits : many riches. " P omits: and dishonour, 


1%? knowledge. 2.7? draweth. 


12 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


and rendeth, so she ensnareth fools, even as it is 
written, saying, “As moths (destroy) a garment, and 
as decay a tree, So sorrow wasteth the heart of a 
man.” 7° And furthermore it is said, “It is better 
to dwell in the wilderness, than that thou shouldest 
dwell ?* with a quarrelsome and talkative and passionate 
woman.” 7° And now also I say unto you, O Christian 
people, look not after nor follow adulterous women. 
But it is right for faithful women to veil themselves 
in purity, not seeking to enhance the beauty of their 
faces with dyes and painting and adornment, which 
have no profit, on the form which God created. Let 
them not do thus, but when they walk in the way let 
them incline their heads, being veiled. 

[i., 10.] And take heed to yourselves, ye faithful 
women, and speak no (word of) hate to anyone, but 
above all (not) to your husbands. O ye good and 
gentle 7" women, worship God with joy and gladness; 
and ye also, our children and our brethren?’ and 
kinsmen and beloved, seek after the precious wisdom 
that adornecth our life,?* and enlighteneth our -hearts, 
and bringeth us close to God, and winneth for us an 
entrance into the Kingdom of heaven in life eternal and 
rest.?° 


CHAPTER IV. 
OF BISHOPS, PRESBYTERS, AND DEACONS, 


[ii., 1.] OF bishops we have heard thus from our 
Lord Jesus Christ, that the shepherd of the sheep who 
is ordained bishop of ' all the Churches must needs be 
blameless, pure and good,” who thinketh not on the care 
of this world, who is full fifty years old, who hath 


33 Prov 12, 4. 7° Or, as Pi: directeth our 
* P omits: that thou course aright. 
shouldest dwell. »” P in eternal rest. 


25 Prov ai, 19. ' P in. 
2* P adds: and virtuous. 2? P good and pure. 
27 P our brethren and our 

children. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 13 


passed the strength of youth, who is not a slanderer,* 
nor one that speaketh lics amongst the brethren. For 
the Gospel saith, “lor every word that a man speaketh 
thoughtlessly, he shall give account in the day of 
judgment, that it may condemn him.’”* And _ further- 
more it is said, “l’or by thy words thou shalt be 
justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.” * 
Wherefore it is meet that he abound in all good things. 
But if he be not learned, let him be prudent and 
intelligent, of middle age. But if the city be a small 
one, and there be not found therein one (thus) fitted 
for the office of bishop? and there be found among the 
young men one prudent and wise, though his years are 
(but) few, and if those who know him bear witness 
that he is worthy to be ordained bishop,* if he have 
lived from his youth perfect in the works of the holy 
and humble fathers,’ and walketh in the way of 
righteousness, tried in every work, and if (men) bear 
witness to him that he is perfect, let him be ordained 
in peace. For Solomon also when but twelve *® years 
old became King over the pcople of Israel; and 
t Joash ¢ ® too became ruler when he was seven years 
old and afterwards in the eighth year he reigned in 
righteousness. For the Lord '® spake by the mouth of 
Isaiah the prophet, and said, ‘‘To whom shall I look, 
but to him that is meek and humble and quiet, who 
trembleth at my word?" and again it is said in the 
Gospel, “Blessed are the meek,'? for they shall inherit 
the earth.” '® Let him therefore be merciful, for it is 
said, ‘Blessed arc the merciful, for they shall obtain 
mercy.” '4 Let him therefore be a peacemaker, for it 
is said, ‘Blessed are the peacemakers; they shall be 
called the children of God.” '® Let him be pure of 


* Pl! omits in translation: fathers, perfect and humble. 
who is not a slanderer. " Cf. « Ka, 12 LXX (cod A), 
“Cf. Mt 12, 36. P by it he * See Add. notes. 


shall be condemned in the day ‘* P adds : God. 
of judgment, "Isa 66, 2 
“Mt 12, 37. '? A adds: in heart. 
© P pope (Eth. papas) and "Mt s, 5. 
bishop. “Mt 5, 7. 


' P in the works of the holy Mt 5s, 0. 


14 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


heart, without revenge and evil and unrighteousness, 
for it is said, “ Blessed are the pure in heart; they shall 
see God.” 76 

fii., 2.) Let him, then, be spiritual, and watchful !7 
to do good, neither insatiable nor passionate, nor a 
drunkard, nor vindictive, without hatred and strife, not 
haughty, nor a lover of money, nor a reviler; neither let 
him exalt himself, lest he fall into the snare of Satan; 
for everyone that hath exalted himself shall be abased, 
and he that humbleth himself shall be raised to honour. 
And let such a one be ordained bishop who hath married 
one elect wife, who is able to order his household 
aright, a teacher and monitor who hath brought up his 
children in purity. And let his wife also be faithful, 
who traineth her children in the true worship and in 
the fear of the Lord. It is right that the men of his 
household should obey the bishop in humility and in 
fear, and let him be ’® master even as it is written. 

{ii., 3.] And let them try him that he be blameless, 
not passionate, (for) thus saith wisdom, “Anger 
destroyeth the wise man.” 1'® And let him be merciful 
and charitable, for our Lord saith, ‘And by this shall 
all know that ye are my disciples, if ye love one 
another.” 7° 

fii., 4.] Let him, then, be a lover of men, who 
receiveth strangers, who accepteth not persons, a man 
of understanding, who sheweth favour neither to rich, 
nor to poor, one who hath a craft,” whose hands are 
open to give, who receiveth widows, a lover of the 
poor and the orphans and widows. And moreover let 
him support those (widows) 7? who have children. But 
if there be a slothful man, or one who hath spent all 
his substance in drunkenness and fornication, and 
desireth to receive alms, let not the bishop show any 
care for him, nor permit him to enter the church. For 

16 3° Jn 13, 35: 

me hase ie and watchful. at { ie ae understand how 
1 P omits: let him be. Pi gets his translation: who is 
1” Prov 15, i. P reads: A ready to serve others. 


passionate man destroyeth wis- 22° The words are fem. in Eth. 
dom. 7 P omits: all. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 15 


the Scripture saith unto those who act thus, “ How long 
wilt thou lic, thou slugpard? and when wilt thou awake 
from?' sleep? A while thou sleepest, and a while thou 
sittest; a while thou slumberest, and a while thou 
foldest thy hand to thy breast; and then as an evil 
messenger cometh poverty upon thee, and want as a 
swift) runner.” ?* 

{ii., 5-] It is not right for the bishop to 
judge, accepting the person of the rich, and to 
neglect the poor. lor God said unto Moses, “ Judge 
not, accepting the person of the rich, nor turn aside 
the judgment of the poor, for the judgment is the 
Lord’s.” 7° But he ought to judge uprightly. The food 
of the bishop ought to be meat seasoned with modera- 
tion, that he may be able to teach and admonish the 
people, and that he may turn them to God. And let 
him keep far from all evil, and read the Scriptures at 
all times and be a lover of wisdom, that he may be 
able to interpret the Scriptures in the Holy Spirit, (even) 
the words of the Gospel, the Law and the prophets. 
The Lord?’ saith, ‘‘Understand ye the words of the 
Scriptures, for they bear witness of me.” ?* = It 
becometh a bishop to search out and expound the 
Scriptures in order, and to satisfy the people with 
spiritual 7° teaching, and fill®® them with the light of 
the law of God with much admonition. God saith, 
“Make the light of wisdom to shine upon you, for it is 
time.” 3! 

{ii., 6.] ‘Thus, then, it is right for the bishop 
to suffer and toil and wrestle for righteousness’ sake, 
but above all before the people, that they, when they 
see his works, may receive his admonition. And, 
moreover, let him become surety for no man, nor 
associate with the great, nor be 7? of a double tongue, 
nor follow after princes, but let him fear God; and let 
him not hearken to a false accusation against his 


* P adds: thy. * P omits: spiritual. 

75 Prov 6, off. 2° Lit, water. 

** Cf. Lev 19, 15: Dt 1, 17. ‘Hos 10, 12. 

2" P For our Lord. *2P adds: of a double heart 
“8 Jn 5. 39. or. 


16 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


neighbour. And let him not be slothful in fasting, nor 
seek occasions for eating, nor say, To-day is a feast, 
as the Gentiles do, to eat and drink and be wanton: 
but let him remove from him every idle desire which 
hath no profit, for all this is despised and hateful before 
God, and well-pleasing to demons. ,It is meet *? for 
the bishop to command and admonish the people to 
remove from them all these works. But let him teach 
them and turn them, that they may imitate him and 
follow (him) ** in righteousness. For God said unto the 
children of Israel, “Observe my law ** and my com- 
mandment.” °** And Jesus Christ Himself also, our 
Lord and our God, first did all, and (then) taught us to 
imitate Him. Wherefore He saith that he who shall 
teach and do, shall be great in the Kingdom of 
heaven."7 It is right for you, O bishops, to teach 
the people and save them from error, even as Christ 
hath given you grace. For the Lord spake by the 
mouth of Ezekiel the prophet, and said, “Son of man, | 
have made thee a watchman to the house of Israel, and 
thou shalt hear the word from my mouth, and admonish 
them by my word. When I say to the sinner, Thou 
shalt surely die, and he hath not repented, and thou 
hast not spoken to him, nor admonished him, that he 
may repent and turn from his (evil) way and live, that 
sinner shall die in his sin, and his blood will I require 
from thee,** saith the Lord.** But if thou hast 
admonished the sinner, and he hath not turned from his 
sin, he shall die in his guilt and thou shalt save thy 
soul.*® And if the righteous man hath turned from his 
righteousness and committed sin, while I show him 
punishment before his face, and thou hast not 
admonished him,‘! he shall surely die in his guilt, and 
his righteousness which he hath done I will not 
remember, and his blood will I require from thy hand. 
And if thou hast admonished the righteous man, so that 


32g : then. ** P from thy hand. 
ie P aay ** P omits: saith the Lord. 
28 P adds: and my ordinance. «© P thou hast saved thyself. 


© Cf Lev 18, 4. “1 P omits 7 and thou hast not 
ay ae :, to. : admonished him. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 17 


he sin not, that righteous man shall surely live, and 
thou also hast saved thy soul.” 4? ‘As when war and 
strife arise in the midst of a people, and they seek out 
a watchman to bring them tidings, that they may be 
on guard, and if he tell them not beforehand, that they 
may be saved from defeat, ¢ their ¢ *? blood shall be 
upon his head, for they heard not the sound of the 
trumpet. But if he see the sword which cometh on 
the land, and blow with the trumpet ** a signal to the 
hosts, and (if) one who hearkeneth hear the sound of 
the trumpet and get him not away, and the sword come 
and find him, his blood shall return on his own head, 
for he heard the sound of the trumpet, and gat him not 
away, and his blood shall be poured out on him; but 
he who gat him away saved his life.” *> In like 
manner the bishop, if he teach the word of life, shall 
find life eternal.4¢ The sword is eternal 47 condemna- 
tion, and the sound of the trumpet is the Holy Gospel, 
and the watchman is the bishop *® of the Holy Church. 
The bishop ought to feed (the flock), and teach, and 
hold fast the word,’? and make men to fear concerning 
the judgment. Wherefore let him admonish those that 
walk without knowledge, and make them to see plainly ; 
and let him teach those that know not, and confirm 
those that know; and let him gather those that are 
lost and speak to them at all times concerning their 
salvation, that, when they hear these things, they may 
be admonished and do (that which is) good. For God 
saith by the prophet, ‘‘Testify against this people, and 
tell them their sins (to see) if they will turn, and repent, 
and be saved from their iniquity.” °° And Moses also 
said unto the people, ‘“‘Hear, O Israel, the Lord our 
God is one.” *' And again, it is said in the Holy 
Gospel, ‘‘He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.” °? 


“ Ezek 3, 17ff. “P watchmen are the 
‘3 A and P read: his blood. bishops. 
““ P blow the trumpet as. “* P adds: of the Scriptures. 


“* Cf. Ezek 33. 2ff. 5° Cf. Jer 26, af. 
“P omits: shall find life "Dt 6, 4. 
eternal. *2 Mt at, 15. 


‘’ P omits : eternal. 


18 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


And Solomon also saith, ‘ Hear, my son, the instruction 
of thy father and disregard not the commandment of 
thy mother.” °° Yet they have not heard unto this day, 
but have forsaken the Lord the only true God, and 
He hath called them a generation of transgressors and 
adulterers, concerning whom we have spoken before. 

{ii., 7.] And now know, beloved, ye who have been 
baptized into the death of our Lord Jesus Christ, that 
it is not meet that they *4 should sin who have received 
such grace as this. Know, brethren, that such as 
these °° who, after they have received baptism, turn 
back to deeds of sin, shall go down to the condemnation 
of Gehenna. 

{ii., 8.] And (there are) others also who have not 
been believers, but (who) afterwards t when t¢ °* they 
have believed and *’ been baptized become blessed 
before God, even as our Lord saith in the Holy ** 
Gospel, ‘Blessed are ye when they revile*® you and 
mock you, and speak all (manner of) evil against you 
falsely for my sake. Rejoice,*° for great is your 
reward in heaven.” *' And if there be anyone against 
whom they have spoken,*? blessed is he. For it is 
written, saying, “Every man who is not tried, is not 
clect before God.” ** [f there be any man who hath 
transgressed the law, and men curse him, he hath 
brought the curse on his own head. In like manner 
we also, if we hear not the commandments of God and 
do not His will, shall bring a curse upon ourselves, 
and moreover shall be far from God. For as for such 
as do not what they themselves teach, and turn not 
from their own ways, the bishop ought to admonish 
them, and put to shame those who do thus. But it 1s 
right that he teach them in the love of Christ how they 
cught to serve. : 

[ii., 9.] It is right for the bishop to seek after 

s cute. 
“ ae nig “ P adder anit Ge glad. 


oe its: such as. "Mt 5, 11. 

ae | oe when. *? P adds: falsely. ’ 
57 P omits : believed and. *’ The source of this quotation 
58 P omits: holy. is unknown, 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 19 


righteousness, and not honour transgressors, nor be 
partial in judgment, nor take a bribe from any man, 
for a bribe blindeth the cyes of the wise, nor turn aside 
a right cause. And moreover it is said somewhere, 
“Put away all evil from you.” ** And Solomon also 
saith, “‘Come not into the place where they encamp; 
withdraw from them, and turn away. For they sleep 
not, unless they do evil. Sleep is taken away from 
them, and they sleep not who feed on sin.” 

{ii., 10.) But if the bishop have no understanding, 
and have walked in subtlety and vileness, even as Saul 
did concerning Agag, and as Eli the priest, who 
admonished not his sons, who forsook the command- 
ment of God—and, behold, how he himself lost his 
honour, and also the holy tabernacle of kis city—he 
hath wrought iniquity before God, and is become a 
stumbling-block and an offence unto ** the new converts 
who have reccived** baptism, and also to the 
catechumens, both men and women alike. And if he 
teach not, nor admonish, nor walk in the ‘right way, 
but forsake the commandments of God, for this cause 
he shall receive excommunication, and the wrath of God 
shall come upon him; for he hath perverted the way 
of the people, even as the people erred in the days of 
Jeroboam, and those also who were slain with Korah. 
But if there be anyone who sinneth against the bishop 
and against those in authority, while there is no sin in 
them, and they are guiltless, it is not right that he 
should enter the Church of God, for he hath been 
bold, and hath walked in folly and the lust of his soul. 
Wherefore that shall come upon him which came upon 
those who mocked at Noah, and as ¢ Achan ¢t *7, who 
received the curse upon himself, and as Gehazi, who 
received money from Naaman, the Syrian. Behold, 
then, it is meet that the shepherd of the sheep should 
teach and admonish in humility,*® and turn them to 
repentance, with full knowledge of the life of each one, 
Cf. 1 Cor 5, 13; Dt 17, 7. Achan is named in connection 
P adds: unto many and. with Gehazi again in c. 35. 


P receive. ** P adds; and in the fear of 
“ Eth. has Nakor (AC. “Ayap) 9 God. 


Cc 2 


20 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


and should order their manner of living, as is fitting, 
in peace; that the people may lead good lives and 
turn from their sins. This then is well-pleasing in 
God’s sight, for when a man turneth from his sin and 
returneth to repentance, others ** seeing him are taught 
the true service. 

[ii., 11.] Therefore ought the bishop to be watchful 
to do good, that the beauty of his life may be known 
unto all; for he is the guide of the people, and the 
shepherd of the elders’° and rulers and teachers, and 
of all who are under him. The bishop ought to sit in the 
church with the priests, and they ought to judge each 
man, as is fitting; for to them hath the Lord given 
authority, and hath commanded them, saying, ““What- 
soever ye have bound on earth, let it be bound in 
heaven, and whatsoever ye have loosed on earth, let it 
be loosed in heaven.” 7? 

[ii., 12.] It is right for the bishop to turn the people 
to the knowledge of God, and to receive the repentance 
of those who have turned 72 to God, (and) to teach them, 
and console them in meekness and in love and_ in 
humility, and with joy of heart; ’° for the Lord God is 
merciful. For He saith by Ezckiel the prophet, “Say 
unto them,” as I live; saith 7 the Lord God, I desire 
not that the sinner should die,”* but that he should 
repent, and forsake his evil way : and why will ye die, 
© house of Israel? And thou, son of man, say unto 
the children of thy people, the righteousness of the 
righteous shall not save him, when he committeth 
iniquity, and the sin of the sinner shall not afflict him, 
if?® he repent of his iniquity : the righteous man also 
shall not be saved, when he hath sinned. When I speak 
to the righteous, if he trust in his righteousness and 
commit sin, all his righteousness 7° I will not remember 
unto him: in his sin which he hath committed, he shall 


its: 5 16 A omits: saith. 
7 rages aaa 7° P the death of the sinner. 
"Mt 18, 18. 7? P adds: in your sins. 
i : ™ P when. 
” F iogtl heart. 1 P adds: which he hath 


™ Ezek 33, 11-16. Pl omits: done, 
say unto them. 











THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 21 


dic. And if T say unto the sinner, Thou shalt surely 
die, and he repent of his sin and do justice and 
righteousness, and return the pledye of his debt *° and 
restore what he hath robbed, and walk in the ordinances 
of life, and commit not sin, he shall surely live, and 
shall not die in his sin that he hath sinned, neither will 
{ remember unto him his sin and *! his iniquity; for he 
hath done justice and righteousness, and by it he shall 
live.” Wherefore sinners shall hope; when they turn 
from their sins and repent, they shall find a good hope; 
and they shall inherit the earth. 

{ii., 13.] But let them that have not transgressed 
take heed lest they fall ®? into ** affliction and sorrow 
and weeping. Know, then, and understand, O man, 
if thou transgressest and committest sin in this world, 
and repentest not,** thou hast not life. Repent, then, 
while thou livest, for after death there is no repent- 
ance.** Even as David saith, ‘‘For there is none in 
death who remembereth thee, and in Sheol who will 
confess to thee?” 8° It is right, then, brethren, that we 
should be ready to do good, and should walk in the way 
of righteousness, in which there is no sorrow. Let us 
hear, then, and understand that which is said, ‘ Direct 
my way and my going according to thy word.” §&’ And 
let us not be wanting in any good work, but observe 
the holy word which the Holy Gospel saith ** concerning 
the five wise virgins, and not (be) as the five foolish 
virgins, whose oil of good works failed, and they went 
forth from the marriage which is in heaven. Wherefore 
we ought to take heed to ourselves and fashion our- 
selves, and mark the time of the bridegroom, lest we 
fall into sin; but he that doeth righteousness let him 
take heed to do good ®* even unto the end. It is meet, 


*® A omits: of his debt. serts the clause after the follow- 
"' P omits: his sin and. ing quotation. 
"? Lit. descend. " Ps 6, 6. 
"* P adds: condemnation and. "' Cf. Ps 16, 5. 
aes P adds: thou shalt surely ** P which is written in the 
ie 


F Holv-Gospel. 
** P omits: for after death ** P omits: good. 
there is no repentance; and in- 


22 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


then, that the bishop be of understanding and judge 
uprightly, for the judgment is the Lord’s. Let him 
admonish sinners, that they may walk in the right way ; 
and, when they turn, let him receive their repentance in 
compassion and in mercy. Remember, then, what our 
Lord saith, “There is great joy in heaven over one 
sinner that repenteth.”’ %° 

(ii., 14.] But if thou receivest not them that repent, 
but rejectest them, thou hast scattered thy flock, and 
hast not understood what David saith, “Deliver not 
unto the wild beasts the soul that confesseth unto 
thee.” *' For thus saith the Lord, “That which hath 
fallen, shall it not arise? and that which hath erred, 
shall it not turn again? Wherefore hath my people *? 
transgressed with an evil transgression, and held fast to 
their own counsel, and refused to leave it? Hearken 
now and hear me. Say they not thus? Is there not 
a man that repenteth of his evil, and saith, What have 
I done? Turn again, O my children that are far 
away, and I will heal your wounds.” ** Receive them 
that turn to thee and * repent, O bishop, and be not 
thou of a double heart, nor make proud thy heart as 
those who have no mercy. For he who doeth thus 
feareth not God: but let him rather take thought to 
fulfil the needs of the people, as it is fitting. Let us 
take heed, then, to ourselves, and have ** no fellowship 
with sinners and wicked men who do thus. The 
righteousness of the righteous (shall be) for himself, 
but he that committeth sin without law, his iniquity 
shall return on his own head. For it is said by Ezekiel 
the prophet, “If a land sin against me, and go astray, 
and transgress, and I lift up my hands ** against it, 
and break the strength of bread,*? and send famine 
against it, and destroy from off it man and beast, if 
these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, 
they should not save (it) ** by their righteousness, saith 


°° Lk 15, 7. ** P have thou. 

oo. iT} 

oe rae eccpte: a P Vegeeee 

" Jer 8, 4f; 2% 22. ** P they shall be saved. 


% P omits: turn to thee and. 








THE EVTHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 23 


the Lord God. And if 1 send evil beasts against and 
upon that land, and punish it, and destroy it, and there 
be none left to go about (therein) because of those 
heasts, even if these three men were in it, as I live, 


saith the Lord God, they shall not save their sons, nor 


their daughters,*” but they alone shall be saved, and 
the land shall be destroyed.” !° As it is written, “If 


‘there be in this world a righteous man and a sinner, the 


righteous shall not perish with the sinner.” But He 
sendeth rain on the good !"' and the evil. And if there 
be anyone who thinketh and saith, Judgment is cqual 
against all, it is not so; '"* for in this? warfare there 
is one that is strong, and again, there is another who 
is stronger than he: and he that hath conquered shall 
receive the crown of victory openly. For God con- 
demneth not the righteous with the sinner. Noah was 
not swallowed up in the waters of the flood: and Lot 
was not burnt in the fire: and Rahab the harlot perished 
not. But if ye desire to know what happened amongst 
us: Judas Iscariot perished, though he was together 
with us in one ministry ; and Simon the sorcerer received 
the seal of the Lord; (yet) because these two were evil, 
their wickedness was made known openly. Judas 
hanged himself, and Simon flew up (into the air) and 
was dashed upon the ground. And while Noah was in 
the ark with his sons, Ham by his wickedness brought 
a curse upon his children. ' And by this we 
understand ' that the fathers are not punished for the 
sin of their children, nor children for the sin of their 
fathers. And this thing is quite manifest, that wives 
are not condemned for their husbands, nor young men 
for their wives, nor servants for their masters, nor 
masters for their servants, nor kinsmen for their 
kinsmen, nor friends for their friends, nor sinners for 
the righteous, nor the rightcous for sinners, but to each 
one is rendered according to his deeds. For Noah was 


** P their sons, nor their chil- '02 P omits: it is not so. 
dren, nor their daughters. 108 P omits: this. 
te Ezck 14, 13ff. te P He hath made us to 


10 A adds: and the sinners. understand. 


24 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


not recompensed '°° for the sin of the 
: eople, 
ag ea i of Te in the fire of Sadun ene 
sake of Jericho, nor the children of Isra 
, el f 
the sake of the Egyptians. We ought not to follow 


107 
the steps and the works of the extortioners and the - 


unjust !°* and murderers, who seek i i 

men of hatred, who are ready '°* to nen deci a 
everyone shall be requited according to his works even 
as David saith, “For thou wilt requite everyone 
according to his works.” ° Therefore it is right that 
we should help the afflicted, and visit the sick and 
convert the sinners, who have been wounded by deeds 
of sin. Let us teach them and instruct them with the 
word of admonition, that they may be saved from the 
death of sin. For it is not the whole who need a 
physician, but the sick; since our Father who is in 
heaven desireth not that one of these iittle ones should 
perish. Now, brethren, let us not hearken to the words 
of fools and those whose hearts are darkened but let 
us accomplish the good pleasure of God the Father the 
Creator of all things ™ by our Lord Jesus Christ to 
whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. 


CHAPTER V. 


. 1 

THAT © THE BISHOP OUGHT NOT TO HEARKEN TO THE WORD 
OF ACCUSATION FROM AN EVIL MAN WHO SPEAKETH 
FALSELY AGAINST HIS NEIGHBOUR. 


But do thou put thy trust in God and order the 
people as is fitting. And let not the son magnify him- 
self against his father, nor the servant against his lord, 


'*° P perished not. ™ P the whol 
°° P nor did R. perish in the oP faite 6 nTvisia of 
vin. chapters here. The word 


1 P wa “that i i 
, : is omitted, but the rest 
ris P adds: and deceivers and of the title given is retained as 
adulterers, a continuation of the pri i 
*° P adds: for violence and. words. Bieseaine 


1° Ps 61, 14. 








THE EVTHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 25 


nor the disciple against his master, nor the official 
against the king, nor the layman against the bishop. 
For the teacher ought to have no fellowship with the 
disobedient and? the wicked, for the sinner desireth not 
the word of admonition. Ezekiel the prophet saith, ‘As 
I live, saith the Lord God, they shall no more speak 
this proverb in Israel. [For the soul of every man is 
mine; as the soul of the father so the souls of his 
children * are mine. The soul that sinneth, it shall die. 
But the man that doeth righteousness and uprightness, 
and hath not eaten upon the mountains, nor lifted up 
his eyes to the thoughts of the house of Israel, and 
hath not defiled his neighbour’s wife, nor come near 
to a woman in her uncleanness, nor done his neighbour 
violence, and hath returned the pledge of his debt, and 
hath not extorted, nor oppressed, and hath given of his 
food to the poor, and t hath clothed t ¢ the naked with 
his garment; and hath not lent his money on interest, 
nor taken (aught) unjustly; and hath turned his hand 
from sin, and hath done judgment ® and righteousness 
between a man and his neighbour, and hath walked in 
my commandment, and hath kept my law, and done 
righteousness, he shall surely live, saith the Lord God. 
And if he beget a son (who is) a sinner and a murderer, 
and doeth wickedness and walketh not in the way of his 
righteous father, but hath eaten on the mountains, and 
hath defiled his neighbour’s wife, and oppressed the 
poor and needy, and hath plundered’ and wrought 
injustice, and hath not returned the pledge of his debt, 
and hath turned his eyes towards idols, and committed 
wickedness, and hath lent ® on interest, and robbed (his 
neighbours) and taken that which was stolen, such a one 
shall in no wise live, in all this sin of his* which he 
hath committed, he shall surely die, and his blood shall 
5 P adds: from violence and. 
3 * P adds: and uprightness. 

* P adds: and in like manner ' A adds: the substance of 
the soul of every man. the poor and needy. 

“A slight change gives this * P adds: his money, 
reading, which agrees with the * P all his sin. 
words below. 


* P omits: the disobedient 
and 


26 THE -ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


return on himself.’° And if he beget a son, and he see 
all the sin of his father that hc committeth, and fear, and 
do not likewise,'? and have not eaten upon the 
mountains, nor lifted his eyes towards the thoughts of 
the house of Israel, nor defiled his neighbour’s wife, 
nor oppressed any man, but have returned the pledge of 
his debt,'? and have not robbed (his neighbours) nor 
plundered, but have given of his food to the hungry, 
and clothed the naked with his garment, and have 
turned his hand from wrong, and have not taken interest 
or bribes '* wrongfully, but have done righteousness, 
and walked in my commandment, he shall not die in his 
father’s sin, but '* shall surely live for ever.!® But his 
father, if he oppress, and plunder, and commit 
injustice,'** and defraud, and do what should not be 
done in the midst of my people, shall die in his iniquity. 
And ye say, Why is the son requited for his father’s 
sin? Because!’ the son is righteous and hath given 
alms, and kept !* my law and done (it),'® he shall surely 
live. And the soul that sinneth, it shall die. But the 
son shall not be requited for the sin of his father; the 
righteousness of the righteous (shall be) upon him, and 
the sin of the sinner on him. If the sinner turn from 7° 
his sin which he hath done, and keep all my law and my 
commandment, and do righteousness, and (give) alms, 
he shall surely live, and shall not die; and all his sin 
which he hath done I will not remember unto him, but 
in his righteousness which he hath done he shall live. 
Do I at all desire that the sinner should die, saith the 
Lord, (and not) rather that he should turn from his 
evil?! way and live? And if the righteous man turn 
from his righteousness, and commit injustice and ® sin, 


1° DP adds: except he repent 18 P omits: for ever. 
and turn. 1* P commit injustice, and 
1 Pp adds: and cease (there- plunder. 
from).  P but if. 
19'P adds: and have turned 1* P adds: all. 
his eyes from evil. '* P omits: and done. 
1® P or the substance of an- 3°) P adds: all. 
other. ™ P omits: evil. 
 P omits: but, 27 P omits: injustice and. 





THE EPHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 27 


in all his iniquity which he hath done, the sinner shall as 
die: all his rightcousness which he hath done I will not 
remember unto him, and in his sin which he hath sinned, 
in it he shall dic. But ye say, It is not right.24. When 
the righteous man turncth from his righteousness and 
committeth sin, he shall dic in his iniquity which she 
hath done. And if the sinner turn from his sin which 
he hath donc, and do righteousness and uprightness, 
such a one hath kept his soul; and hath seen, and 
turned 2 from all his sin which he hath donc; he shall 
surely live, and shall not die. And the house of Israel 
saith, The way of the Lord is not right. Is not my way 
right, O house 76 of Isracl? Is it not your way (which) 
is not right??? And for this will I judge all of you 
according to your way, O house of Israel, saith the 
Lord God. Turn, and repent of your evil,?® and let not 
the punishment of your sin come upon you. Put away 
from you all your evil and 29 your iniquity and your sin 
which ye have sinned against me ;*) and make you a 
new heart and a new spirit; and why will ye die in 
your sins, O house of Isracl? For I desire not that 
ye should in any wise dic, saith the Lord God, but that 
ye should repent and live.” *? 


CHAPTER VI. 


THAT BISHOPS OUGHT TO RECEIVE IN LOVE AND MEEKNESS 
THE REPENTANCE OF THOSE WHO TURN. 


[ii., 15-] See then, my 1 beloved brethren, the 
greatness of the mercy of the Lord our? God, (who is) 
good and righteous and a lover of men, merciful and 


22 P he shall. 2° P omits: your evil and. 
% Some words of the Greek *© P omits: and your sin. 
text of the LXX have obviously 81 P adds: saith the Lord. 
been omitted here per hom- Ezek 18, 3ff- P adds: 


oioteleuton. saith the Lord God. Turn and 
38 Or. and (if) he see, and repent of your evil, that ye may 
turn : live. 
7 1 + . 
3° A reads: to the house. P omits : my. 
31 P adds: O house of Israel. > P omits: our. 


* P sin, 


28 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


compassionate to 
He delighteth not in those that judge h 
deceitfulness of heart, without mercy; but (willeth) that 


one should convert and receive those ‘ 


c ver that have ‘sinned 
into the true religion, that they may be able to come to 


repentance. And if bishops do not teach, and act thus, 
God will require at their hands the sin of 
even as Isaiah* saith, “ Admonish my people, saith 
God: ye priests also speak unto the heart of 
Jerusalem.”* The bishop ought to examine ¢ the 
People, and if there be any that have sinned, let him 
turn them to repentance, that they may gain for them- 
selves'a good reward. And if they teach not, and turn 
not the people to true godliness, they shall receive 
condemnation. Now let us receive with joy and love the 
repentance of those that turn to God; and against those 
that have sinned let us give judgment with compassion 
and mercy, as is fitting, towards the penitent.’ But if 
thou seest a man who committeth sin, and falleth into 
error, lift him up again from his fall; but if thou 
makest his way of life pleasant unto him, behold, then 
thou hast slain thy brother. But it is right that thou 
shouldest lift up again from his fall him that hath fallen, 
that he perish not; and that others, when they see him, 
may learn, and understand, and receive the word of 
admonition. It is not right for the bishop to be 
negligent as touching the sin of the people, nor, again, 
to disregard the desire of those who seek for repentance, 
lest by his slackness the flock of the Lord 8 perish. For 
concerning them God spake by the mouth of Jeremiah 
the prophet, saying, “ Many shepherds have destroyed 
my vineyard, and defiled my portion, and have made my 
portion, which I love, a desert and a waste; and it hath 
become a desolation anda ruin: for my sake all the land 
hath perished and is destroyed.” * 


[ii., 16.] Thou also, if thou seest one that sinneth, 
* P in placing heavy burdens, 
“ P adds: the prophet. * P of Christ. 


’ Isa 40, 1f. * Jer 12, tof. P adds: for 
* P adds: the lives of. my sake. 


' Lit. towards repentance. 


the people, ~ 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 29 


mand the deacons to expel him and put him forth, 
sid to admonish him and teach him,’® that others, sa 
they see, may fear. And when he turneth, se 
to repentance,'! Ict them ask, and entreat for him with 
God, and? with the bishop, that he may teach him. 
For the Saviour prayed for sinners to His Father, even 
as it is written in the Gospel, “Vather forgive them, 
for they do what they know not.” '* And then let at 
examine him that hath sinned, whether he Seal: 
his evil way, and when he confesseth his sins, an 
turneth to repentance, let them '* suffer him to we 
the Church, and bid him to fast according to the 
greatness of the sin he hath committeth, two weeks, or 
three weeks, or five weeks, or seven. It is right sad 
thou shouldst teach the sinner, and instruct him, an 
admonish him, without anger or Paeoor,, What he may 
humble himself, and pray to God, and find 7 compassion 
and mercy when he standeth before Him." ee 4 
said, “If thou, O Lord, shouldest mark sin, oO ord, 
who should stand before thee? For forgiveness is sheets 
thee,” ?® and mercy is in thy hand. Thus, then, do, - 
make a difference. For God said unto Cain, “T - 
hast sinned : be silent then,” 7° and lift not up thy han - 
But it is right for the sinner to grieve and et ie 
despise himself. Let us understand the word Hane ae 
spake to Moses concerning Miriam, “If her fat . - 
spit in her face, should she not have been as ps 
seven days? Let her remove outside the eve : 
seven days and then let her enter in. ee Li 
removed outside the camp for seven days, and a al 
journeyed not until Miriam was purified. And oe 
they ?! journeyed.” 7? Let us do,” then, thus un o : as 
who desire repentance for their sins. Let us appoin 


1 P adds: bring him in and. 


'© P teach him and admonish tr B that he may find. 


4” P and repenteth. '" P God. 

ts P antite with God and. 1% Ps 129, 3f. 

'P adds: and instruct him. Gn 4, 7: 

‘P adds: this, and count it ™" P the people. 
not a sin. 327 Nu 12, 14ff. 

"© Lk 23. 34. " P sav. 


30 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


them a fixed time of years, accordin 

their sin, wherein they shall feaente ep eric 
repent, let us receive them, even as fathers sh 
a ae their children. a eae 

ii., 17.) But if bishops, and others i i 

ane on them any defilement or stain, dae 
of them the people are?! put to shame; and (if) the 
judge not uprightly for the orphan, and the oor, 
and the widow, but show favour in judgment that the 
may get gifts** and bribes, such shall be reckoned A 
with the hypocrites, Even as it is written in the Gospel 
saying, “Why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy 
neighbour’s eye, and seest not the beam that is in thine 
own eye? ’’?* Let bishops and Priests then give heed 
that there be not found with them deeds of this sort,- 
lest others be offended, when they see these evil doings. 
For the wicked seek occasions to destroy others and 
to scatter the Lord’s?® flock. For a little leaven 
leaveneth much meal. In like manner sin followeth 
after those that commit it, (and) thus destroyeth *° very 
many. As when a thief is found in a treasure-house 
and bringeth an evil name on his kinsfolk by the evil 
of his doings; and as when the stinking flesh of a 
corpse 1s cast into ointment, the odour of 2 the 
fragrance thereof is tainted; and as when a king is evil 
and cruel (and) dispenseth not justice, so, too, are his 
Princes; and as when a_ scabby sheep feedeth with 
(other) sheep, they all become scabby, if it be not 
separated from them; and as, when a mad dog biteth all 
whom it meeteth, except it be killed, all *? those whom 
it biteth become mad together with it; in like manner 
if any man be a scorner, and a mocker, and contentious 
and a transgressor of the commandments which are in 
the law, let him be put forth from the Church, lest he 
corrupt the house of the Lord, and make (it) a den of 


P and on account of this "Mt 7, 3; Lk 6, 41. 


are. 2° P omits: Lord's. 
Hi P the poor and the orphan. ?° P and destroyeth. 
Lit. interest. *' P omits: the odour of. 


*’ PI mistranslates ; perish. 2 P omits : all. 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 31 


robbers. It is not right that we should keep silent 
concerning sinners and wicked men, but we should 
admonish them, that they may forsake ** their doings, 
and put from them wicked deeds and ** habits. On the 
other hand, Ict us bid them fast and pray and give alms, 
that they may learn the fear of God. For He®>® said 
unto the children of Israel, ‘Fear me, and keep my 
commandments.” 8 The bishop ought to show anxious 
care concerning the sin of the people, and consider the 
life of each one of them, that he may be unto them a 
guide and a saviour *” unto works of righteousness, that 
they may be prepared for God, and be saved ** from the 
condemnation which shall fall on sinners at the day of 
judgment. But let such as are slothful hear what is 
said, “‘ Wherefore have ye kept silent concerning trans- 
gressors and gathered their fruits? ” ** 

(ii., 18.) ‘It is right that the bishop should feed 
the people in peace; those that have not sinned let him 
not suffer to fall: and those also that have sinned let 
him turn to repentance. Hear, O bishops, what the 

elLord saith unto you, ‘Despise not one of these little 
ones.” 4° But they ought to forgive and pardon him 
that hath sinned. And when a sinner confesseth his 
sin, and cricth to the Lord from the depth of his heart, 
humbling himself with tears and sighs, the Holy Spirit 
will come and say unto him, The Lord pardon‘! thee 
all thy sin. Know, then, O bishop, how much honour 
and glory God hath bestowed upon thee, and hath 
given thee authority to loose and to bind.42. Take heed 
to thyself, and guard the flock of Christ. Walk in the 
way of righteousness, whilst thou livest in this world, 
for thou shalt give account in the day of judgment. 
“For to whom much hath been committed, of him 


** P adds: the evil of, be saved. 
** P omits: deeds and. °* Hos 10, 13. 
** P God. “© Mt 18, 10. PI translates : 
3° Cf. Dt 5, 32 (29). offend not, confusing two very 
3°’ Lit. salvation. P omits: similar words. 
and: hence PI's translation : “" P will answer, saving, The 
fuide of salvation. Lord hath pardoned. 


** P for God that they may “ P to bind and to loose. 


32 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


shall much be required.” *? For there is no man that 
liveth even one day without sin, except One, who for 
our sakes became man, God the Word. And for this 
reason hath been written the memorial ** of the 
‘righteous who gave good heed unto themselves. For 
it is said, “My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, 
and they follow me, and I give unto them eternal 
life.” “* And He answered the people and said unto 
them,** “Behold, I judge between rams and _ sheep. 
Know, then, that ye have fed in a good pasture; and 
the rest of the pasture ye have trodden with your feet 47 
- . . my sheep have eaten.”‘** And again, “Now 
shall ye know that I am the Lord, and ye are my sheep, 
the sheep of my pasture: ye are my shcep and ** I am 
the Lord your God, saith the Lord.” *° 
{ii., 19.) Hear, ye bishops, and hear, ye people, 
what God saith, ‘‘ Behold I judge between rams and he- 
goats.” 6! Moreover He saith, “I will give judgment 
against the shepherds of the sheep who have destroyed 
my flock by their slothfulness.’’ 52 And again He saith, 
“T will judge between bishop and bishop, between peopleg 
and peoples, between ruler aed rulers.” And my sheep 
are rational creatures, and are not without reason; and 
therefore let not the people say, We are sheep and not 
shepherds, what is this to us? As the sheep that 
followeth the good shepherd of the sheep, that he may 
save it from the ravening wolf** that destroyeth (is 
preserved); in like manner the sheep ™ that followeth 
the foolish and wicked shepherd of the sheep, the wolf 
will devour before his face. Wherefore it is right that 
we should keep far from evil and deceitful ** shepherds 


4“) Lk 12, 48. 5! Ezek 34, 17. 
“« P the deeds and the lives. 53-This sentence and the fol- 
‘6 Jn 10, 297f. lowing one, though introduced 
“* See Add. notes. as quotations, are not from 
“* Some words have dropped Scripture. 
out here, possibly per homoiote- 83 Or, hywna. It is not the 
lenton. same word as is used in the 


“ Cf. Ezek 34, 17ff- quotation from Jn 10 in the next 
‘* P omits: ye are my sheep section. 

and. 5 P he. 
"© Ezek 34, 30f. 55 P hurtful. 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 33 


who spare not, nor save the flocks, but follow the good 
shepherds who spare and save ** their flocks. 

{ii., 20.] For the people love a good shepherd, and 
fear him as a father, and a lord, and as a priest, and 
as God’s high-priest, for he admonisheth them, and 
guideth them unto true godliness. For he that obeyeth 
him, has obeyed Christ, and heard His voice, but he 
that rejecteth him and heareth not his voice, hath 
rejected and transgressed against Christ,*’ as ** he that 
obeyeth Christ, hath obeyed God.** Moreover it is 
said, ‘He that heareth you, hath heard me, and he that 
rejecteth you, hath rejected me, and he that rejecteth 
me, hath rejected him that sent me.” ®° In like manner 
it is right for the bishop to love the people as his 
children, for they are his sons; and to nurture them *! 
with admonition as a bird which broodeth over her eggs, 
and nurtureth her young ones until they fly. In like 
manner let him teach the people the word of God, 
and feed them with spiritual doctrine, and give what 
they need to all who desire to receive of him; and let 
him not *? be burdensome to them, but admonish them 
with words of wisdom, and put them in fear, lest they 
turn again unto sin. Rather let him bid them walk in 
the way of righteousness, and keep the faith; and let 
him feed the people in peace. Moreover let him raise 
the fallen, and strengthen the weak, and gather together 
the scattered, and heal the wounded in heart,*? and 
console the faint-hearted, and strengthen the lame 
with * the word of admonition; and let him lighten the 
heavy burden of thcir sin, that they may get them a 
good hope. And as for them, let them learn the law of 
the Church, and turn to repentance. And if there be 
any man who is cast out through not understanding the 


5¢ P omits: the flock, but fol- ** Lk ro, 16. 


‘low the good shepherds who " P adds: with love and. 


spare and save. A omits: not. 
5" P and he that heareth his ** P omits: in heart. 
voice, hath heard the voice of P and restore the lame in 
Christ, heart that they may be strong 
* P for. by. 
5° P adds: the Father. 
D 


34 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


words of the Scriptures, despise him not, nor suffer him 
to fall into sin, but help him, and heal him from the 
wound of sin, and turn him to thee, and restore him 
to the Christian flock.*® But whoso refuseth to turn 
again, he shall go forth from thy * flock, and be made 
food for the birds of the heaven and *7 the beasts of the 
field; and his portion shall be with them that say, Let 
us eat and drink: to-morrow we die; and that think 
not on their latter end. And if there be any man whom 
the bishop hath seen doing thus, he ought to say unto 
him, I will bear thy sin, and die in thy stead, even as 
Christ died for the sin of the world. Then let him toil 
and suffer with him, until he turn again unto repentance. 
Kor “the good shepherd giveth up his life for the 
sheep; but the hireling who is not the shepherd, whose 
own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming, and fleeth 
and leaveth his sheep, and the wolf catcheth them and 
scatteretly them. Because he is a hireling, he careth 
not for the sheep.” ** It is right that we should know 
that God is merciful, and desireth not the death of a 
sinner, but his conversion and return to repentance. 
And if there be anyone that sinneth through aindecstarie 
ing not the commandments which God hath ordaine 

for repentance, but walketh in the deceit of his or 
and remembereth not his sin, and his evil which he hat 

done, remembering ** not the words of the ner 
Scriptures which have proclaimed mercy to him, ts 

a one shall perish and be without hope. But ee ou 
out a good shepherd, and a meek and patient teacher 

and monitor, and one that Is merciful and a peice 
maker, who goeth about and. feedeth his sheep 
sceketh that which is lost, like the Lord our iar 
For our Father who is in heaven sent His belove 

Son our Saviour the Good Shepherd, our Teacher Jesus 
Christ, who left the ninety and nine in the Na a 
and went to seek one shcep that was lost. And when 


© Jn 10, If. 
“ P Hay shee: s f understanding. 


7 P omits: the birds of the 1© A adds: and king. 
heaven and. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 35 


He found it He bore on His shoulder,’! and brought it 
to the flock with joy, because He had found that which 
was lost. Hear this, O bishop, guide them that have 
gone astray, and gather together them that have been 
scattered, and seek them that are lost, for thou hast 
authority to turn (to repentance), that thou mayest bind 
and loose. For our Saviour”? said to the man with the 
palsy, “I have forgiven thee thy sin; thy faith hath 
saved thee; go in peace.” ’*° For the peace which we 
have received is the Church of Christ, whereinto thou 
shouldst bring them that have repented of their sins, 
and are cleansed,’* and have done righteousness and 
goodness, and found the hope of life. The bishop 
ought to heal the sick7® who are diseased through 
deeds of sin; to visit them and to console them and to 
heal their wounds, for “not the whole, but the sick 
are they that need the physician. For the Son of man 
came to seek and to help that which was lost.” 7* Since, 
then, thou art a physician in the Church of the Lord, 
impart healing to each one as it befitteth, and feed them 
with spiritual food, that they may be strong in the 
Holy Church. And feed the flock of Christ in humility 
and in love, and mild severity"? without anger, not 
exalting thyself in thy position of authofity, for thou 
art the shepherd of the sheep of Christ’s flock; and thou 
shalt gather the lambs in thy bosom. 

{ii., 21.] Be, then,’® merciful and just, without guile, 
or revenge, or jealousy, or slandering, or calumny, or 
hatred, or partiality, or evil speaking, or haughtiness, 
or boasting. Despise not them ’® that are under thee, 
nor hide from them the commandments of God, nor turn 
thyself away from their repentance, nor bring pretexts 
against them, nor drive them away from the Church.*° 
Be of understanding, then, in judgment, and receive not 
the witness of one man against any, but only the witness 

™ P shoulders. 
™ P the Lord. 
"™ Cf. Mt 9, 2. 
P and have repented. 
** P afflicted. 
Mtg, 12; Lk 19, 10. 


™ A unintelligibly reads: and 
for yourselves. 

"* P adds: good and. 

™ P the people. 

** P adds: of God. 


36 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


of three good and faithful men,*'! to whom others bear 
witness that they are good and faithful, who cherish not 
hatred, nor revenge, nor jealousy. lor there are some ®? 
that speak falsely, that have two tongues, or three, who 
rejoice in evil-doing, haters of the brethren, who seek 
to scatter the flock of Christ. But if thou hearest their 
voice, and believest those that do thus, behold thou hast 
scattered thy flock without judgment, and given them 
over to evil and ravening wolves,®* that is (to) evil men. 
Or rather, they are not men, but evil ** beasts who are 
in the likeness of men, ungodly and unbelieving and 
apostates, who know not God. Such are liers in wait 
in the way, and like a wolf that seizeth and ** devoureth, 
they seize them that depart from the law of the Church; 
and when they see one that is lost, it seemeth a great 
thing for themselves.** For their father, the devil, is a 
murderer. And those that go astray °’ from the Church, 
and depart from the law, devils shall be their shepherds, 
and shall afflict them with torment and distress and 
sorrow of heart. And they shall follow the way of 
transgressors, and shall lose their reward,*® and shall 
depart farther and farther from God. And as for the 
bishop, if he judge not uprightly, his portion shall be 
with them.’ Thou oughtest not, then, to thrust away 
the sinner, nor to despise him that turneth; neither be 
thou lacking in mercy, that thou mayest heal the wound 
of sin, nor have thou fellowship with the man of blood. 
For concerning them the Scripture saith, ‘Their feet 
are swift to shed blood; shame and affliction are in their 
way, and they know not the way of peace; and there 
is no fear of God before their eyes.”** The way of 
peace is our Saviour Jesus Christ, who hath taught us, 
saying, “Forgive, that he may forgive you; and give, 
(and) men shall give unto you;”?* that is to say, 
Forgive men their trespasses, that your heavenly Father 


*' P three witnesses, good and ** P they think they have 


faithful. gotten them great gain. 
** P man *' P that are far. 
y- oe 
** Or, hyznas. P hope. 


* Ro 3, sf. 
© Cf. Uk 6, 37f. 


P omits: evil. 
P amits: seizeth and. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 37 


may forgive you your trespasses. Moreover He hath 
taught us in the Prayer, saying,*! “Forgive us our 
trespasses and our iniquity as we also forgive him that 
hath trespassed against us.” *? But if ye cannot forgive 
the trespasses of him that hath trespassed against 
you,** how shall ye find forgiveness for your trespasses ? 
And if there be anyone that hath been thrust forth being 
innocent, and then returning hath asked for pardon, 
and (the bishop) receive him not, he is a murderer of his 
brother, and a shedder of blood like Cain, who shed the 
blood of Abel his brother; and his blood cried unto 
God. And if any bishop thrust forth (a man) being 
innocent, he is, like Cain, a murderer. 


CHAPTER VII. 


THAT WE OUGHT NOT TO ADMONISH ANY MAN EXCEPT IT 
BE PROVED BY TESTIMONY THAT HE HATH SINNED. 


For he that thrustcth forth an innocent person, is 
worse than a murderer, and perceiveth not the mercy 
of God, for he reniembereth not the love of his 
neighbour.'| And he who doeth thus shall not find 
salvation,? for he hath slipped away, and fallen into 
grievous sin, because he hath not admonished, nor con- 
verted those who have committed many sins, but hath 
scattered the flock of God,® and also fought against 
Him. For God is righteous, and righteous is His 
judgment, wherewith He judgeth all, righteous men and 
sinners; (He is) merciful to those who turn unto Him 
in righteousness and mercy and meekness, as David the 
beloved of God (saith).‘ 


*' P adds: But ye when ye mandments of Christ, who 
pray say thus, Our Father, etc. saith, There is joy in heaven 
(quoting the whole prayer down over one sinner that repenteth. 
to the words in the text). * P adds: of his soul. 

* Lk at, 4. * P Christ, 

** P of your neighbour. “TT mceekness, in the love of 

‘ P remembereth not the com- God. 


38 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


[ii., 22.] The bishop, then, ought to judge upright 
and follow after God * and do His will, fortod ident 
righteously those* that turn to Him. Rememberest 
thou not David, when he sinned and Nathan said unto 
him, Why hast thou done thus? And he said, I have 
sinned and I repent. And when he confessed his 
iniquity, he was saved from death. And Nathan said 
unto him, “Be of good cheer and doubt not; thou 
shalt not die."”7 Jonah the prophet, also, not wishing 
to preach to the men of Nineveh, was plunged in the 
sea, and a whale swallowed him up, but afterwards he 
came forth from the whale’s belly, and was saved from 
death. And Hezekiah, also—when he became proud, ® 
judgment came upon him. And Hezekiah humbled 
himself, and forsook his pride, and wept before God, 
and (God) had mercy on him. Hear, ye bishops, the 
profit that is in this matter; for it is written in the 
Fourth Book of Kings: ‘And Manassceh his son reigned 
in his stead. Twelve years old was Manasseh when he 
began to reign, (and) fifty and five years reigned he ® in 
Jerusalem, and his mother's name was Hephzibah; and 
he did evil in the sight of the Lord.”?° Moreover it 
is written in the Second Book of Chronicles, saying, 
“And he did evil in the sight of the Lord more than 
all the uncleanness of the nations whom the Lord rooted 
out from before the children of Israel. And he turned 
and built in the high place the altar which Hezekiah 
his father had destroyed, and he set up pillars for the 
Baalim, and made groves, and worshipped all the host 
of heaven, and served them. And he built an altar in 
the house of the Lord, of which the Lord said,!! Let my 
name be 7? in Jerusalem for ever. And he built altars 
for all the stars of heaven in'the two courts of the 
house of the Lord; and he himself made his own sons 


* P Christ. "™ P omits: of which the 
* P judgeth the sinners. Lord said. 

"Cf. 2S 12, 13. 2 P my name shall be. Some 
* Lit. lifted up his heart. words are probably omitted in 
* P adds: over Isracl. Eth. per homototeleuton. 


2K 20, 21ff. 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 39 


to pass through ' the fire in the land of Benomnimén,"* 
and used signs, and [made himself like an ass '5], and 
practised magic, and sct up diviners and soothsayers, 
(and) wrought much evil in the sight of the Lord to sin 
against Him. And he set the graven and molten 
images which he made in the house of the Lord; (of 
which the Lord had said) to David and Solomon his son, 
In this house and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen 
out of all the tribes of Israel, will I set my name for 
ever; and I will not again move the foot of Israel 
t from the landt?** which I gave io their fathers. 
Howbeit let them observe all that I have commanded 
them in all my law and mine ordinances and my 
judgments by the hand of Moses. And Manasseh made 
Judah to sin, and them that dwelt in Jerusalem, by 
doing evil above'’ all the nations whom the Lord 
removcd before the face of the children of Israel. And 
the Lord spake against Manasseh and against his 
people, and they hearkened not unto him. And the Lord 
sent against them the captains of the host of the king 
of Assyria, and they took Manasseh in bonds, and bound 
him in chains, and brought him to Babylon. And when 
he was in affliction, he sought the face of the Lord his 
God, and he humbled himself '* greatly before the face 
of the God of his fathers.’’'® And Manasseh the son 
of Hezekiah the King prayed, and said thus: “O 
Lord, Ruler of all the world, the God of our fathers, 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all their righteous race, 
who hast made heaven and earth with all that in them 


" Lit. serve in. ‘' Lit. on account of. The 
' P. Benonim. AC fe Be- word must be translated as 
vevvéu, i.e. the valley of the above to give sense. The trans- 
children of Hinnom. lator has confused the two 
% The Greek has oiwsl{ero. meanings of the preposition 
In the extraordinary mistrans- dwép. 
lation of the Eth. the trans- 18 Lit. was solitary. That is, 
lator has apparently taken the as Dillmann explains: was 
verb as in some way connected afflicted in mind. 
with 8vos. 2 Chr 33, 2ff. 
1 have followed Platt’s ** What follows is an Eth. 
emendation. A and P read: version of the apocryphal 
the great land. Prayer of Manasseh., 


40 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


is; *! who didst rebuke 7? the sea with the word of thy 
commandment; who didst shut up the depths, and seal 
them in terrible majesty, and that by thy glorious name; 
before the face of whose might everything trembleth 
and shaketh, for the greatness of thy glory is without 
end. Terrible is the plague of thy wrath against 
sinners. The mercy of thy commandment hath no 
number, nor measure, for thou alone are the Lord most 
high, merciful, slow of anger, and bountiful in com- 
Passion, and gentle towards the sins of the sons of men. 
And now, O my Lord, the God of the righteous—for it 
is not for a righteous man that thou hast appointed 
repentance, not for Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, who 
sinned not against thee—turn thee unto the repentance 
of mea sinner, for I have sinned beyond the number of 
the sand of the sea; and my sins are many. And I am 
not worthy to look up, and behold the height of heaven, 
because of the multitude of mine iniquities. I have 
toiled in chains of iron, that I might get me respite 
of my sins, and by this also I have had no respite, 
for I have provoked thee to anger, and done evil in 
thy sight, observing vanities and multiplying things 
that profited me not. And now I bow the knecs of my 
heart, entreating thy mercy. I have sinned, O Lord, 
I have sinned; and I confess my sin. I make supplica- 
tion and entreat of thee; have compassion on me, O 
Lord, have compassion on me, and deliver me not over 
unto my sin. Reserve not evil against me for ever; 
and take not vengeance upon me in the depths of the 
earth. For thou, O Lord, art the God of those that 
repent; and thy goodness shall be manifest upon me, 
since while I was not worthy, thou didst save me in the 
multitude of thy compassion. I will glorify thee at all 
times and all the days of my life; for all the host of 
heaven glorify thee, and thine is the glory for ever. 
Amen.” 

And when the Lord saw that Manasseh repented of 
the evil ‘of his doings which he had done in his 


>! Lit. with all their world.  we84oas was perhaps read as 
»* Or, admonish. The Greek sra:dedoas. 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 41 


ignorance, the Lord pardoned him and heard his prayer 
and accepted the voice of his petition. And forthwith 
a flame of fire encircled him, and the bonds of his chains 
of iron were loosed. Then the Lord saved Manasseh 
from all his affliction, “and brought him back to 
Jerusalem to his kingdom. And Manasseh knew that 
the Lord was his God,” and he served the Lord with 
all his heart and with all his soul, all the days of his life; 
and he was reckoned with the righteous. Then he 
thrust forth from the house of the Lord the strange gods 
that were made by the hands of men, ‘and he raised 
high (the wall),?° and appointed captains of the host in 
every place over the walls of Judah. And all the altars 
which he had built on the mountain of the house of the 
Lord and in Jerusalem, he utterly destroyed ?* from out 
the city; and he erected the altar of the Lord, and 
sacrificed on the altar,?> and offered praise. And 
Manassch spake unto Judah to serve the Lord, the God 
of Israel. And Manasseh slept with his fathers in 
peace; and Amon” his son reigned in his stead. And 
he did evil in the sight of the Lord, as Manassch his 
father had done, and provoked the Lord his God to 
anger.” 37 

{ii., 23.] Behold then, ye have heard, our children, 
how he served idols, and sacrificed to them, and in his 
lawlessness slew many. And the Lord God afflicted him 
for a while, but when he repented, He forgave his sins, 
and restored him to his kingdom. For God receiveth 
the repentance of them that turn unto Him, and 
restoreth them again 7® to their former honour. For 
there is no sin greater than idolatry, since it is rebellion 
against God, yet men are saved from it by true 
repentance. But whosoever transgresseth and com- 
mitteth sin, and saith in his heart,2* What will God do 
unto me?—he is a rebel against God. For he doth not 
first try himself, but walketh in his own way, and doeth 


** Some object must be sup- ** Eth. Amos. 
plied, cf. 2 Chr 33, 14. ' Cf. 2 Chr 33, 13ff. 

** P has no verb. Pl in his 27° P even so that he restoreth 
edition reads: cast forth. them. 


** P adds: of the Lord. ** P adds: concerning this. 


42 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


the desire of his soul, and saith, This is good. Whoso 
doeth thus, and repenteth not, shall not have forgive- 
ness.*° Thus, then, did Amon, the scn of Manassch. 
For the Holy Scripture saith, “ Amon conceived rebellion 
in his heart, and did evil in the sight of the Lord, as 
Manasseh his father had done; and he multiplied proud 
words,*! and said, My father sinned much in his youth, 
and when he was old, he turned and repented. I also 
will do in like manner and will walk in mine own way, 
and will follow the desire of my soul, and when I am 
old, I will turn theréfrom,*? and repent before the Lord. 
Then Amon did evil in the sight of the Lord, and 
wrought exceeding much evil,®® as ** those before him 
had done. Then the Lord chastised him, and destroyed 
him from off the good land, and his servants [aid 
(hands) ** upon him, and slew him in (his) house. “And 
the people of the land slew those who had laid (hands) 
on King Amon. And he reigned two years.” 5¢ 

{ii., 24.] Understand then, ye people, and think not 
to do evil as Amon did, lest ye be destroyed. In like 
manner, the bishop ought to’’ feed and convert the 
people ** and admonish them,®® and heal them of their 
sickness and receive their repentance, so far as he is 
able. But if he be lacking in mercy, and receive not 
the repentance of sinners who turn to him,*" he is 
despised and dishonoured, and shall be condemned 
before the Lord his God. But if he receive the 
repentance of those that turn to him,*! he shall find 
compassion and mercy with the Lord God, who sent His 
only-begotten Son into the world; and He was pleased 
to be born of a woman, and was made man for our 
sakes. And He endured suffering on the Cross, and 

°° P adds : before the Lord. lator seems to have taken the 

°' Lit. taunts, or, reproaches, word literally, 
cf. 2 Chr 33, 22f. ** 2 Chr 33, 25; 33, 21. 

*? P omits: therefrom. *’ P let the bishop. 

** A omits: evil, ** P adds: and teach them 

** Pl’s translation “above and make them to understand. 
those who were before him” ** P those who have sinned. 
is not in accordance with either “* P God. 
A or P. “| P God. 

3 Greek éwé@eyro. The trans- 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 43 


was wounded,*? and died. He ** is God the Word, the 
Angel of His great and terrible counsel; He took our 
sicknesses and bare our suflerings, and by His wounds 
our wounds have been healed. .In_ like manner, 
let us, too, paticntly endure suffering and afflic- 
tion, and receive the repentance of them that have 
sinned. 

See then the mercy of the Lord towards Matthew, 
who was a publican—when he turned unto Him, He 
made him an evangelist ; and towards Peter, who denied 
Him thrice through fear—when he repented and wept 
bitterly, He received his repentance, and made him the 
shepherd of His sheep; and towards Paul, our brother, 
though he was formerly a persecutor, who blasphemed 
against the Holy Spirit, yet when he turned unto Him, 
He made him an apostle. And to the woman who was 
a sinner, who gave alms ‘** unto many, He said, ‘Thy 
sin hath been forgiven thee.” ‘* And the other woman 
also, the adulteress whom the priests set before Him 
to prove Him,‘* He saved, and said unto her, ‘‘Go thy 
way, from henceforth sin no more.” 4” It is right for 
you, ye bishops, to set your trust and hope in God, our 
Lord and our Saviour,** Jesus Christ the Saviour of 
your souls. Draw nigh unto Him in meekness and in 
mercy, aS peacemakers without strife and anger: 
convert the sinful, and lift up the fallen; and render 
not evil for evil. Morcover be ye not railers, nor 
passionate, nor blasphemers, nor boastful, nor accepters 
of persons, nor drinkers of much wine, nor drunkards, 
nor singers,‘® nor dancers, nor thieves,*®® nor murderers, 
nor takers of bribes. Neither seek. ye honour and 
riches from strange gods, but keep far from them, for 
ye have been called to this work, that ye should serve 
God. : 

{ii., 25.] Thus let the life of the bishop be. (Let) 


‘? Lit. pierced. P reads: His “Ink or. 
side heing pierced, We died. “* P adds: and our God and 
base id whe. our King. 


“" Po adds: of her substance. 
“ Cf. LK 7, 47. 
“* P Jesus. 


“* P omits: nor singers. 
°° A repeats here: drunkards. 


44 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


his raiment and his food (be) in moderation and purity, 
as much as is sufficient for him, that he transgress not 
in any other way or matter.*? For he that serveth is 
worthy of his meat, even the tithes and first fruits which 
men bring to the Church, as is commanded by our 5 
Lord. The bishop may give what they need to the 
poor, and the needy, and the widows, and the orphans, 
and to the destitute, and to the Strangers, and to 
them °* that have nothing. But if the bishop exercise 
no care for them, God will require it of him on their 
behalf, for (the bishop) hath authority to appoint for 
every man, as is meet. And ye also that are set in 
authority in the Church, if ye have need, take from its 
store, but if ye are not impoverished, it is not right that 
ye should take therefrom. And if ye act thus, ye shall 
be saved before God. But if the bishops take for them- 
selves alone, and be insatiable in eating, and lay up 
store for themselves, and give not to the destitute, God 
will require this of them, and they shall be clothed with 
shame and dishonour. Wherefore it is said, “Ye have 
drunk the milk, and clothed you with the wool, and have 
slain the bulls; ye have not lifted up that which was 
fallen, nor helped that which was lost.” ® “ Will ye 
live alone upon the earth? ’’** Therefore hath He com- 
manded you in the law, saying, “Love your neighbour, 
as yourselves.” §@ And moreover it is said, “Thou 
shalt not muzzle the mouth of the ox when thou treadest 
out thy corn.” *7 And seek ye not to take aught but 
that which is according to your service and your toil, 
as is right. For the threshing-floor is the Holy Church 
of God. And do ye also eat therein, as the Levites, 
who served in the tabernacle of the testimony, which is 
a type of the Holy Church. It is meet, then, that the 
priests eat the offerings with their wives, and their sons, 
and their daughters, from the offering that has been 


5! P omits: or matter, 2 
*2 P the. " 1 Coro, 9; 1 Tis, 18 P 
*? P omits: and to them. reads: when it treadeth out the 
** Cf. Ezek 34, 3f. corn; as in Dt 25, 4. 

** Isa 5, 8. 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 45 


offered to the Lord of Hosts,™ first-fruits, or tithes,) or 
a sacrifice, or an oblation; for they have no other duty, 
nor any portion of land with the children of Israel, but 
only to serve in the tabernacle; for the offering which 
the people bring is the portion of the Levites. And 
now ye, O bishops, are the exemplars of the priests 
and Levites, as those of old. Ye ought to entreat and 
pray on behalf of the people, for ye are prepared for 
the service of this ** church, who stand before the altars 
of the Lord our God, and (who) offer up a pure and 
reasonable and bloodless sacrifice to °° Jesus Christ, the 
great High-priest. Tor ye are preachers,*' and elders, 
and prophets,*? and rulers, and kings, who have 
authority over all the people and over all** who are 
under you. It besecemeth you to preach and speak and 
cause the people to hear the word of God, and not to 
‘ hide the keys ** of wisdom and knowledge. And if ye 
hide them, ye shall meet with condemnation, which is 
prepared for you before God; but if ye preach and 
teach the people, ye shall meet with honour and 
recompense ** before God, because ye have patiently 
endured and borne every burden.“ Wherefore ye shall 
attain in every thing that which ye need,*’ because ye 
have imitated Jesus Christ, who took our sicknesses, 
and bare our sorrows on the Cross. For He, who had 
no sin, was crucified for us; in like manner ye also 
must needs bear the sins of His people. For Isaiah the 
prophet saith, concerning our Saviour, “He took our 
sicknesses and bare our sorrows, and for our sakes He 
was afflicted.”** And again he saith, ‘He was 
wounded for our sakes and for our sins,** and was 
afflicted for our iniquities.” 7° And in like manner 


5° It would be nerhaps better *? P omits: and over all. 
to follow the reading of P: to ** P adds: of the doctrine 
the V.ord a vow which they ** P recompense and honour 
have vowed. and favour. S 
** P adds: holy and blessed. ** A every evil and offence (7). 
“A slight Fe gears z y your hope. 
i - ugh Jesus rist,”” SA 5% 4. 
Lea aie Bed ** P was crucified for our 
“' P omits: preachers. sins. 
"2 — prophets and elders. 


46 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


should ye also save the people, even as Christ saved 
you. Think not that the burden is light which 
presbyters and ”* bishops bear. As they have borne a 


heavy burden, so they shall receive the first-fruits, and 


give”? thereof to the destitute.”> For One will call 


you to account, with whom none can” dispute or 
contend. It is right, then, that they who serve the Holy 
Church should have their needs supplied, and receive 
the offerings as priests, and Levites, and 7* ministers; 
even as it is written in the Book of Numbers 
concerning the priests: “And the Lord said unto 
Aaron, Behold, I have given unto you to keep 
the first-fruits which they offer unto me7’* of all 
that is sanctified by the children of Israel; to 
thee I have given it; feven all the first-fruits of corn 
that are in all their land and all that they offer unto 
the Lord; to thee have I given it all] 7 until thine old 
age,’* and after thee to thy children as an ordinance 
for ever. And this shall be yours of that which is 
sanctified unto the holy place, of the sacrifices, both of 
every oblation, and of all their sacrifices, and of their 
trespass-offerings, and of all their sin-offerings ; whatso- 
ever they bring unto me of all their holy things, to thee 
shall it be and to thy children. In the most holy 
place eat of it; let every male eat of it, thou and thy 
sons; for it is holy unto thee. And let this be yours 
of their first gifts, and of all that the children of Israel 
offer; to thee have I given it, and to thy sons and thy 
daughters with thee as an ordinance for ever. Let 
everyone that is clean in thy house eat of it. And all7* 
the first-fruits of oil, and all the first-fruits of wine 
and wheat, even their first-fruits, and all that they 


™' P omits: presbyters and. "™ The words enclosed in 
™ P let them give. square brackets seem to be an 
™> In A the word is fem.; in insertion in A. The same 
P masc. words occur further on in both 
™ P you cannot. manuscripts. 
'® P omits: and.  P thou art old. There is 
" P omits: unto me; but aconfusion here between yfpas 
inserts the same words after and yépas. 
“sanctified. ’’ ™ P omits: all. 





ane. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 47 


offer unto the Lord, to thee I have given it. All the 
first-fruits of corn that are in all their land, and all 
that they offer unto the Lord, to thee have I given it 
all.2° Let him that is clean in thy house eat of it. All 
that they dedicate among the children of Israel is thine, 
and everything that openeth the womb of his mother *! 
of all flesh, everything that they bring unto the Lord 
from man even unto beast is thine. And those that are 
redeemed with a ransom—the first born of men, and 
the first born of beasts that are unclean, ye shall 
redeem. And for a ransom for each one that is a month 
old, the price shall be fifty shekels according to the 


’ shekel of the sanctuary, (that) is twenty obols.*? But 


the first born of cows and the first born of sheep and 
the first born of goats, thou shalt not redeem, for they 
are holy; and thou shalt pour out their blood at the 
altar, and their fat thou shalt make a sacrifice unto 
the Lord for a sweet savour. And its flesh shall be for 
thee; even as the breast which they offer, and as the 
right shoulder, it shall be thine.** Every offering which 
is holy, even all that the children of Israel separate 
unto the Lord, I have given it ** to thy sons and thy 
daughters with thee as an ordinance for ever; and it 
is a perpetual decree for ever before the Lord unto 
thee *° and unto thy seed after thee.” ** 


CHAPTER VIII. 


. THAT THE PEOPLE OUGHT TO BRING OFFERINGS TO THE 
CHURCH ACCORDING TO THEIR ABILITY. 


(ii. 26.) Hear now also, ye people of the elect 
Church of God. For of old the Hebrews were called 
the people of God, a holy people; but now ye are priests, 


** P connects with what fol- * T follow here the punctua- 

lows: let every one that is tion of A. 

clean, etc, "* P adds: to thee and. 
*' P omits: of his mother. ** P omits: unto thee. 
"? A adds: to me. ** Nu 18, 8f. Pi 


48 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA © 


a holy people, elect (in) your generation, and your 
names are written in heaven for a kingdom and a 
priesthood, a holy people, a bride adorned for the Lord 
God, a glorious and faithful Church. Hear how it was 
appointed of old what should be given to those set in 
authority over the Church of God,’ (whether) vows, 
first-fruits of corn, or tithes? for the salvation of men’s 
souls. The beginning of the name of Jesus is iota, 
by number, ten.* Hear,* O thou Holy Church, the 
congregation of people which hath been founded on iota, 
which was manifested in the law, and hath kept ® the 
faith, and believed in our Lord Jesus Christ, and been 
a guide to the knowledge of the word iota, and hath 
stood fast in the perfection of His glory. For in old 
times they brought ® sacrifices, and thank-offerings, 
and vows,’ and tithes, and first-fruits, which were their 
oblations in those days; but now let the bishops and 
priests offer the sacrifice of the oblation to the Lord 
our God and® our Lord Jesus Christ, who died as a 
ransom * for us. And He hath appointed high-priests, 
and presbyters, and deacons,”° and readers, and singers, 
and doorkeepers, and deaconesses; and also widows, 
and virgins, and orphans. And over all these is set 
the bishop, for he is the teacher and instructor of all 
who serve God in the right faith, and for their sakes 
he delivereth the word. It is right that they obey 
him, for he is the teacher of the law for all, and besides 
their father, who hath begotten them by water and by 
the spirit. Since he is your chief and your teacher, and 
your stay, and your god on earth under the true God, 
ye ought to magnify him,'? and others who are like 
him; even as God spake by the mouth of David the 
prophet, saying, “I said ye are gods, and all of you 
* P Christ. number of the testimony of the 
2 This is the punctuation of | Holy Church. ‘ 
the Eth. (A and P). Accord- * A reads: established. 
ing to AC a new sentence be- oP adds: offerings and. 
gins with “Tithes.’’ * Platt omits : and vows. 
> P omits: ten. * P omits: and. 
“In P this goes with the pre- * P omits: as a ransom. 


i y i h 1@ P adds: and sub-deacons. 
ceding words: according to the Wee ua ence Line 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 49 


children of the Most High.” '? Speak no evil word 
against the gods, that is, the bishops; but let the 
bishops have the first seat amongst you, for to them 
hath been given honour and glory from the Lord God, 
that they may feed His people in peace, as Christ the 
great High-priest."* But let the deacon minister in 
purity without blame, and let him do nothing without 
the permission of the bishop his father. And let the 
deaconess do nothing without the permission of the 
deacon. And Ict no other woman go to the deacon 
save only with the deaconess; and in like manner let no 
woman go to the bishop save with the deacon. Honour 
then the priests, for they admonish you and teach you 
the way of God; and ye shall receive from them the 
word in the right faith. For He sent them to preach, 
and teach, and admonish, and baptize into the name of 
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, 
and to teach men to observe all that t Het ™ had 
commanded them. Honour widows and orphans as the 
Church; and virgins also as the altar and the offering 
of incense. 

[ii., 27.] For of old none was able to offer sacrifice 
except he were of the sons of Levi, and the people could 
not approach the altar except along with the priests." 
And in like manner do ye also do nothing without the 
counsel of the bishop. He who acteth thus without the 
permission of the bishop his work (?) is idle and vain 
and without profit. As Saul offered a sacrifice without 
Samuel the prophet, and heard a voice saying, “Thy 
sacrifice is vain”;'* in like manner, if a layman do 
(anything) without the priest, it is vain. Uzziah the 
King also, when he was not a priest, and yet did the 
office of a priest, became a leper. And if there be 
anyone of the people that usurpeth the priest’s office, 
and doeth not the commandments of God, he shall not 
escape judgment, for he hath taken an honour that 
was not given unto him, and hath resisted the priest- 


'? Ps 81, 6. Eth. (A and P) has: I. 
'P omits: as Christ the '' P priest. 
great High-priest. . 1S. 13, 13. 


50 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


hood, and hath not imitated Christ, ‘‘who glorified not 
Himself to be made a great High-priest”;'7 but 
patiently endured until '® He heard the voice of the 
Father saying, ‘‘The Lord sware, and will not repent, 
thou art his priest for ever after the order of 
Melchizedek.” '® But if Christ glorified not Himself 
without the Father who is equal with Him, how then 
can a man by himself take ?° the priesthood to himself, 
unless he that hath authority over him have given it 
unto him? For the sons of Korah were of the tribe of 
Levi, yet when they strove against Moses and Aaron, 
the fire consumed them, because they sought to take 
that which belonged not to them. Dathan?! and 
Abiram ?? went down alive into Sheol. The rod that 
budded destroyed the counsel 2° of many foolish men, 
and He made manifest thereby the great High-priest 
who was ordained by God. Therefore, brethren, ye 
ought to bring your sacrifices and your incense to the 
bishop, for he is the High-priest. Bring unto him 
your first-fruits and tithes (and) all your vows, that he 
may give to each one according to his need, even to the 
destitute who have nothing. Let him appoint unto 
them as is fitting, that none wrong his neighbour in 
receiving alms. The bishop ought to exercise due care 
concerning all the destitute, and to examine their lives 
and know well their condition. . at 
{ii., 28.] Moreover when the faithful desire to invite 
to a feast the destitute 7* and the widows,?* as ?* the 
Lord hath commanded, the deacons ought to minister. 
And let them, knowing well the lives (of all), invite 
them and set them each one in his place, as is fitting. 
And let them distribute unto them; and to the shepherd 
also let them give thereof in secret, for the honour of 
God, seeing that the priesthood hath been given unto 


a 33 Lit. heart. 

ue ae 2 ** A reads: destitute women. 
'* Ps 109, 4. This does not agree with what 
2° P adds: the gift of. follows. 

2" P adds: also, 25 P adds: and orphans. 

32 P adds: and Korah. 2* P adds: God. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 51 


him. And after distribution hath been made unto the 
widows, let the deacons take thereof two portions; and 
in like manner the presbyters also, who watch, and 
teach the word of admonition, and let them receive 
double,?’ for they are apostles of our Lord,”* they being 
counsellors of the bishop, and the crown of the Church, 
who therein judge uprightly. And let the reader receive 
one portion, and in like manner the singers also, and let 
the doorkeepers get cach one according to the appoint- 
ment of the Church; and to the people let them give such 
portions as befit them.?® And let them not neglect the 
bishop, nor delay to give unto him, but send speedily 
unto him along with the ministering deacons. The 
deacons ought to inform the bishop of every need of 
the people, that he may command them®*® to do as 
befitteth. For of old there was no man that entered 
into the temple, or did anything (therein) without the 
Priest. Malachi the prophet saith, “For the priest’s 
lips keep counsel and search out the law.” 3! For those 
who serve (false) gods, and do their will, and set them- 
selves up. as righteous, though they are impure and 
their works evil, and (who) have no good works, and 
account themselves as the saints—men indeed seeing 
their works mock at, and detest,*? and despise them— 
yet is there none of these that can accomplish or do 
anything without the counsel of the idol-priests, but 
they look up to them and hearken to the voice of him 
that commandcth them, and do all that he saith unto 
them ; and they honour the idol-priests, and put their 
trust in them, and believe in their gods. Now if they 
believe in these that have no life, and (if they) serve 
unclean spirits in whom is no profit, and hope in vanity 

and set themselves up as righteous, how much more 
should we, who have received grace,** and have an 
enlightened faith and a perfect hope wherein is no 


3" P adds: honour. °° P th 1 
= P adds: Jesus Christ. *" Mal ca is 
ie naan ie people ive = P omits: and detest. 
uc onour as 5 "Pg : 
bean Ws e Spicie idds: of the Holy 


E 2 


52 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


deceit,*! believe the message ** which is full of glory 
and without fear, that we may please the Lord our 
God. For know of a truth that the first fathers °* and 


the bishops are the mouth of God. 


(ii, 29.] For Aaron spake to Pharaoh, being a 
_helper to Moses, and therefore he was called the 


prophet, and Moses was ca 


as a king and high-priest. 


lled °7 the god of Pharaoh, 


Even as God said unto 


him,** “Behold, I have made thee to be a god unto 
Pharaoh, and Aaron thy brother to be unto thee ** a 
prophet.” ‘° How then do ye not believe them, for they 
intercede for you, and deliver the word? 


[ii., 30.] Serve them, 


for they are prophets and 


servants of God, the deacon like Aaron, and the bishop 
like Moses. And if Moses was called a god by the 
Lord, it is right that for you also to honour the bishops 
as God, and the deacon as a prophet. As Christ did 
vothing without the Father, in like manner let the 
Jeacon do nothing without the counsel of the bishop. 


Also there is nothing that 


the Son doeth without the 


Father, and as the Son is subject to His Father, in like 
manner let the deacon be subject to the bishop. 


CHAPTER IX. 


THAT THE DEACON OUGHT TO DO NOTHING EXCEPT 
BY PERMISSION OF THE BISHOP. 


Even-as the Son is the good pleasure of the Father, 


and His angel of counse 


1 and His prophet, in like 


manner is the deacon the messenger! and prophet of 


the bishop. : 
[ii., 31.] Wherefore it 


34 Lit. falsehood. P where 
is no uncleanness, nor any’ de- 


ceit. 
33 Tit. preaching. P adds : 


of the Gospel. ; 
36 | have translated literally. 


The phrase generally means 


is not right that he should 


“patriarchs,” but that is 
scarcely suitable here. 

*7 P omits: the prophet and 
Moses was called. 

3* P Moses. 

%* P adds: a minister and. 

“Ex 7, 1. 

1 Lit. angel. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 53 


do anything without the counsel of the bishop. And 
if he give in secret to one that is destitute without the 
knowledge of the bishop, he causeth reproach, and 
imputeth (unto him) neglect and sloth as touching the 
poor, and needy,” and afflicted. And he that speaketh 
evil against the bishop, or doeth (him) wrong, hath 
sinned against God, not understanding that which is 
said, “Thou shalt not speak evil against the ruler of 
thy people.’’® For this law was not ordained concern- 
ing stones and trees which the Gentiles 4 worship, but 
reads ae ue to priests® and wise men. [or to 

ese He said, ‘‘Ye are gods, and : 
the Mest Hieh"® gods, and all of you sons of 

[ii., _32-] Understand then, O deacon, if thou seest 
a destitute man, and he be ashamed to beg, speak 
concerning him? to the bishop, and reveal not his 
poverty to another, nor speak of it, lest he be ashamed 
and murmur. But if thou revealest his secrets, thou 
shalt bring sorrow on thy brother, and for his sake the 
Lord will be wroth with thee.8 ‘And He® said unto 
them, Wherefore were ye not afraid to speak evil 
against my servant Moses? And the anger of the 
wrath of the Lord came (upon them). And Moses said 
unto those that murmured against him, And we, what 
are we? and this your murmuring—it is not against 
me that ye murmur, (but) against the Creator.” 12 And 
if there be anyone that saith to a layman, Thou fool 
he shall be condemned, for he hath blasphemed against 
the name of Christ. And if this be so, much more 
then shall those (be condemned) that blaspheme against 
the bishop. For when he stretcheth forth his hands 
the Holy. Spirit cometh down'8; and by him ye are 
taught the spiritual commandment, and know God, and 


7 P adds: and destitute. * P the Lord. 
: Bee 23. Ss ‘° P ashamed. 
Lit. foreigners. "Ph i 
* P adds: and teachers. “anger - a outs a ed 
; Ps 81, 6. them. oop 
adds: in secret. 2 Of. N : 
*So P. A seems to read: " Daas heed hie eee 


threaten, 


54 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


have believed in Christ, by whom ye are saved by the 
oil of gladness and the holy chrism, and are made the 
sons of light. For when the bishop layeth his hand 
upon you in holy baptism, the Lord sendeth His holy 
Word upon you, saying, ‘““Ye arc my sons, and | 
to-day have begotten you.’’ 16 

{ii., 33-] Understand, then, O man, that by the 
prayer of the bishop thou art called a son of God. Now 
also know that!” which was granted unto thee; and 
love him that hath loved thee, and called thee 18 to this 
glory and honour. Revere the bishop! who is under 
God a father unto thee. For ye have heard the word 
which saith concerning those who begat you according 
to the flesh, “Honour thy father and thy mother, and 
for this thou shalt find good"; and, “he that speaketh 
an evil word against his father or his mother, let him 
die the death.” ® And if this be so, how then is it that 
ye do not magnify and honour those who have begotten 
you again with water and the Holy Spirit, and have 
fed you with spiritual milk, and nurtured you with the 
word of admonition, and strengthened you by the 
eucharist, and made you meet to receive the holy Body 
and the precious Blood of our Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ? These are they who have loosed you from the 
bond of sin, and made you partakers of the holy 
eucharist,2! and of the love of God, that ye may be 
partakers of the inheritance and joint-heirs with His 
Son. Fear them, then, and honour them in every 
thing, for they have been granted life from God, that 
they may give judgment against them that have sinned, 
and save them from the fire of Gehenna, and pardon 
them that turn from their sins. 

(ii., 34-] These then you ought to fear as chiefs 
and rulers; and obey them as kings, and receive them 
into your houses. Even as Samuel the prophet com- 


'© There is no “and "’ before '' P this gift. 
this word in A. Therefore ‘© A omits: and called thee. 
there is no need to supply “‘are '* P Revere him. 
anointed ’’ as PI does. 3° Ex 20, 12; 21, 16. 

8 Pp hands. 2! A different word from that 


’Ps2 7, used in the last sentence. 














THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 55 


manded the people concerning the king in the first 
Book of Kings, and Moses also commanded concerning 
the priests, we in like manner command you concerning 
the bishops, that ye give them their due, even as is 
appointed. Tor of old Moses and Elijah™ and Samuel 
commanded the people to hunour kings and _ priests, 
who do service in matters of this world; and if this be 
so, much more is it meet that you should give their due 
and their maintenance to bishops and priests who watch 
and do service on your behalf, and are your guides unto 
the Kingdom of heaven. And if of old kings raised 
armies to fight and war, that they might guard and 
save men’s bodies, how much more are they (worthy 
of honour) who have reccived from God the office of 
the priesthood, (and) who preserve soul and body from 
condemnation. [For the soul is of more account than 
the body, and the priestly office is of more account than 
the kingly, for this is the office which bindeth those that 
deserve condemnation, and looseth those that seek for 
healing.* Wherefore it is right that ye should honour 
and #4 love the bishop as a father, and fear him as a 
king, and trust in him as (in) God. Bring unto him 
your gifts, both the fruits of your ground, and the 
labour of your hands, and your first-fruits, and your 
presents, and your vows *; even the first-fruits of your 
wheat and wine and oil and wool. And for this shall 
he pronounce a blessing upon you, that your oblation 
may be acceptable and well-pleasing as incense, even 
a sweet savour before the Lord your God; and that 
the Lord may bless the work of your hands, and 
multiply the good fruits of your land. For the blessing 
of the Lord is 2? upon the heads of the righteous who 
shew mercy. 

{ii., 35.] Behold now, know ye that the Lord hath 
freed us from the curse of the Law, and brought us 


27 P omits: and Elijah. ** P your tithes and your 
23 Lit. medicines. P reads: _ sacrifices. 

pardon (a similar word in Eth.) >" P the Lord pronounceth a 
24 P omits: honour and. blessing. 
*5 P bishops . them... 

them, 


56 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


back to life, when we were scattered abroad and lost as 
sheep without a shepherd, and as the beasts that cannot 
speak. He hath turned us from our sins, and cleansed 


us from our iniquities, and commanded us to bring our 


sacrifices to the priests, and to give alms to the poor 
who have nothing. For our Lord saith in the Gospel, 
“Unless ye abound more than the Scribes and Pharisees 
in doing righteousness ye cannot enter into the King- 
dom of heaven.” * (This will ye do) if ye take care to 
give to the priests and the widows and the orphans; 
even as it is written, saying, ‘He hath dispersed abroad 
and hath given to the poor, and his righteousness 
remaineth for ever,” °° for ‘by righteousness and up- 
rightness and mercy sin is pardoned.” 8! For a pure 
and blessed soul pleaseth God. Do, then, righteousness 
thus as the Lord hath commanded; give to the priests 
as it befitteth, the first-fruits of thy winepress and thy 
threshing-floor, for they have authority to give to all 
the destitute, and power over every matter of the 
Church. Strive not, then, against the bishops in any- 
thing that they do, saying, When did he do it? or, To 
whom hath he given? or, When did he spend it? or, 
Whither did he send it? (Nor discuss) whether he hath 
done good or evil, or acted justly or unjustly, for the 
Lord God will require it of them, who hath given them 
the office of the priesthood, and granted unto them the 
greater degree. 

(ii., 36.] But do thou set the fear of God before 
thine eyes, and remember at all times the word that 
saith, “Love the One % Lord, thy God with all thy 
heart and with all thy strength,” * and follow not 
the way which leadeth unto (false) gods, nor anything 
like thereto that have no life in them, nor the doctrine 
of devils, and other creatures (? ) 5 which Christ has 
not commanded. But seek thou to read the Scriptures 


3* Or, reason, ** P adds: and with all thy 
> Mt 5, 20. P reads: of mind. 

God. “Dt 6, 5. 
2° Ps rit, 9g. ?* PI translates : devices. The 
*! Cf. Prov 15, 27 (16, 6). word does not seem to have 
*? P omits: One. this sense. 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 57 


which are the law of the Lord thy God,® and cease not 
to read His ® Scriptures at all times. And remove from 
thee all evil that opposeth itself, which is not com- 
manded jn the law, (even) mocking and anger. But 
honour thy father and thy mother who begat thee 
according to the flesh, and love thy neighbour as 
thyself, and shew mercy ® to the poor, and keep far 
from false swearing wherein is no profit. But keep not 
far from the Church of Christ; resort thither early at 
all times, and worship humbly ® with the lowly, who 
sleep not night or day, giving ‘! thanks to God for # 
the life that He hath bestowed upon them. Live by 
(thy) labour, the work of thy hands, and offer unto the 
Lord of what thou hast according to thy power; and 
be a friend of the poor, and gain the Kingdom of 
heaven, where is no moth nor rust, neither doth the 
thief find it. And if thou desirest to save thyself, strive 
not in judgment with the bishop, nor with a layman, 
thy brother, nor with thy fellow wrongfully. And if 
thou strivest in judgment with him ® wrongfully, thou 
hast drawn on thyself transgression and sin, none con- 
straining thee. Tor judgment hath been given to the 
priests, and not to the layman. For the Lord saith (to 
them) “Judge in righteousness and uprightness ’’; 44 
and, “Be of understanding and judge the great ones of 
the people, each one of them.’’ 45 But to you * it is 
not petmitted to judge any man. For it is said to those 
that have not the office of the priesthood, “Judge not, 
for your judgment shall not be acceptable.” 47 

{ii., 37.) But let the bishop judge in uprightness, 
even as it is written, saying, “Judge the poor and the 


** P omits: thy God. Zech 7, 9. 

°’ P the. “* So A reads. PI translates 

** Pl wrongly translates: be thus the reading of P: give 
a guide. judgment unto every man with 

** P adds: at all times. discernment. The words are a 

“° P day or night. translation of the well-known 

“" P who give. saying : “Show yourselves tried 

“ P adds: all. money-changers.”’ 

“ P them. “* P adds: O people. 


“Cf Dt ww 16+ 16, 18; “Cf, Mt 7, 1; Lk 6, 37. 


58 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


orphan, do justice to the oppressed and the needy, and 
save the desolate and destitute.” 8 And moreover it is 
said, “Wherefore judge ye not amongst you® in up- 
rightness, ’’ 5 


CHAPTER xX. 


THAT THE BISHOP OUGHT TO EXAMINE AND TRY EVERY 
MATTER IN RIGHTEOUSNESS AND UPRIGHTNESS, 


Be ye then pure as the first fathers, good and wise! 
and prudent?; and put away from you (every) evil 
habit and wicked custom. Choose rather for yourselves 
the way of life. The bishop ought to walk in this 8 
way, and do as it befitteth,4 and turn aside from § evil- 
doing, and do good works,® and heal the sick? who 
desire to repent, and cast forth such as refuse to turn. 
For there are many who seek pretexts, and lay snares § 
and accusations through envy, as did the two elders 
against Susanna in Babylon, and as did the Egyptian 
woman against Joseph. But do not thou, O man of 
God, as these do; but be good and merciful, and 
receive them that repent. And favour not the sinner, 
neither slay the just. But whoso receiveth. not the 
repentant, and bringeth not the sinner back is the 
father of anger, and in him is no peace. For in the 
place where anger is, there the Lord dwelleth not; but 
anger is the friend of Satan, who goeth to and fro 
amongst false brethren—and in him is no peace—and 
causeth trouble in the Church. Understand, then, and 
follow not the way of fools who rejoice in evil, neither 
hearken to their voice,® but beware of them, for there 
is * no fear of God before their eyes, but rather revenge 


““ Ps 81, 3f. fitteth. 
“ P adds: in righteousness * P— adds: all. 
and. * P omits: works. 
*° Cf. Lk 1a, 57. ' P poor. 
' P omits: and wise. *P  unintelligibly reads: 
? P adds: and faithful. practise magic. 
> P adds: right. * P adds: in evil. 
“ P omits: and do as it be- ‘° P they have. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 59 


and envy. For evil men accuse the good who are 
without sin, and raise against them an evil report, and 
bring them down into great trouble and affliction. 

{ii., 38.) But thou, O bishop, understand, and 
examine those who come unto thee to tell their cause, 
and judge between them with wisdom, discerning how 
and what the matter is. And if a man be found to have 
transgressed, admonish him thyself alone,!! as _ the 
Lord hath commanded; take him with thee alone, and 
speak unto him, that he may turn to repentance. And 
if he reject thee,!? take with thee one or two, and tell 
him of his sloth and folly, and teach him in meekness 
and wisdom; and it (that is, wisdom) !8 dwelleth in the 
heart of the good, and resteth in the mind 1 of teachers. 
And if he hearken to the word of you three, he hath 
saved his soul and gained himself !®; but if he refuse 
to hearken, tell it unto the Church, and if he refuse (to 
hear) the Church, he shall be unto thee as !6 a heathen 
and a publican. Receive him not, and permit him not 
to enter the Church, nor reckon him with the 
Christians.” But those that repent of their sins, and 
turn to our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of 18 God—let 
us receive !® their repentance. 

{ii., 39.) Behold I, Matthew, one of the twelve, 
declare unto you the teaching of this new ™ Didascalia, 
though before I was a publican. And when I repented 
and believed in the right faith, 1 became an apostle and 
a preacher 2! of the holy gospel, for by faith a man is 
saved. And in like manner Zacchaeus also, though 
before he was a publican, (yet) when he turned and 
repented @ and prayed to the Lord, He received his 
repentance and despised him not. And behold as those 


"" P omits: thyself alone. meaning which the word cannot 

' P omits: thee. have. 

1% P and say unto him, Wis- ‘TP the Christian people. 
dom. ' P adds: the living. 

'« P bosom. '* P He will receive. 

‘© P saved himself and gained 7° P omits: new. 


his soul. 2" P adds: of the word. 
' P adds: a layman. This ™ P omits: and repented. 
Pl translates “Gentile,” a 


60 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


soldiers and publicans, who entered into the Church 
heard the word of repentance from John the Baptist, 
and that which he said after (their) baptism “Do 
nothing beyond that which is commanded unto you ie ies 
(so) lay not ye burdens ™ on the Gentiles who turn unto 
God, lest they rebel against the faith. And thus we 
give commandment: Those that turn % ye shall bring 
into the Church, that they may hear the word of the 
Scriptures, and bring forth fruits meet for repentance, 
lest they perish.% But do not ye stand together with 
them in prayer, but let them be put forth after the 
reading of the Scriptures of the Law and the prophets 
and the Gospel. Then they shall be ready at all times 
to serve in the Church, that others, when they see, may 
fear and be admonished, and learn true godliness, 

i., 40.] O bishop, help the sinners, and strengthen 
them by the word of the Lord, and despise them not, 
and refuse not to eat with them. For our Lord refused 
not to eat” with publicans and sinners and when the 
Pharisees said unto His disciples, ‘‘ Wherefore eateth 
your master with sinners and publicans? he answered 
and said unto them, The sick have need of the 
physician, and not the whole. I have not come to call 
the righteous, but sinners to repentance.’’ 28 Where- 
fore it is right that thou visit them and comfort them, 
and eat with them in love, and be careful for their 
salvation, and help them, and say unto them, Be strong, 
clap your hands and dance (with) your feet. Ye ought 
then to console the sorrowful of heart, and bear 
patiently with the angry, lest they turn again unto folly, 
for the passionate man is ever a fool. 

{ii., 41.) But if any man turn, and show forth the 
fruits of repentance, straightway receive him, as the 
prodigal son who scattered all his father’s substance, 


™ Lk 4, 13. omits: with them. For our 
*“ P adds: on sour brethren Lord refused not to eat. 
and. * Mt 9, 11ff. 


75 P adds: to God. ** This sentence, Be strong, 

* P lest they despise the etc., represents a quotation from 
teaching. Isa 35, 3 in AC. 

7 iP per  homoioteleuton 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 61 


“living riotously. And he spent all that he had, and 
there came a great famine on that land, and he began 
to be in want. And he went and joined himself to one 
of the men of that country, and he sent him to his field 
to feed swine. And he would fain have filled himself 
with the berries * that the swine did eat: and no man 
gave unto him. And he thought in his heart, and said, 
How many hired servants of my father’s (are there) who 
have bread enough and to spare, and I die here of 
hunger.®!_ I will arise and go to my father, and will 
say unto him, Father, I have sinned against heaven, 
and in thy sight; and am not worthy therefore to be 
called thy son: make me as (one) of thy servants.*? 
And he arose, and came to his father. And his father 
saw him from afar, and was moved with compassion 
for him, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him. 
And his son said unto him, Father,®3 I have sinned 
against heaven, and in thy sight, and am not worthy 
to be called thy son. And his father said to his 
servants, Bring quickly choice garments, and put (them) 
on him; (and) put a ring on his hand and shoes on his 
feet: and bring a fatted calf, and kill (it), and let us 
eat, and make merry: (for) this my son was dead and 
lived again; and was lost and is found.” ™ Thus do, 
O bishop, when ye baptize the catechumens: receive 
them and lay thy hand ® upon them, for they have been 
purified by repentance. And after thou hast prayed 
over them, baptize them and bring them into the good 
flock. For when thou layest thy hand upon them the 
Holy Spirit descendeth upon them from our Lord 
Jesus Christ. And if one of the faithful brethren asketh 
thee, and saith to thee, Wherefore hast thou (slain 57] 

** Eth. berries of  tséra. Lk 15, 13ff. This quota- 


Whether the last word is a tion is much longer in Eth. 
proper name (=Greece) or the than in AC. 


name of some tree is quite un- ‘3 P adds: on them and. 
certain. ** P when the bishop layeth 
" P servants (a different his hand upon them they re- 
word). ceive the Holy Spirit. 
** P one of thy servants (a *' This seems just the wrong 
different word), word, but both manuscripts 


°° P omits: Father. agree in the reading. 


62 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


the sinner? Oughtest thou not to rejoice with him, and 
to say to him, Because this thy brother was dead, and 
lived again; and was lost, and is found? For God is 
merciful, and forgiveth the sin of him that hath 
repented and done (that which is) good. Hear what 
David did when he sinned in the matter of the wife of 
Uriah. After % his sin he repented, and said, ‘Turn 
thy face from my sin, and blot out all my trans- 
gression. Create for me a clean heart, O Lord, and renew 
a right spirit within me. And cast me not away from 
before thy face, and take not thy Holy Spirit from me. 
Restore unto me joy and thy salvation and strengthen 
me with an excellent‘! spirit.’’42, And thou also, O 
bishop, heal them as a wise physician, and as a faithful 
friend, who careth and seeketh for the salvation of his 
neighbour. Jn like manner do thou help and save, and 
heal from the wounds of sin those that turn unto God, 
that they may be saved from condemnation. If their 
disease be great, give unto them the remedy which 
blotteth out uncleanness; and anoint them with the oil 
of life, which destroyeth the poison of the disease, that 
is, fasting and prayer; and bind up by prayer and 
supplication #3 the defilement of the limbs of those that 
are broken. And if, when thou doest all this, thou art 
not able to heal them, be not against them as a saw 
which cutteth asunder, or as an axe which breaketh in 
pieces, but rather as a wise physician who cutteth with 
a lancet, and removeth the foulness of the disease that 
is hidden within: and then shall the whole limb become 
sound. But if thou seest a deceitful‘4 man who 
refuseth to turn unto repentance, but liveth in folly 
and error, cut him off from the Church. For it is said, 
“Remove all 4 evil from you.” “ It is right that thou 
admonish him, but it is right 47 that thou reckon him 
not an‘48 enemy, for he is a member of thine. And 


3® P adds: hath sinned, when ‘9 Lit. worship. 
he. ““ P adds: and talkative. 
3* P adds: he confessed. ‘5 P omits: all. 
“* P adds: O Lord. “| Cf. Dt 17. 7. 
“Or, powerful. Greek ‘TP omits: it is right. 
Hyeuovixds. “* P they, 


“2 Ps 50, 11ff- 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 63 


\ 
respect not persons in judgment, and favour neither the 
rich nor the poor. 

[ii., 42.] And yc, O shepherds of the sheep and 
deacons, ought not to hearken to words of falsehood 
and accusation against an innocent man in whom is no 
sin, that ye should put him forth from the Church, 
seeking occasions to receive bribes, and to accept 
persons; for those that do thus are the friends of the 
devil. Know, then, that ye shall be requited concerning 
this before the judgment-seat of the Lord, for it is 
written, saying, ‘Thou shalt not slay the righteous with 
the sinner, nor take a bribe to destroy life: for a bribe 
blindeth the ‘eyes of the wise, and perverteth the word 
of righteousness.’’4® Honour not a_ transgressor 
because of a bribe, and change not righteousness for 
falsehood, but take heed to youselves,” and do not any 
(such) thing. And judge not unrighteously, and be not 
partakers with evil-doers. For it is said by Isaiah the 
prophet, ‘“ Woe unto them that call good evil, and evil 
good; that call light darkness, and darkness light; 
that call sweet bitter, and bitter sweet. Woe unto 
them that are wise unto evil, and say, We are as the 
wise.’’ 5! But if ye pervert judgment by iniquity, know 
that ye shall bring on yourselves grievous * condemna- 
tion. For our Lord saith, “Even as ye have judged, 
ye shall be judged, and with the measure wherewith ye 


-have measured, men shall measure unto you.”’ But 


if ye have understanding, and enquire into matters of 
judgment, ye shall discern the evil, and the false, and 
the slanderers who would fain slay their neighbours by 
wrongdoing. 

[ii., 43-] These are they that cause trouble, and ob- 
serve words of vanity, and make snares for themselves 
by the words of their lips. Those that do thus put far 
away,” lest they destroy © the Church of God. But if 
they turn and repent, and forsake their wickedness, and 


“Cf. Ex 23, 7f.; Dt 16, 19. 
8° P thyself. 

"V Isa, 5, 20f. 

"2 P omits: grievous. 


53 Mt 7.2; Lk 6, 37. 
54 P adds: from the Church. 
58 P defile. 


64 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


’ 
do good, let them be received that they ma enter into 
the Church, for they have received the Body or Christ. If 
a man be born having in his members aught super- 
fluous, will he not cut off that which is superfluous in 
his members, that it be not a shame unto him? In like 
manner, ye shepherds of the sheep, drive out from the 
Church of God the ungodly and unbelieving ; for it is 
a shame if there are ® with you those that believe not 
in the name of & Jesus Christ. Cut them off entirely 
from the Church; ye are truly members of Christ and 
sons of the Church. And if there be found in your midst 
a superfluous member, who hath thoughts of evil, and 
goeth to and fro among you with murder,® and slander, 
and blasphemy—he that doeth thus hath accomplished 
all the devices of Satan, and hath blasphemed against 
the Church. Let those that do thus be put © forth from 
the Church, and be requited according to their works, 
and entirely cut off from the people of the Lord. 
Behold © then the Church of the Lord is beautified, for 
the evil member hath gone forth from her, that dwelt 
within her, troubling her. These are destroyers, haters 
of good, and lovers of wealth and vain praise, who are 
wise unto evil, and scatter the sheep of the flock of 
Jesus ® Christ. 

lii., 44.] Bishops and people ought to judge ® in 
righteousness; for our Lord saith, “If ye walk in a 
ctooked way, I also will walk with you in a crooked 
way.’’® And moreover somewhere it is said, ‘“ With 
a righteous man thou shalt be righteous; and with a 
pure man thou shalt be pure; and with the elect thou 
shalt be elect; and with the crooked thou shalt be 
crooked.” & Walk, then, in the way of purity, that thou 
mayest find honour and favour with the Lord. Be of 
one heart and love one another: and let there be peace 


* P live, behold. 
‘7 P in our Lord. " P omits: Jesus. 
** P and bring murder. "2 P the bishops ought to 
** P those that do thus drive judge the people. 
out, and Ict them be put. * Lev 26, 27f. 
*° P and when ye do thus, “Ps 17, 264 


THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 65 


among you."- And ye, O bishops, feed the people with 
firmness, with one heart®® and in uprightness ™ and 
fellowship, that ye may glorify God in one faith. Be, 
then, one body and one spirit :nd one faith, even as the 
Lord hath granted unto you, in uprightness.@ Let the 
deacon tell the bishop of all that is done, even as Christ 
did nothing without the Father; for there is one will 
of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. And 
when the deacon hath received ordination from the 
bishop, let him be ® an ear, and an eye, and a mouth 
to the bishop, and tell (him) the cares of the people as 
befitteth: even as Jethro told Moses the prophet and 
he received his word. 

[ii., 45.] This honour 7 befitteth a Christian people. 
Let not the layman judge, nor the elders, but rather 
such as are set in authority in the Church. For Satan 
bringeth snares on the servants of God from the 
ungodly, and teacheth them reproaches and blasphemies. 
Is there not one among us of understanding that is 
able to judge between us in uprightness? 

{ii., 46.] Suffer not, then, the heathen to know the 
mystery of your hidden things, and accept not against 
yourselves the testimony of those that believe not, but 
keep that which has been given unto you. For it is 
said, “Give that which is the King’s unto the King, 
and that which is God’s unto God.” ” But if thou hast 
a debt to pay, delay not to give, saying, To my brother 
a believer I will pay, but to him that believeth not, I 
will not pay; but do as our Lord when He paid tribute. 
And ye, O servants of God, keep the commandments of 
Christ; and if ye see among the brethren a quarrel or 
dispute, it is right for you to give word concerning them 
to those that are set in authority. If they are men of 


** Pl omits in his transla- sentence; It is right that the 
tion the words: and let there deacon, etc. 





be peace among you. 

** P mind, 

*' P omits: and in upright- 
ness. 

* P with a slight change of 
reading joins this to the next 


* P adds: as. 

‘© Something seems to have 
been omitted here. There is 
nothing to show what the 
“honour "" is. 

™ Mt 22, 21. 


66 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


evil habits, and causers of trouble, and haters of good, 
and such as walk not in the right way—them that are 
such admonish and put to shame; but when they 
repent, receive them. And if ye act thus, ye have made 
peace between brethren and saved them from sin. Ye 
ought to forgive and pardon the trespasses of your 
neighbours, even as the Lord commanded Peter, when 
he said unto Him, If my neighbour sin against me, 
how often shall I forgive him? Seven times? And 
Jesus said unto him, I say not unto thee, seven times, 
but, seventy times seven. Thus, then, the Lord willeth 
that His disciples should do, and that they should never 
let revenge dwell in their hearts, nor envy,” nor anger, 
nor evil desire, but that they should make peace between 
brethren that they may live in unity.?8 For our Lord 
saith, “Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be 
called the sons of God.’’ 74 

[ii., 47-] Ye ought not then on the Christian 
Sabbath” to cause contention, but rather (to make) 
peace. Let judgment be given on other days. And it is 
right, O bishops, that presbyters 76 and deacons should 
sit with you in judgment. And judge not with partiality 
or accepting of persons, but judge in righteousness and 
uprightness as servants of God. And if there be anyone 
that hath a suit with his fellow, let them come both of 
them together, and stand in the court, even as it is 
written in the law. Judge ye” then in righteousness 
and in uprightness. Take heed and quickly set them 
at one, and make peace between them, before the judg- 
ment of death come forth 7 from the bishop on him that 
hath sinned. For with you in the court of judgment 
is 7 Christ the Son of God. And if any man say, Such 
a one hath blasphemed against the name of God, and 
walketh not in the way of righteousness, let not (your) 
judgment be given hastily, before his fellow appear. 


™ P omits: nor envy. Eth. name for Saturday. 

” Lit. in (or, with) one heart. ™ P priests. 

™ Mt 5, 9. '’ P adds: between them. 
™ T.e. on Sunday, the ‘‘Sab-  P omits: forth. 


bath of the Jews,”’ being the ™ P sitteth. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 67 


{ii., 49.] And when they have come both of them 
judge between them. Il or the judgment which pro- 
ceedeth from you leadeth unto life, and on the other 
hand it goeth down ® unto eternal condemnation. Tor 
our Lord saith, ‘Follow righteousness and upright- 
ness.’’ But he whose sin is manifestly 8! known, and 
hath been justly brought up to judgment, shall be far 
from life eternal, and shall not see the glory of God, 
but shall be put to shame before the saints. But if ye 
judge wrongfully, ye shall find condemnation and shall 
be requited ® according to your works, even as God 
requited the two elders who spake falsely against 
Susanna. Beware then of speaking falsely, for he that 
speaketh falsely shall find great condemnation. Be not 
as the men who were transgressors of the law, who 
spake falsely against Naboth in Samaria; and as the 
council of the Jews who spake falsely against ® Stephen 
the first martyr. They that bear witness must needs be 
faithful and & meek men, in whom is no anger, pure 
and good % and faithful, worshippers of God, in whom 
is no evil. Such men are worthy to bear witness, 
(being) pure, in whom is no ® blemish, and their testi- 
mony is sure.8? But receive not the testimony of those 
that live not thus. And though the testimony of % 
many false witnesses agree with one consent, hear not 
their words, for it is said, ‘‘Let me have no fellowship 
with their assembly of blood.” 8 And moreover it is 
commanded in the law, ‘‘And hearken not unto a false 
accusation, nor sit with him that is unjust, lest thou 
become an unjust witness; nor join thyself with a 
multitude to do iniquity.’’ 

*© P feadeth. Perhaps the with AC and is probably cor- 


right reading is “bringeth rect. 
down."? A very slight change ** P omits: faithful and. 


would be necessary. ** P adds: tover of God, 
"' P omits: manifestly. F bal ‘ihe ' 
a2 . . rf 
ea So st Pp “and esate carefully 
") Pladds: our Lord in Jeru- their testimony. 
salem, and as those that spake ** P omits: the testimony of, 
falsely against. This agrees Be 15, ‘, 
x 23, If. 


68 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


[ii., 50.) And if there be one who cometh before 
you in judgment, examine ®! his life and (see) what his 
character and habits are; and (if) ye find witnesses 
concerning him that there is no evil in him, but that 
he followeth after righteousness, (being) a lover of 
God, and a receiver of strangers, and a lover of the 
poor, and a lover of the brethren; who loveth not gain, 
no extortioner, no drunkard, no sluggard; who putteth 
not forth ® his hand for oppression—him whose deeds 
are such judge™ in righteousness. But him that 
speaketh falsely against his neighbour admonish, for 
he is his brother’s murderer; that others, when they 
see, may fear, and not follow his way. And if there be 
one whose sin becometh manifest in judgment, admonish 
him and put him to shame. 

{ii., 51..] As we have said before, if there be one 
who maketh an accusation, give not judgment for the 
one until both of them are prcsent together in court. 
But if ye give judgment for the one wrongfully, before 
his fellow standeth in the court of judgment, then are 
ye become speakers of lies, as the priests who spake 
falsely against Susanna in Babylon, and brought her 
down to the court ™ unto a judgment of death. Howbeit 
Daniel the prophet saved Susanna, and brought down 
to the condemnation of death them that had spoken 
falsely against her.% 

{ii., 53-] And ye also in like manner, if ye judge 
not in righteousness and uprightness, shall find con- 
demnation, and the scourge of God shall come upon 
you. But if ye judge in righteousness and in upright- 
ness, ye shall find a good reward and life eternal. Take 
heed, then, beloved brethren, and do good at all times, 
that ye may find honour before God with the holy 
fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of 
heaven in life eternal; for that is right before God. 


*! A omits: examine. ** P omits per homoiote- 
°2 P openeth not. leuton: Howbeit Daniele. . . 
°° P adds: in uprightness against her. 

2 ** P adds: of the anger. 

*¢ P adds: of controversy. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 69 


Judge, then,"” in righteousness and peace without anger, 
for he that provoketh his neighbour to anger without 
a cause, his portion shall be in Gehenna. For it is said, 
“Before the sun set, cool your anger, and give not 
place to Satan. (lor let him that stole, steal no 
more.] ’% And again David saith, ‘Be ye angry and 
sin not.” Love one another, and remove evil from 
your hearts, and be at peace amongst yourselves. Hear, 
then, what our Master and our Lord and our Saviour 
Jesus Christ saith! in the}! Gospel, ‘‘When thou 
bringest thy gift to the altar, and there rememberest 
that thy brother hath wherewith to reproach thee, leave 
there thy offering before the altar, and go, first be 
reconciled with thy brother, and then, returning, offer 
thy gift." The sacrifice of God is a meek spirit and 
a humble heart,!3 prayer and thanksgiving; but if 
thou provokest thy neighbour to anger, and grievest his 
heart, God will not receive thy sacrifice and thy prayer. 
Ye, beloved brethren, ought at all times to pray and 
make supplication, and utter !°4 your supplication to 
God, that He may remove from yeu indignation and 
anger. Praise the lord continually at every season, 
and make mention of His name (which is) Most high, 
that He may remove from you hatred, and anger, and 
revenge, that ye may be able to pray with a pure heart 
wherein is no defilement; for the Lord hath commanded 
us to love our enemies, and much more our friends. 
And again it is said, “‘ Hate not any man, but some of 
them admonish, and some of them teach.” 1% Neither 
hate thou thy brother with thy whole heart, nor hear 
an accusation against him, nor find?” occasion of 
stumbling because of him. And persecute not the 
stranger that dwelleth with thee, for thou wast a 


*' P omits: then. ‘*" P adds: Holy. 

* Eph 4, 26f. The second 19 Mt 5, a3f. 
part of the quotation is omitted, ‘8 P meck heart and a 
rightly, as it would seem, in P, humble spirit. 

* Ps 4. 5. ' P adds: all, 

109 DP and hear what our Lord 13 P adds: at all times. 
Jesus Christ saith, and teaches ee Cf. Lev 19, 17. 


us, ‘er P fest thou find. 


e 
70 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


stranger in the land of Egypt; and hate not an 
Edomite, for he is thy brother. And David also saith, 
“If I have requited them that requited me evil, let mine 
enemies cause me to fall down naked.’’ 1% 


CHAPTER XI. 


THAT CHRISTIANS OUGHT EVER! TO FORGIVE THE 
TRESPASSES OF THEIR NEIGHBOURS, AND NOT LET 
REVENGE DWELL IN THEIR HEARTS, NOR THINK EVIL. 


But if ye desire to be Christians indeed, walk in the 
way of the Lord, and loose every band? of sin; for the 
Saviour hath commanded you to forgive the trespasses 
of your neighbour (even unto) seventy times seven. And 
if ye desire not to forgive them, hear what Jeremiah 
the prophet saith? . . . But if thou thinkest evil in 
thy heart, and nursest hatred, and judgest in anger, 
thy prayer shall not be able to ascend unto God, for 
thou hast not done the commandments of thy Lord. 
But if thou hast forgiven‘ the trespass of thy brother 
four hundred and ninety times, thou art become slow ° 
of anger and great in mercy, that thou mayest save 
thyself. And if thou doest thus, thou shalt be a son 
of thy Father who is in heaven, and when thou makest 
supplication unto Him, He shall hear thy prayer as a 
faithful friend. 

(ii., 54.] Wherefore, O bishops, when ye are 
gathered together for prayer and praise and worship, 
and to hear the reading of the word of admonition, 
read* the Holy Scriptures. Let the deacon stand 
amongst you, crying with a loud voice, and saying, If 
there be any man that hath’ in his heart revenge, or 


nee PS 9-36: “ P because thou hast not 
' P omits: ever. forgiven. 
*» P bands; though PI trans- 5 P be then slow. 
lates as singular. * P omits: read. 
* In AC a quotation follows ' P omits: that hath, 
from Zech 8, 17. 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 71 


envy, or deceit, or any malice against his neighbour,‘ 
let him speedily be reconciled with him,® and then God 
will receive their prayer and their supplication.!° And 
when ye enter into a house, say thus, The peace of God 
be in this house. And if there be there sons of peace, 
your peace shall rest upon them. Even as it is written, 
“He is peace to them that are afar off, and'! to them 
that are nigh,” 1? even to the people that believe in 
Christ. All who enter into the Church of God ought 
to pray unto Him to send peace '? upon His ** people. 


CHAPTER XII. 


THAT BISHOPS OUGHT TO BE PEACEMAKERS, MEN OP MERCY, 
WHO PARDON HIM THAT HATH TRESPASSED AGAINST 
THEM, AND RECEIVE 1 THE REPENTANCE OF THOSE 
THAT TURN TO GOD; AND IF THEY DO NOT THUS THEY 
SHALL NOT BE CALLED BISHOPS, BUT EVIL. . a 


But if the bishop pray for peace upon others, shall he 
not much more then be peaceable himself that he be 
not a son of darkness, and* that he may be called a 
son of light?‘ And if in himself there be no peace, 
how then can he give (peace) to others? Wherefore 
the beginning of all his work must needs be peace,® 
without evil or hatred; but in love and in peace let 
him* feed the sheep of Christ. Especially let him 
guard them as a faithful friend, that they may be saved 
together and become one flock. But let evil men, who 
work iniquity and (cause) hatred and trouble, be far 
from God. 


* P omits: against his neigh- ™ P the. 
bour. ' P and should receive. 
* P amits: with him. ® See Add. notes. 
1° P omits: and their sup- * P omits: that he be not a 


plication. son of darkness, and. 
" P adds: salvation. “ P peace. 
' Eph 2, 17. * P peaceable. 
His’ compassion and His “ P adds: reconcile and, 


peace. 


72 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


[ii., 55-] For the Lord the God of mercy desired 
to bring back all generations to repentance by the teach- 
ing of the Holy Spirit, and the righteous, and the 
prophets.’ For before the flood the people lived accord- 
ing to the teaching of Abel and the admonition of 
Abel,*® and Seth, and Enoch, who ascended to heaven; 
and those that were after the flood, Noah taught; 
and those of Sodom, Lot the lover of strangers taught. 
And after Lot (men were taught) by Melchizedek, and 
the patriarchs,” and Job the lover of God; and the 
Egyptians and the children of Israel by the command- 
ments of Moses, and Joshua the son of Nun, and 
Caleb, and Phinehas, and those (that were) after them; 
and after the law by the admonition of angels and 
prophets; and after these (came) our Lord, who became 
incarnate and '® was made man of our Lady '' the Holy 
Virgin Mary; and, after John the Baptist was cast into 
prison, He preached, saying, ‘Repent ye, for the 
kingdom of heaven is at hand.” And after He had 
suffered on the Cross, He commanded us, even us His !? 
twelve apostles to preach along with our good brother 
Paul. We are they to whom He hath granted" that 
we should be witnesses concerning His Son our Lord 
Jesus Christ. And moreover (there are) with us James, 
the brother of our Lord, and the seven deacons. We 
have heard from His mouth ™ the word of life, and 
have believed and known that He is Jesus Christ, in 
whom the Lord'® the Father is well pleased. We 
declare unto you perfectly that which we have heard '* 
from Him that none that believeth in Him’? shall 
perish. To Him let us offer up praise with one voice 
that we may obtain life eternal. 


' P bring back (men) to re- "PP omits: our Lady. 
pentance by the teaching of the ” P the. 
righteous even of all the genera- ' P who have been granted. 
tions of the prophets. 1 P the mouth of our Lord. 
* P lived walking according 5 P omits: the Lord. 
to the admonition of Abel. ‘SA omits: that which we 
* Lit. first fathers, have heard. 
'© P omits: became incarnate ’ P omits: that believeth in 
and. Him, 








ayeiysies a ee 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 73 


[ii., 56.) Thus our Lord hath commanded us, When 
we pray to the Father, saying, Thy will be done, as in 
heaven, so also on earth; that as ** the hosts of heavenly 
and spiritual ones glorify (Him), so every creature on 
carth t may glorify t'® the One God by His only- 
begotten Son our Lord and our God and our Saviour 
Jesus Christ. This, then, is His good pleasure that we 
should glorify Him and bless Him with one mind, and 
worship Him with one spirit. This is the good pleasure 
of Christ, that those that are saved should be many, 
and that not one of them should perish, nor the Church 
be diminished. Slay not the soul which hath been 
made alive through repentance, for it hath been saved 
from indignation and anger. But do ye in the beauty 
of your patience fulfil every word of the Scriptures. 
But if ye scatter the sheep of His flock, ye shall be 
enemies of God.?° Destroy not the lambs that Christ 
hath fed. Be of good understanding, then, O bishop, 
lest by thine occasion the sheep of Christ’s flock be 
scattered, whom we have gathered by the preaching of 
tongues from every quarter, by toil, and by weariness, 
and by sorrow, and by watching, and by hunger, and 
by thirst and labour (and) journeyings, and by persecu- 
tions, and by affliction, and by imprisonment. And 
behold 2! we have done the yood pleasure of God, and 
have filled with plants 2? the house which is the holy 
congregation, the Church of God. Those that are 
called thereinto rejoice and are glad, glorifying and 
blessing God, even those that have been called by you 
unto life eternal. And ye also, O people, work amongst 
you (the works of) love and peace, that ye may walk 
in the Church 2* of God with one heart. And for this 
ye shall obtain a good reward from God. 

[ii., 57-] But be thou, O bishop, holy,?4 without 


‘© P adds: all. Christ’s flock, thou shalt be an 
1” Both manuscripts read here enemy of Christ. 

the imperfect. It seems neces- ™" ?—P adds: thus. 

sary to read the subjunctive as 23 Te, neophytes. 

PL does. 2? P house. 


2° Pp if thou scatterest 2¢ P omits: holy. 


74 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


blemish, and do not that which is unseemly, nor be 
Passionate, nor deceitful, nor of evil-disposition, but be 
a teacher and helper of those that perish, and a 
counsellor of good; and confirm the people as a man of 
God. And when ye are gathered together in the 
church, command them to walk in the good way as a 
wise ship-master. And command the deacons to be as 
the sailors, that they may make the brethren to sit 
down each one in his own place, as befitteth in 
righteousness and purity, for they are together with 
you in one ship. Let the length, then, of the church be 
towards the East; and (let there be) two porches in 
its sides after the likeness of a ship; and let the throne 
of the bishop be set in the midst. Then let the 
presbyters 7* sit on his right hand and on his left: and 
let the deacons also stand ready to serve with their 
garments girt up like sailors. But let the people sit 
in their places in fear and trembling; and in like manner 
let the women sit by themselves in silence. And let 
the reader also stand in (his) place,?* and read the 
books of Moses, and of Joshua the son of Nun, and of 
the Judges, and the Kings, and the Chronicles, and the 
books after the captivity (and) return from Babylon, 
(and) Job and Solomon, and the fifteen prophets. And 
t after they have read t ?” from the books two at a 
time, one shall rise up and sing praises in the words 
of David, and the people shall answer with praises. 


Then they shall read the Acts of the Apostles and the - 


Epistles of our brother Paul, our beloved fellow- 
labourer, which he wrote, and sent to all the churches 
by the help of the Holy Spirit. And after this let the 
presbyters or the deacons ®* read the Gospel which we 
have given unto you, even I Matthew and John, and 
which Luke and Mark, the fellow-labourers of the 
renowned Paul, have proclaimed, (and) which they have 
appointed for you. And when ® fhe Gospel is read, let 


°5 P priests. and P read: and then they shall 
** P in a lofty place. read. 
*' The sense seems to require ** P presbyter or the deacon. 


this slight alteration. Both A 3° P adds: he standeth when. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 75 


the presbyters and the deacons and all the people stand 
in great fear; for it is written, ‘Be silent, O Israel, 
and hearken.” Then let the presbyters stand 5! one 
by one, and confirm the people; and afterwards the 
bishop that he may save them by (his) admonition. And 
next let the doorkeepers stand where the men come in, 
and set them in their places: let the deaconess in like 
manner make the women stand in their places. If any 
man *? be found standing in a place which is not his, 
let the deacons put him to shame, and then bring him 
back to his own place; for the deacons are like the 
sailors, and the church like a ship. Howbeit it is not 
a ship, but a flock of sheep. Now shepherds separate 
the sheep from the goats, and place them according to 
their kinds and according to their divisions; and in 
like manner let the people be found together in the 
church according to their classes. Let the young men 
stand by themselves; but if there be no place to contain 
them, let them stand with (the rest of) the people, And 
let the old men sit °° by themselves, and let the children 
sit in front of their fathers, these taking care of them. 
And let the maidens sit by themselves; but if there be 
no place, let them stand behind the married women. 
And let the virgins and the widows and the elder women 
stand before all the (other) women.** And let those 
that have husbands and children sit by themselves. 
The deacons should arrange them one by one; and let 
no one pass over into his neighbour’s seat. And let 
him mark the conduct and behaviour of the people in 
church, lest they sleep or be slothful in prayer; but 
let him watch them, and if any be found laughing or 
talking foolishly, let him admonish them and cause 
them to be silent. We ought, then, to stand in the 
church in fear and trembling, and to set our thoughts 
to hearken to the word of the Scriptures. tt And when 
the catechumens and those that are under penance have 


* Det 27, 9. ignores this in his translation. 

*' Tit, be. ** P stand. 

*2P women (with pronouns ** P omits this whole sen- 
following in the feminine). Pl tence. 


76 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


departed t °° let all the people rise up and look towards 
the East, and pray unto God, who is in every place. 
to bring them back to their former place, unto the 
garden of joy, from which the first man went forth, 
when he consented to the counsel of the Serpent, and 
transgressed the commandment of God. And after this 
let the presbyters** rise up and offer the sacrifice to 
God with fear and trembling. Then let the ministers 
rise and command them to keep silence; and let the 
deacon who standeth at the right hand *” of the bishop 
say thus to the people, Let no man harbour in his 
heart revenge, or hatred,** or envy against his 
neighbour. Then let the men ** salute one another with 
a holy kiss; and in like manner let the women salute 
one another. Howbeit salute not one another with 
guile like Judas Iscariot, who kissed our Lord and 
betrayed Him wickedly.*° And after this let the deacon 
pray, and make supplication for the whole world, and 4! 
all that is therein, for the fruits of the ground, for 
the king, for the priests, for the rulers, for the chief 
priests, for the peace of the holy Apostolic Church. And 
after this let the chief priest make supplication and 
entreaty that peace may be upon the people. Then let 
him bless them, as Moses cémmanded the priests to 
bless the people, saying thus, “The Lord bless thee, 
and keep thee, and make his face to shine on thee, 
and have mercy upon thee,‘? and give thee peace.” 49 
And after this let the bishop make supplication, and 
say, Save Thy people, and bless Thine heritage; feed 
them and lift them up for ever. Thou hast purchased 
and redeemed by Thy precious Blood Thy Holy Church *4 


°§ The words obelized are ‘° P omits: and betrayed Him 


intended to give the sense of 
the clause now found in A and 
Pr. As the clause stands it im- 
plies that  catechumens and 
penitents were allowed to re- 
main for the missa fidelium. 

YP presbyter. 

*7 P standeth with. 

?* P unto hatred. ° 

°* Lit. people. 


wickedly. 

“' P omits: the whole world, 
and. 

“7 P and save thee. 

“ P adds: and have mercy 
on thee. 

““P Which is Thy Holy 
Church which Thou hast pur- 
chased by Thy name and re- 
deemed by Thy blood. 


THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 77 


through our Lord Jesus Christ, Who hath called her 
to be a congregation of kings and priests, a pure 
family, a holy people. And after that the priests have 
taken up the mysteries, let them take heed lest (any) 
enter who are not of the faithful. And then let the 
men *® stand up, and the women also,‘*® veiling their 
heads, (and) let them put forth their hands, and pray 
for pardon, (and) receive His holy ‘’ Flesh and precious 
ood. 


[ii., 58.) And if any brethren or sisters come from 
a distant place, let the deacon enquire into their lives, 
and get knowledge of their faith. And if they have 
the tokens of the right faith,** let him permit ¢* them 
to enter the church; but if they are unbelievers, let him 
not permit them to enter. And if a presbyter come 
from a distant place, let the presbyters receive him; 
and in like manner the deacons.*® And if a bishop 
come, a stranger, let the bishop, who is like unto him, 
receive him, and let him sit with him, and let (the 
bishop) show him honour. Then let him ask him to 
teach and admonish*! the people; ** for it is said, “A 
prophet is not had in honour in his own city.” °° 
Entreat him** to offer up the sacrifice. But if, by 
reason of fear, he refuseth,®® let them all the more 
entreat him to bestow a blessing on the people. And if 
there be one that cometh to thee, a stranger, or one 
of the men of the place, clothed in goodly apparel, full 
of grace, do thou, O bishop, declare unto him the word 
of God. And when thou hearest them teaching °* or 
reading the Scriptures, cease not the work of thy 
ministry.°7 The brethren ought to receive strangers,°* 


‘3 Lit. people. 


°° Lk 4, 34; Jn 4. 44. 
“« P adds: by themselves. A 


*¢ P adds: then 





‘7 P omits: holy. 

“© P the true tokens of the 
faith, 

4* Lit. receive. 

** Lit. and behold as these 
the deacons. 

51 P adds: and exhort and 
comfort. 

* P them. 


5§ P he desireth not to offer 
up the sacrifice. 

5 P singing. 

*' P cease not to minister, 
the work of thy hand. 

** Or, according to the order 
in A: Men ought to receive 
strangers (who are) brethren. 


78 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


and magnify and honour them. But if there be one 
(who is) haughty, and (who) honoureth not a stranger, 
let the deacon coming admonish him, and set him behind 
(the rest of) the people, that others, when they see, 
may fear. And if there come unto you poor men, 
whether young or old,** let the deacon receive them 
with a glad heart, and set them each one in his place, 
as befitteth, without respect of persons, but (so) that 
your service be that which is well pleasing to God. 
And let the deaconess also do in like manner with the 
women, whether rich or poor. 

{ii., 59.] Admonish, then, O bishop, thy people, 
and bid them come to the church day and night, and 
never absent themselves from it, that the congregation 
therein be not diminished, for they are members of 
Christ. And we say this not concerning the priests 
alone, but concerning all the people, that each one may 
understand the word of the Lord. For our Lord saith, 
“But he that is not with me is mine adversary, and he 
that gathereth not with me scattereth.” *° Be not 
slothful, then, for ye are members of Christ; separate 
not yourselves from His Body and His Blood; *' nor 
choose the cares of this world before the command- 
ments of God. Gather yourselves together in the church 
in the evening and in the morning; glorify God,*? and 
sing, and read the Psalms of David, the sixty-second, 
and the hundred and fortieth as well. And especially 
on the Christian Sabbath.** which is (the day of) His 
holy resurrection, offer praise and thanksgiving and 
honour to God, who created all things by His Son Jesus 
Christ, whom He sent unto us; who was well pleased 
to suffer according to His will, and was buried in the 
earth,** and rose again from the dead. But if ye come 
not to the church, what excuse, or what answer will ye 
make to God? For on this day, the Christian Sabbath, 


5* P old or young. Jews and on the first day (of 
* Mt 12, 30. the week) the Christian Sab- 
" P omits: and His Blood. bath. 

* P omits: God. ** P tomb. 

** P on the Sabbath of the 


a 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 79 


we ought to hear the preaching of His holy resurrection, 
and remember His sufferings, and make remembrance 
of Him, and read the Scriptures of the prophets, and 
the *> Gospel ; and (celebrate) the eucharist, the sacrifice, 
and ** oblation, (our) spiritual food. 

[ii., Go.] But if ye watch not day and night,*’ and 
do not according as we say, ye are transgressors against 
God, and enemjes unto Him,** for ye have chosen 
pleasure, eating and drinking, and delights, that wax 
old and perish, and ye have forsaken that which waxeth 
not old, nor perisheth.*® And to them that do such 
things God saith, “The foolish people ’° are better than 
you”; as He reproached” Jerusalem, and said unto 
her, “Sodom is better than thou.” 7? Behold, then, let 
us look at the foolish Gentiles. Every day, when they 
awake and rise from sleep, they betake them forthwith 
to those gods that ’* profit not, and they worship them, 
and make supplication to them concerning their needs ; 
and they gather themselves together, great and small, 
on their feast-days, and not these alone, but others 
also come from distant places, and worship and serve 
them. And the foolish Jews, though ungodly (and) 
unbelieving, yet work six days, and rest on the seventh 
day. Then they gather themselves together in the 
synagogues, and keep a feast to idols, and magnify 
them, and honour them that have no life, nor spirit, 
and (that) profit not at all. Howbeit they vaunt them- 
selves, and say, We are Jews. But if these " do thus, 
and gather themselves together at all times, and in ’° 
folly serve those in whom is no profit, how is it then 
that ye who have received grace from the Lord God, 
are slothful, and neglect the service of the church? If 
ye keep far from the church, ye shall lose your hope, 
and abandon your salvation, and become ungodly, 


“© P adds: holy (omitting: saken. . perisheth. 
and celebrate the eucharist). "© P other peoples. 

** P of the oblation. "' P spake unto. 

*' P night and day. "Cf. Ezek 16, §2. 

** P are transgressors of the ™ P adds: that save not and 
law and enemies of God. ' P those who. 

** P omits: and ye have for- ™ P adds: their. 


80 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


+ ye who f 7° turn aside from that which is good, and 
become ™ evil. Behold the Lord said by 7 Jeremiah 
the prophet, “I‘or my people have forsaken my law 
which I set before their face, and have not heard my- 
voice, but have gone and have followed the desire 7° 
of their own hearts, and have followed idols, as their 
fathers taught them.” *° And moreover it is said, 
“Rebellious Israel hath justified herself more than 
treacherous Judah,” *! and, ‘“ Their shepherds have led 
them to the mountains, and driven them away; and 
they wander on the hills.” 2 What excuse do they 
make who are slothful ** to go to the church, and go 
out therefrom at the time of prayer? At what time 
shall they hear of the salvation of their souls? and 
what answer shall they give to God? Understand, then, 
that the service of the faithful (which) abideth with 
them ** in truth, is this, the worship of God. Let not 
your work and your toil be of ** the cares of this 
transitory world, which waxeth old and perisheth,** 
but let your thoughts be toward God. Even as our 
Lord saith, “Take no thought for transitory meat that 
waxeth old and perisheth,*’ but for the meat that 
endureth unto life eternal.” ** And moreover He 
saith, ‘‘The work which pleaseth God is this that ye 
believe in him whom he hath sent unto you.” °° 


(ii., 61.] Take heed, then, that ye keep not far from 
the church of God, nor follow the steps of the ungodly 
and unbelievers, and the worshippers of idols, and the 
congregation of the Jews. And go not toa temple of 
devils, nor have fellowship with Christ’s murderers, nor 


™ This is merely a conjec- " Jer so, 6. 
ture. The text as it stands " P who delay. 
‘ aa " | Ak 
seems meaningless. P adds: and their work. 
™ P do. *> P for. 
™ P adds: the mouth of. ** P adds: and its pleasure 
™ P way. remaineth not. 
°° Jer 9, 13f. *' P omits: that waxeth old 


"' Jer 3, 11. A reads differ- and perisheth. 
ently: The rebellion of I. hath au Jn 6, 27. 
justified itself more than the Cf. Jn 6, 29. 
shame (?) of J. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 81 


enter into a congregation of the ungodly. Have ye *° 
not heard that which is said, “I have not sat in the 
assembly of vanity, nor have I gone in with evil-doers : 
I have hated the congregation of the wicked, and I 
will not sit with the deceitful and evil-doers ’’? ®! And 
again it is said, “Blessed is the man that hath not 
walked in the counsel of the ungodly, and that hath 
not stood in the way of sinners, and that hath not sat 
in the seat of the scornful. But his delight is in the 
law of the Lord; and on his law he meditated day and 
night.” *? But behold thou hast left the congregation 
of the faithful, and hast despised the Church of God, and 
hast not kept His law and His ordinance; but hast 
followed the way of robbers, and hast counted the 
unclean as clean, and hast become a companion of those 
that were separated from thee, and hast made thy 
dwelling with ** the heathen, and hast inclined thine 
ear unto the words of the theatre, which are full of all 
uncleanness and vanity, wherein is no profit. And thou 
hast refused to hearken to the words of Jeremiah the 
prophet,** who saith, ‘‘O Lord, I have not sat on the 
seat of judgment with injustice, but I am afraid before 
thy face.”** Wherefore desirest thou to hear the 
words of the dead heathen, who were wounded through 
sin, by the works of the devil, (and) slay the man who 
followeth them, and draw him away from the right 
faith, and make him to serve many gods? But do not 
ye thus, but keep the commandments of God, and choose 
for yourselves life. And above all seek after the law 
of the Church of the Lord, which Christ, His beloved 
Son, who was before the world was created, hath 
purchased with His °* Blood. For His *? Church is the 
Daughter of the Most High, she who strengtheneth our 
hearts, and bringeth us near to God, that we may find a 
place with Him; for we are His members and His 


** P hast thou, ** P omits: the prophet. 
"' Ps 25, af. P omits: and ** Jer 35, 17. 

evil-doers. ** P adds : precious. 
7" Ps 1, if. *’ P the. 


** P adds: the adulterers and. 


82 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


friends. Let us, then, be good and pure, without 
uncleanness, and perfect*® in the right faith and in 
every good work.®* 


CHAPTER XIII. 


THAT CHRISTIANS OUGHT NOT TO ENTER INTO THE 
CONGREGATION OF THE HEATHEN, NOR BE SPECTATORS 
IN THE THEATRE, NOR LISTEN TO (THEIR) SONGS. 


(ii., 62.] Beware, then, of deeds such as these, and 
take no part in the assembly of the Gentiles, and keep 
far from the devices of Satan, for the devil hath no 
love toward God. For he who hath fellowship with a 
singer to do the will of the enemy, shall be reckoned 
with the devil, and shall inherit a curse. Keep far then 
from evil deeds, wherein is no good thing, such are, 
play-acting, and worshipping of idols, and (consulting 
of) seers,’ and diviners, and augurs, and necromancers. 
Even as it is written, ‘And let there be no wickedness 
in Jacob, nor evil in Israel.”"? Depart then from such 
works * as these which idolaters do to lead men astray : 
they * are the works of Satan. The faithful ought to 
separate themselves from the congregation of the 
ungodly,® and not join in keeping a feast with them. 
And in like manner let us keep far from them, and not 
enter into their houses, nor eat with them, nor drink; 
for they are full of * the deeds of Satan. Let us turn 
aside from worshipping of idols and from error, and 
their salutations’ and (their) vows to their gods. 

[ii., 63.] Ye also, young men, perform without sloth 
for the Holy Church every duty that is fitting, and 
support yourselves by the fruit of your toil in purity, 
that ye may need nothing, nor be a burden on the 
Church of God: * so that we may be without care. But 


** P omits: and perfect. * P which, 
** P adds: which is pleasing * P wicked. 


* Or, perfected in. 
Oe dias and magicians. ' So literally. Pl suggests : 
> Cf. Nu 23, 23. their social meetings. 
* P customs. * P Christ, 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 83 


in ® the preaching of the holy Gospel let us not neglect 1° 
the labour of our hands, nor be slothful. For some of 
us are fishermen, and some of us tent-makers, and some 
tillers of the ground. Solomon saith, “Turn to the ant, 
thou sluggard, and when thou seest her way,'? imitate 
her, and become wiser than she. For she, having no 
field, nor any that oonstraineth her, and having no 
master, prepareth in summer her food, and laboureth 
much in the time of harvest. Or go to the bee, and 
learn how laborious she is, and how she maketh her 
work good; !? of whose labour kings and people take 
for health; who is desired of all and had in honour, 
yet in strength is she weak; honouring wisdom she is 
advanced (?).'* How long, thou sluggard, wilt thou 
sit and sleep? ?5 When wilt thou awake from !* sleep? 
A while thou sleepest, and a while thou sittest, and a 
while thou slumberest, and a while thou foldest thy 
hands on the breast: and then poverty shall come on 
thee as an evil messenger, and want as a swift courier. 
But if thou be not slothful, thy harvest shall come?” as 
a fountain of water,'® and poverty as a slow courier 
shall be far from thee. A foolish and lawless man 
walketh in ways that are not good.” ?* And again he 
saith, “He that tilleth the ground shall be filled with 
bread.” 7° And moreover he saith, “The sluggard 
hideth his hand in his bosom, and it troubleth him to 
bring it to his mouth.”® “He appeared wise unto 
himself."’??_ “A foolish sluggard foldeth his hands 
together, and eateth his own flesh” ;7° for the doings 
* I follow the punctuation in the LXX TpohxOn. 


A. Pl following P takes with ® P wilt thou sleep (a dif- 
the preceding clause: without ferent word), 


care except for the preaching, ‘* P adds: thy. 
etc. ‘7 P adds: on thee. 
‘© P adds: to labour. ** P omits: of water. 
" P ways. The pronouns re- ’* Prov 6, 6ff. 
ferring to the ant are in Eth. 7° Prov 12, 11. 
in the masculine. ™" Prov 19, 21. 
_ '? P and how good her work ** This seems a quotation 
is. from Prov 26, 16. PI trans- 
* In this clause the reading lates: The wise man provideth 
of P is followed. for himself, 


“T translate according to ™ Eccl 4, ° 


G2 


84 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


of a sluggard are without remedy. Whosoever will not 
work, let him not eat, and let him not sit idly with you. 
Fear Him,?' then, at all times, and keep far from sloth,?* 
for the Lord our ?* God hateth all the slothful. Let not 
the slothful man sit with those that are obedient to 
God the Father, to whom be honour and glory 27 for ever 
and ever. Amen. 


CHAPTER XIV. 
OF WIDOWS. 


{iii., 1.] (A wipow) ought to be # appointed at sixty 
years of age, in whom are good works, and (who is) 
elect and pure, and desireth not another husband. 
Younger widows are not worthy of the office. But if 
ye ® appoint a young widow, as she is® not able to 
have continency as the elder widows, but desireth to 
marry again, trust her not, for she will bring a shameful 
report, and dishonour, and reproach on the Church, and 
shall be condemned before God, for she hath married a 
second husband, and hath not kept the command of the 
Scriptures. Wherefore they ought not to appoint (them) 
hastily, until they make enquiry as to their lives, and 
prove them (to see) if they have (the gift of) continence. 
But if they cannot have continency it is better not to 
appoint (?)®! them, for they keep not that which they 
have promised. But if there be a young widow, who 
hath lived for a little while 82 with her husband, and 
been separated from him by death, and then hath lived 
alone, and observeth the duties of the wigows, she who 
doeth thus is blessed: for she is like unto the widow 


"The word is unusual. I 
follow the meaning given by 
Dillmann, who refers (sth 
voce) to the present passage. 


2% P them. 

35 P the slothful. 

2° P omits: our. 

31 P glory and honour. 


* P let (a widow) be ap- *2 Pp omits: for a little while 
pointed. (inserting the same words after 
2° P thou. “from him’ in the next 


© P who is. clause). 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 85 


who was in Sarepta of Sidon unto whom Elijah the holy 
prophet of God came, and she received him, and unto 
the daughter of Phanuel of the tribe of Asher, who 
lived day and night in the house of God, ready con- 
tinually for prayer and supplication, though her years 
were sO many. Scven_ years f she lived with her 
husband, and then ¢ % entered into the temple, and 
remained fifty-seven years as a virgin, hoping for the 
coming of Christ, and giving thanks to the Lord, and 
speaking of Him to all who were hoping for the coming 
of the salvation of Israel. The widow who doeth thus 
findeth honour and favour ™ and praise in this world, 
and also in the next before God in the Kingdom of 
heaven. 

{iii., 2.] And let not younger widows be appointed 
to the order (of widows) of the Church, for they cannot 
have continency while they are in the vigour of their 
youth; and they will marry a second husband. And as 
for such as these their youth is (given over) to Satan; 
but let them take heed for their own salvation that 
they marry not a second husband. And as for such as 
these 8 ye must needs understand this, that a first 
marriage is pure before God; but those that marry a 
second time are transgressors of the law; yet it is not 
on account of their union, but (because) they have 
proved false against God the Creator. And those that 
marry a third time shall not be reckoned with the flock 
of the Lord *® Christ; and those that marry a fourth 
time, their wantonness is still more abundantly mani- 
fested, and they shall find shame and dishonour. For 
in the first creation God gave one woman to one man, 
and for this cause they two are one flesh. Thus we 
command the younger women; if their first husbands 
die, let them marry a second husband,® if they cannot 
have continency, lest they fall again ® into the snare 
and devices of Satan, and into evil desires that destroy 


*® See Add. notes. ** P omits: the Lord. 

** P favour and glory. *' P marry again. 

*. P omits: And as for such ‘** P omits: again. 
as these. 


86 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


souls, and go down themselves into the eternal con- 
demnation of Gehenna, where is no “ rest. 

[iii., 3.] But widows who are known for righteous- 
ness, women who have married one man, and concern- 
ing whom many bear witness that they have lived in 
purity, let such be reckoned with the faithful widows, 
and (those who) bring up their children without blame.*! 
Those that are such ye ought to help, and give them 
what they need, for their trust is in God. And now 
also ® stretch forth thy hand to give, and remember 
the poor,’ and give to each one according to his need, 
and visit the widows and the orphans and the afflicted. 

{iii., 4.] The bishop, then, ought to help and save 
and supply the need of all the destitute and troubled, 
and help them,*4 and feed in his good pasture all the 
people, who bring their offering of alms. From what 
they have brought to thee, give what they have given 
to thee,“ to each one, as is fitting, as a good and 
merciful steward, for this is well-pleasing before God. 
Everyone that giveth to the destitute shall find a good 
reward; and thou, who hast toiled for God, shalt 
obtain a recompense. And say thus unto those to 
whom thou hast given, (It is) such a one who hath 
offered (this), and I have given (it) to you, that ye 4 
may pray for him,‘? and entreat on his behalf. Ye ‘8 
ought to do good unto all men, and not say, To this 
man will I give, and the other I will refuse. Do thou 
make no distinction between any. For our.Lord saith, 
“Give to everyone that hath asked of thee,” * that is, 
either thy friend, or thine enemy, or thy kinsman, or 
a stranger, or one that is married, or one that hath no 
wife, or a widow, or an orphan—even to every one that 
is 5! destitute do thou good. For our Lord hath com- 


** P the soul, given to thee. 

«* P adds: refreshment nor. “* P they. 

“\ Lit. impurity. ‘' P omits: for him. 
‘2 P adds: O bishop. “ P we. 

“ P adds: and needy. “ Lk 6, 30. 

‘« P omits: and help them. 5° P omits: that is. 


P omits: what they have "| P to all the. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 87 


’ ful 
din the Scriptures that we should be mercifu 
Cane poor, for He saith by the mouth of Tale a 
prophet, “ Break thy bread to the hungry, an Ake iv 
poor to eat," and make him to dwell in the ae oe 
thy house. And if thou scest one that Is naked, ats 
him; and shut not thine eyes (to him that ot 
sced of thy house." & And Daniel also ou ise 
fore let my counsel be pleasing unto thee, . Oe cd 
by almsgiving in righteousness thou shalt . sie 
and (atone for) thy sin by shewing mercy 7 a P ee 
until, God pardon thine iniquity. iy ; et 
Solomon ®5 saith, “By faith and by mercy eee 
be blotted out.’’ & And moreover David saith, incre 
is he that considereth the poor and pe ae ss 
shall deliver him from the day of evil. An ae 
he saith, “‘He hath scattered abroad, and ee A the 
poor: and his righteousness remaineth a ae 
And again ee prec eee) : a : eal 
mercy to the poor lendeth unto : ee aa 
mpensed even as he hath given. ° 

aes! his ear, lest he hear the cry of the poor, a 

he that covereth Res be Sn pee the oppressed, 

i hall the Lord be deal. ™ ; 
2 ae a * Widows ought to be patient, not Luerpie 
(women) in whom is no evil nor anger, but ae es 
worshipping God in righteousness. And w ses a 
they see evil deeds, or hear ® evil words, oe eae 
silent, as if they saw and heard not. Let Maca 
have no care aes to es “ne ck ae ae aiean weet 
ba offerings to the : } 

or ce ata aoe A tler idle words of vanity, let 
ing i ** P omits: and he that... 

: ce ae la iad the | oppressed gece SA 
iniguity 4, 24. A omits: thine P ads and he that covert 
5! P omits: Solomon. s eye lest. ae a 
wb by ergy andy th Pe ant and shal oo 

Ey him. 
“ Hs arg g. P adds: and Me P adds: and meek. 


*2 P omits: hear, 
ever. “PD give alms. 


88 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


them not answer him, but let them recei 

seek words of faith and deeds of soe an Mgr 
good hope before God. But let those (widows) that 
desire to learn that which is appointed,® go to those in 
authority to learn and © hear the word of admonition: 
and let them not hearken to slander, nor follow after 
other gods, but worship the One God who created all 
things. For the Lord hath likened the Kingdom of 
heaven to a grain of mustard seed, which is smaller 
than all seeds, and when a man tastes it, it burneth 
him. And so the word of the doctrine of the faith 
burneth Satan. We ought not to transgress the words 
of the prophets, nor reveal mysteries to unbelievers 
but we (ought) to be firm in faith. For our Lord hath 
commanded us, saying, “Cast not your pearls before 
swine, nor give your holy things to the dogs,® lest 
they trample your pearls with their feet, and turn and 
rend you.’’ _ For when the ungodly know the word 
of the mysteries, they despise (it), and in their foll 
a (it) i dishonour and a shame. : 

i., 6.) But teach them rather ® the words of t 

Law, and the prophets who prophesied of the ae 
of Christ. For our Master 7 Jesus Christ sent us the 
Twelve to teach all nations; but He commanded not 
women to teach, nor to speak in the Church to the 
people. But let them rather receive admonition and 
(keep) from deeds of fornication, and be obedient in 
fasting and prayer and in hearing”! the words of the 
Scriptures. For there abode with us72 Mary Magde- 
lene, and the sisters 73 of Lazarus, Mary and Martha 
and Salome, and others also with them”: (and) since 
He commanded not them to teach along with us 
neither is it right for other women to teach. For 75 
the man is the head of the woman, so it is not right 


*s Lit. learn the ordinance.  P our Lord. 

** P omits: learn and. ™ P for hearing 

‘7 P adds: lest they turn and 77 P adds: His mother and 
bite you, nor to swine. His sisters. 

“Mt 7, 6. P omits: and '* P sister. 
turn and rend you. ™ P omits: with them. 


** P adds: to understand. '™ P But if, 


> 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 89 


that the member should be greater than the head.”6 
Widows and virgins ought not to walk about in the 
streets, nor enter men’s houses 77, but they who do 
thus are not widows nor virgins, but rather become a 
stumbling-block to men. And if 78 they cleave not to 
the Church, they become slothful and insatiate, and 
covetous of the goods of others, and they lead men 
captive, and become seducers of others, and cause souls 
to fall; and they that follow them are far from the 
Lord. But as for those that enter the Church and 
understand not 7 that which is in ® the Scriptures, and 
hearken not to the word of the book 8! of admonition, 
concerning them that do thus Isaiah the prophet saith, 
“Hearing they shall hear, and shall not understand; 
and seeing they shall see, and shall not perceive: for 
the heart of this people is darkened.” © 

[iii.,°7-] And to widows such as these show thou 
not the sacrifice of Christ. But let her that desireth to 
please Christ 8 dwell in her house in quietness, and 
glorify Him by day and by night with a mouth that 
keepeth not silence, and let her pray to God with a 
pure heart like wise Judith who prayed to God for 
Israel day and night. In like manner the merciful 
widow will pray to God, ceasing not to resort to the 
church every day,*! for all her thoughts are ready con- 
tinually for (His) service, and she turneth not to® 
pleasure; but her eyes are pure, and her ears holy, and 
she stretcheth not out her hands to covetousness, and 
her feet run in the way of peace, and her mouth 
speaketh not lies, and her food is in moderation. As 
for her whose works are such, the Lord will hear her 
prayer and her supplication, for it ts said, ‘‘ When ® 
1 call upon thee, hear me speedily."’®7 Let such a 


© P omits: it Is not right *! P omits : of the book. 
. head. "2 Isa 6, of. 
” P enter the law-court (?). > P the Lord. 

Pl enter into public assemblies. * P omits: every day. 
™ P and those that. * P adds: the desire of. 
1* A omits the negative here "© P In the day that. 

and with the next verb. "' Ps 101, 3- 

"© P the word of. 


go THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


widow be appointed, who loveth not money, in whom is 
no vanity, nor avarice, (who is) no lover of gain, but 
is elect ® and prudent, and abideth at home, giving 
praise, and singing, and reading the Scriptures, and 
observeth the times of the hours by day and by night, 
and fasteth and prayeth to God at all times, and 
yiveth to the poor from the labour of her hands, 
and seeketh no gain, remembering the widow who 
offered the two mites in the sanctuary of the Lord; of 
whom ®& Jesus Christ bare witness in the Gospel ™: 
“Verily I say unto you that this widow hath offered 
more than all they that offered to the treasury. For all 
they that offered," offered of their abundance,” but she 
of her want offered all that she had, even all her 
living.” 8 

{iii., 8.] The widows, then, ought to be pure, and to 
be in subjection with fear and trembling, but above all 
to the bishop % and to the presbyters and to the deacons 
and to the deaconesses. And let them do nothing without 
the counsel of the deacons, nor go after pleasant meats 
or wantonness. But if they be found doing thus, let 
them be admonished by the deacon, and let him com- 
mand them to fast. And in like manner let not the 
priests receive gifts® from robbers and  money- 
changers 7 and adulterers. Receive thou nothing from 
those that do thus, nor offer (it) as an offering to the 
Lord thy God. The widows ought, then, to be ready to 
hearken to the words of their elders, and to do all that 
they command them, and to observe the word of the 
bishop, and to honour him as God. But if there be 
anyone that receiveth alms from the evil-doers and the 
ungodly,% he shall fall into their error, and die in their 
iniquity. If he prayeth for them, he grieveth Christ. 


** Or, approved. ** P omits: and trembling. 
** P adds: our Lord, ** P bishops. 
*© P adds: and said. ** Lit. interest. 
"A per  homoioteleuton *' P omits: and  money- 
omits: to the treasury. For all changers. 
they that offered. * P the ungodly and the 
, 


P of that which they had. — eyil-doers. 
°° Mk 12, 43- : 











THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 9! 


But let him turn them to repentance; and those that 
convert not’ the evil-doers and liars! and sinners are 
partakers with them in the evil of their deeds. 


CHAPTER XV. 
THAT WOMEN OUGHT NOT TO BAPTIZE, 


[ili., 9.] Benotp we declare unto you that great is 
the condemnation of those that thus do these deeds.! 
We command you not to do this,? for this thing is a 
transgression of the law. For the head of the woman 
is the man, who is appointed unto the priesthood. We 
then ought not to transgress against the Creator, (and) 
leave the head and follow the member. For the woman 
is the member of the man, and came forth from him; 
and from her children are born. Because He said unto 
her, ‘‘He is thy lord,” as we have already said, suffer 
not the women to admonish or teach, or execute the 
office of the priesthood, which is not commanded in 
the law. And he that doeth thus hath transgressed 
against God, and is as those that are without know- 
ledge, even those that appoint women to be priestesses 
to graven images of women. Such women ® keep far 
away from the institution’ of Christ. Wherefore 
women ought never® to baptize anyone. If it were 
lawful for women to baptize, our Lord Jesus Christ 
would have been baptized by His mother, and would 
not have been baptized by John; and He would not have 
sent us (only) into the world to baptize, but would have 
sent women to baptize along with us. We too com- 
mand you that they do no such thing. Even if they 
are very wise, and have faith, and know the Scriptures, 
we do not permit them? to baptize or preach the 
Gospel. 

** A omits: and those that * The suffix of the verb in A 
convert not. is feminine. 

'° P the erring. Lit. law. 

' P omits: these deeds. P God, 

7 Lil, this deed. P omits: never. 

P adds: teach, or. 


~ eee 


92 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


CHAPTER XVI. 


THAT THE LAYMAN OUGHT NOT TO EXECUTE THE OFFICE 
OF THE PRIESTHOOD. 


[iii., 10.] We command you,! then, that no layman 
execute the office of the priesthood, . (that he) neither 
offer incense, nor baptize, nor lay on hands, nor bless,® 
nor give the bread of the blessing. For there is none 
that can receive this grace, unless it be given him of 
God. But they must needs receive this grace and 
honour from the bishop. And he to whom the dignity 
of the priesthood hath not been given shall find con- 
demnation, if he transgress, like Uzziah the King. 

{iii., 11.) Moreover we do not command that all 
that are in the Church should baptize—(that is) neither 
the readers, nor the singers, nor the doorkeepers but 
only the bishops and the presbyters, and let. the 
deacons $ minister together with them. And they who 
transgress and do thus shall find the condemnation 
which befell the sons of Korah. Behold we command 
that presbyters ordain not deacons, nor deaconesses, 
nor readers, nor singers, nor doorkeepers; but let 
bishops only ordain according to the order of the 
Church—and such in whom is no revenge, nor envy, 
nor slander, nor hatred, nor malice. 

{iii., 12.) Behold we have told you before that they 
that do thus are aliens 5 from the society ® of Christians : 
and above all widows. 


CHAPTER XVII. 
OF WIDOWS. 


For Satan seeketh an occasion whereby to ensnare, 
as he did of old in the case of Cain. For there are 
some who say, We are widows, but do not do the 


“ P omits: nor deaconesses. 
* P far removed from. 
* Lit. people. 


' P omits: you. 
7 P omits: nor bless. 
* P and the deacons who. 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 93 


works that befit widows, even as Cain! did toward his 
brother that which befitted not. These then are they 
that 2 have no knowledge. For it is not by being called 
widows that they shall enter into? the Kingdom of 
heaven, but by a right faith and by good works. But 
she that taketh the name of a widow, and doeth the 
work of Satan,® belieth the name (? )® so that she shall 
find eternal condemnation.’ Behold we hear that there 
are among the widows some that are evil and envious 
and slanderers,® and that cause strife amongst the 
brethren. These are not of Christ, for they have not 
kept the word of admonition. If there be one of the 
sisters, and (others of them) see men give her alms, 
whether money, or raiment,® or food, or drink, and (if) 
she then rejoice and find rest, they ought to say thus: 

{iii., 13.] Blessed be the Lord our !°© God, Who hath 
granted rest and ¥ joy to the widow, our beloved sister, 
O Lord send blessing and honour ? on him who hath 
given to this widow, and increase his substance in 
righteousness and in purity, and remember him with 
Thy goodness, in the greatness of * Thy ¢ompassion 
and mercy. And to this bishop also give Thou a double 
honour, who hath taught and exhorted those that have 
given unto us: give him the crown of glory when he 
shall depart this life. And in like manner let this 
widow pray and entreat along with them for those that 
have shewn mercy towards her. 

(iii., 14.] And now’ also let her give to the 
destitute from that which she hath received; and for 
this cause shall her works be well-pleasing before God, 
as it is written, saying, ‘Let not thy left hand know 
what thy right hand doeth, and let thine alms be 


' P adds: who. ' P find condemnation before 
> P omits: are they that. God for ever. 

2 P shall inherit. * P omts: and _ slanderers. 

“ P by patience. * P adds: of any kind. 

* P the devil. ‘* P omits: our. 


™ P omits: rest and. 

‘13 P omits: and honour. 

** P omits: the greatness of. 
P omits: now. 


* The reading is uncertain. 
Pl. translates : is a deceiver, in- 
somuch that she shall receive. 


94 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


secret.” '* Thus let '* the widow ra 
anes unto her and bestowed Hes eee 
ines bel Sr, bys thy Father, who seeth 
- reward thee openly. But wi 
Bae ane “ta begs - commandment of Gane 
oO hath given alms to their si ue 
fend) they ask, and say, Who is it that eee 
unde her? ai then when they under- 
and » they go to him th Y gi 
their sister to iraukee: him, and i ne in, whe 
tae thou given first unto her, while we are far riGie 
sac than she? For they are foolish who say thus 
an ing it is a gift from man, whereas the gift of 
avour is from God. But if 2° she was manifestly in 
want, uiGy ought not to go to trouble?! him ‘that 
showed ? mercy, but rather is it right that they should 
remain * at home, and fall down on their faces, and 
repent and Pray to God. For God sheweth merc to 
them that Proclaim His goodness. Our Lord 24 saith 
eee ye enter into a house, say, Peace be to this 
sa and if a son of peace be there, your peace shall 
sores it; and, if not, your peace shall return to 
fiii., 15.] But if peace ”* find not (a plac 
(for her) where she may rest, she sean Roe 
but returneth to him that sent her. In like manner the 
unrighteous curse shall not come on him that hath not 
sinned, but shall rather return on him that uttered it 
He that hath cursed another without cause, hath cursed 
himself, as Solomon saith.?* In like manner ye also 
shall be requited even as ye have done unto others. 


THE ETHLOPIC DIDASCALIA 95 


For it is said, ‘“‘ He hath digged a pit, and hollowed it 
out, and he shall fall into the pit which he made. And 
his toil shall return on his own head, and his wickedness 
shall descend upon his own pate.” 7* For he that 
diggeth a pit for his neighbour shall fall,into it,*° and 
he that feareth a curse, let him not curse another; and 
what he hateth for himself let him not do to his 
neighbour. Wherefore, O bishop, do thou as a 
master *? admonish those women *? that despise widows, 
and bear patiently with the angry, and visit the sick, 
and rejoice with the elect who bless and curse not, and 
command them to do not that which is evil, but to 
make peace.** Whether it be a bishop, or a presbyter, 
or a deacon, or whosoever it be of those set in authority, 
let there not proceed from his mouth cursing, lest he 
inherit a curse ** instead of a blessing. The bishop 
ought to admonish and teach ** and command the people 
that no word of cursing proceed from their mouths.** 
But let him show care for priests, and deacons, and 
virgins, and widows, and the people. 

[iii., 16.] Wherefore, O bishop, prove the deacons 
who do service with thee, and help them in doing good, 
that they may be ready to minister unto the people, and 
let a deaconess also be appointed to minister unto the 
women, an elect and pure woman who is blameless. 
For a deacon ought not to minister unto the women, 
lest there arise an evil report from those that believe 
not. Therefore let there be a deaconess as a minister 
to the women, and let her anoint them with oil, and 
clothe them after baptism. And do thou, O bishop, 
anoint the foreheads of them that are baptized, men and 
women, with holy oil according to the ordinance of 


'* Mt 6, 3f. 

1 P ai 

 P omits: and bestowed 
alms upon her. 

‘* P adds: of God. 

'* P adds: widow. 

7° P omits: But if. 

™' P and trouble. 

_ ‘ hath shewn. 

rather in rightcousness 

(?) let them genial 


?* P For our Lord. 

75 Lk 10, 6. 

** P omits : peace. 

*" A omits: she abideth not 
there. 
_ 7™* A new chapter (xvi accord- 
ing to its reckoning) begins here 
in P with the title, “That ye 
ought not to do evil to your 
neighbours."’ There is no break 
in 





holy baptism. And after this, O bishops and presbyters, 


* Ps 7, 16f. 
2° P adds: himself. 
* P do thou teach them 


Pp and admonish them 
(masc.). 

*? P command them not that 
which is evil, but rather that 


they do good and (make) peace. 

** P omits: lest he inherit a 
curse. 

** P teach and admonish. 

** P and no word of cursing 
(ought) to proceed from his 
mouth. 


96 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


pray for them that are under you, and baptize them into 
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Spirit. And then let the deacon take the men, 
and let the deaconess also take the women, that the 
seal which they receive, which no man may (break), 
may be holy and pure. And after they have been 
baptized, let the bishop anoint them with the oil of 
balsam, for they have been baptized into the death of 
* Christ. 

{ili., 17.] The oil of balsam is the strength of faith, 
for when a man cometh forth from the water,*’ he is 
in the likeness of Christ whom the Father raised from 
the dead. This is He who is over all;°* our Lord 
Jesus Christ is the only-begotten Son the Lord of life, 
and the Paraclete is the Spirit of truth who was sent 
by the Father to teach all things. 

(iii., 18.) But let them that are baptized be far from 
transgression and be pure from sin, and let them be 
friends of God and enemies of the devil, and fellow- 
heirs of Christ and + adversaries of t Satan ®* and his 
devices. And they shall be pure without stain, and shall 
be called the sons of Christ. Moreover let them pray 
and entreat the Father that they may be one congre- 
gation together with the faithful, and say thus, Our 
Father which art in heaven. Hallowed be thy name. 
Thy Kingdom come. And thy will be done, as in 
heaven so also on earth. Give us to-day our daily 
bread. Forgive us our trespasses and our iniquities, 
as we also forgive him that hath trespassed against us. 
And bring us not into temptation, but save us and 
deliver us from all evil. For thine is the Kingdom, 
the power and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen. 

[ili., 19.) The deacons then must needs be pure 
and good, without blame, as the bishop; and serve 
continually in the Holy Church, and minister unto God 


* After this word there is a clause. 
leaf lost in Platt’s manuscript. ** So E reads, A by an in- 
** This follows the punctua-  terchange of two letters has the 
tion of AC. The Eth. takes absurd reading: servants of 
these words with the preceding Satan. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 97 


with a good ministry, and fulfil their office in wisdom 
with one -heart and one spirit, and understand the 
reward of their service, and not be puffed up in 
ministering to the destitute. Even as our Lord Jesus 
Christ came, not to be ministered unto, but to minister, 
and to give His life « ransom for many. And moreover 
He refused not to give His life in place of His friends.*° 
And if the Lord of glory and the Lord of heaven and 
earth endured all this patiently for our sakes, how 
then are ye puffed up in ministering to the poor and 
needy? Ye ought in everything to be imitators of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, who endured to become a servant, 
and accepted poverty and want, and humbled Himself, 
and bore the sufferings of the Cross for our sakes. In 
like manner do ye also do service to the poor your 
brethren, and be imitators of Christ. But he among 
you that desireth to be chief, let him be your servant. 
So our Lord Jesus Christ fulfilled in word and in deed 
all that was written, and became the servant of many. 
He took a towel,'' and poured water into a bason, and 
first washed the feet of His disciples and (then) wiped 
them with the towel wherewith His loins were girded. 
He did thus that we might love‘? one another, and 
taught us to love our neighbours as ourselves.‘? And 
if our Lord and Saviour humbled Himself, and did thus, 
how then are ye puffed up and slothful to do good to 
the destitute and afflicted? Do service, then, in perfect 
love without murmuring, or accepting of persons. 
Howbeit do not this for outward appearance, but for 
God’s sake, that ye may receive the reward of your 
toil from Him at the last day. The deacons ought to 
scek to satisfy the desires of the poor, before they ask 
them. Moreover let them do service unto the bishop, 
and be of one mind ‘** (with him), and account him as 
father and teacher and monitor. 

[iii., 20.) And behold we command that a bishop be 
ordained by three bishops, and if not, by two. But by 


““ The word is singular in “ At this word the lacuna in 


Eth. Platt’s manuscript ends. 
“7 E adds: and girded Him- *. P omits: as ourselves. 
self. “Lit. soul. 


H 


98 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


one bishop it is not possible to give ‘* ordination: for 
by the testimony of three or two ‘* (witnesses) let ¢’ 
every word be established. Presbyters and deacons and 
others set in authority in the Church shall be ordained 
by one bishop. To presbyters and to deacons it is not 
given to ordain a layman; but let the presbyter teach, 
and baptize, and bless the people, and burn incense, 
and offer up the sacrifice. And as for the deacon there 
‘is nothing that he may do except minister to the bishop 
and the presbyters;‘*® and let him fulfil aright his 
ministry.¢® 


- 


CHAPTER XVIII. 
OF ORPHANS. 


[iv., 1.] CHRISTIAN people who have no children 
ought to educate orphans, whether youths or virgins, 
and adopt them as their own children, and love them 
yet more. And he that hath a son who hath attained 
the due age, let him marry the orphan virgin. And if 
ye do thus, ye shall accomplish a great work and be 
the fathers of the orphans, (and) obtain a reward from 
the Lord God for the service ye have done. But if 
there be one that is proud, and despiseth the orphan, 
and saith, I will not marry a poor woman,’ let him 
understand then who is the father of the orphan, and 
the protector? of the widow. For he that thinketh to 
do thus shall scatter his wealth to another, and shall 
fulfil in himself * that which the Scripture saith, “ What 
the saints have not eaten, the Syrians‘ shall eat,” even 
as Isaiah saith, “Your land a foreign enemy shall 
devour it in your sight.” * 


‘* P receive. * Pi translates wrongly: 
“* P two or three. avenger. 
“’ P shall. * P in him shall be fulfilled. 


‘* P without the authority of “P absurdly reads: Phari- 
the bishop, and (he is) to sees. AC has: Assyrians. The 


minister to the presbyter. source of the quotation is not 
“* P fulfil (it) with a good known. 

Ministry. ‘Isa 1, 7. 
' P orphan. 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA y9 


CHAPTER XIX. 


THAT BISHOPS OUGHT TO SHOW CARE FOR WIDOWS AND 
ORPHANS. 


{iv., 2.] Ye bishops, provide for the sustenance of 
the destitute and supply their needs, and give to the 
orphans' as an inheritance the substance of their 
fathers; and to the widows also the substance of their 
husbands; and for the youths and virgins provide 
marriages, as is fitting; and to them that do service 
give their reward; and provide shelter for the poor,? 
and satisfy the hungry; and give drink to the thirsty, 
and clothe the naked, and visit the sick, and help the 
prisoners. Think on this, and do thus for the orphans 
and widows by day and night. 

[iv., 3.] For he that can do thus, blessed is he. 
Behold then he hath saved himself, for he hath received 
the widow, and the orphan, and the stranger. Where- 
fore our Lord saith, “It is better to give than to 
receive.” > But those that oppress the poor shall be 
condemned for what they have done, in the presence of 
God at the last day. But he that bestoweth of the 
alms which he hath received, and giveth to the orphan 
ar to the aged‘ or to the sick, or the poor man that 
hath children—him that doeth thus, blame not, but 
commend, for he is an altar of God. It is right also 
that he pray at all times without slothfulness § for those 
that have given him alms. 

{iv., 4.] But he that receiveth alms while he hath 
(sufficient}—with him God will reckon, for he hath 
snatched away the bread of the poor, and hath* not 
done good to himself nor to others. And he also that 
hath wealth, and giveth not to the destitute, is like 
unto the rich man who gathered together, and filled 
his barns in vain, and he shall be destroyed from before 


» P supply the needs of the “ P adds: or to the poor. 
orphans and give (them). * P omits: without slothful- 
2? P adds: and the stranger. ness. 
> Acts 20, 35. * Lit, for he hath. 
H 2 


100 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


God, for his wealth shall not profit him in the fire’ 
of the anger of God. But he that doeth thus, believeth 
not in God,*® but worshippeth ® his wealth and trusteth 
therein, and desireth not truth, but accepteth persons,’° 
and hath no mercy, and setteth not the fear of God 
before his eyes: love is not in him; (he is) his own 
enemy, and hath no friend. And as for him that doeth 
thus, his wealth shall perish, and a foreign enemy 
shall devour it, either while he liveth, or after he is 
dead. For it is said, ‘‘He that gathereth his riches 
by evil-doing, his riches shall be taken from him.” ™ 


CHAPTER XX. 


THAT UNMARRIED WOMEN AND WIDOWS! OUGHT TO 
RECEIVE WITH THANKSGIVING THAT WHICH 1S 
BESTOWED UPON THEM. 


[iv., 5.) Ler us exhort widows and unmarried 
women? to receive that which God hath bestowed 
on them with thanksgiving in fear and_ trembling, 
and to give thanks to God who giveth food to the 
hungry. Which of you is there that eateth and 
drinketh in moderation? Is it not God who giveth 
unto him? He who stretcheth® out His hand and 
multiplieth good things according to His will; who 
giveth corn‘ to the young men, wine to the 
maidens, and the oil of rejoicing to the living; * 
abundance to the cattle, and liberty to servants, and 
flesh to the beasts, and fruits to the birds, and food 


' ?—P day. seems to be that the former 
* P Lord (a different word). means a “woman without a 
* Or, maketh a god of. husband.’’ The title of the 


© In his translation Pl omits: corresponding chapter in Arabic 
but accepteth persons. (II) has: widows and orphans. 


Cf, Job 20, 18; Jer 17, IT. 2 P unmarried women and 
1 The two words translated widows. 
“unmarried women” and » P and stretcheth. 
“widows ’’ may each mean, ‘A omits: who giveth corn. 
when used separately, “ widow.” 5p adds: and he giveth. 


When contrasted the difference 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 101 


to all, as it befitteth. Wherefore our Lord saith, “ Be 
ye like unto the birds of heaven * which sow not, nor 
reap, nor gather into barns, and your heavenly Father 
feedeth them: ye are far better than many birds. 
Think not, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall 
we drink? or, Whcrewithal shall we be clothed? For 
your Father who is in heaven knoweth that ye seek 
all these things.””’ But if ye desire to receive His good 
things, and to inherit His kingdom, offer unto Him 
praise and thanksgiving and blessing. And to those 
that reccive the widow and the orphan God the Father 
shall give gladness in the Kingdom of heaven, through ° 
His* Son our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be honour 
and glory for ever and ever. Amen. 


CHAPTER XXI. 


THAT THE BISHOP ! OUGHT TO SHOW UNDERSTANDING IN 
RECEIVING OFFERINGS FROM THOSE (ONLY) THAT ARE 
WORTHY. 


[iv., 6.) THe bishop ought to show understanding 
and? make a difference about receiving offerings in 
cases when it befitteth not.° Beware, then,‘ of the seller 
of strong drink, for far removed is his salvation from 
sin. Wherefore it is said, “ \Voe unto them that mingle 
water with wine.””> Let us ® keep far from drunken- 
ness and fornication, for the Lord God saith, “ Bring 
ye not an offering of the reward of fornication.” 7 
Beware of the extortioners® and of them that lend their 
money on interest, and of the defiled in spirit. Those 


* P omits: of heaven. ceive that which is not right. 


' Mt 6, 26ff. “ P omits: then. 
" P omits: heaven, through. * Cf. Isa 1, 22. P reads: 
* P adds : beloved wine with water. 
' That bishops. * P adds: then. 
a bg x 7 

ing a esene UIees a oP a puss (joining with 
> P offerings from those that the preceding words). 


are worthy; and let him not re- 


102 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


that make sacrifice thus are not well pleasing unto God. 
The bishop must needs keep far from those that oppress 
widows and orphans, and from those that fill the prison 
with the innocent who have done no wrong, and from 
those® that lay a grievous burden of service on their 
servants, and torment them with hunger and thirst. 
The sacrifice of such men is unclean 3, Teceive it not from 
them, for everyone that doeth evil and speaketh 
iniquity is rejected of God. Let us keep far from 
robbers and publicans, and from them that make idols, 
and (from) seducers, and such as use false balances, and 
from wicked soldiers who plunder the houses of the poor 
and needy, and seize their goods unjustly. Beware, then 
of murderers and liers in wait by the way, and of the 
ungodly,'® and of those that pervert good works, and 
of unclean persons," and of drunkards,’2_ and of 
blasphemy, and above all of those that exact interest, 
for such are the enemies of God.'8 For it is written, 
saying, “Better is a little with righteousness than the 
great riches of sinners.” And again it is written, 
saying, “Thou hast hated, O Lord, all workers of 
iniquity, and thou shalt destroy all them that speak 
lies.” ** But he that vexeth'® him that feedeth the 
widow and the orphan shall be condemned before God. 
For that which Adonias did is written in the book of 
Kings, how he transgressed against God, and ate bread 
and drank water in the place wherein the Lord com- 
manded him that he should not eat, because of the 
transgression of Jeroboam the son of Nebat; and for 
this cause was he slain. For that which (a man) 
obtaineth by his toil for the sustenance of the widow, 
be it much or little, is acceptable before God, because 
it was not (gotten) by iniquity. For it is written, 
saying,’’ “Better is a little with righteousness than the 


* P adds; evil men. joteleuton omits this quotation. 

** P omits: of the ungodly. ™ Ps 5, 6f 

" P (and of) unclean wizards * P is unintelligible. A by 
and of all such. altering the position of two con- 

'? P omits: and of drunkards. sonants reads as above. 

" P omits: for such... God. ™ P omits: it is written, 


“Ps 36, 16. A per homo- saying. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 103 


great riches of sinners.” '* But if a widow eat and be 
filled at the hands of the ungodly, and pray for them, 
God shall not hear her prayer, for God trieth the heart 
and reins.'® For God saith concerning the ungodly and 
unbelievers, “Though Moses 7° and Samuel stand and 
pray before me,’' I will not hear their prayer, nor 
pardon their sin.” 22, And (He spake) not concerning 
these alone, but of others also that have sinned, and 
refused to turn unto repentance. And when they pray 
He will not hear their prayer 2° for them that do such 
things; but they provoke God to anger, and remember 
not the evil of their doings. 

{iv., 7.] Keep far, then, from all such deeds, for 
all they that do thus are transgressors of the Jaw. For 
Elisha #4 did not receive the offering of Hazael who 
reigned over Syria, and Ahijah did not receive the 
offering of Jeroboam. But if the prophets of God did 
not receive offerings from the ungodly, in like manner 
it is right that bishops should 7° fear to do so. And 
Simon the Sorcerer also brought presents to us, even 
to us, Peter and John, and planned to receive the honour 
which is above every honour. But we received not the 
presents from him, but bound him with eternal bonds. 
But he desired to snatch an honour that was not 
given unto him by God. Keep far, then, from the pol- 
luted offerings which they bring into the house of God. 
And again it is said, ‘Depart from iniquity in fear and 
trembling.” 7* . ; 

{iv., 8.] But if ye say, If we receive not offerings 
from the ungodly, what shall we give to the widows 
and orphans, and to the destitute who have no sus- 
tenance ?—if ye do thus it shall become sin unto you. 
For God?’ hath appointed for you, as of old for the 


™ Ps 76, 16. their prayer. Perhaps the 
* P jis unintelligible in this clause belongs to some other 
clause. part of the context. Neither 
2° P adds: and Elijah. reading is very intelligible. 
™ P pray for them. * P Elijah. ; 
32 Jer 15, 1. 7° P in like manner let bis- 
33 A here reads: And when hops. 
they turn T will have compas- %* Cf. Isa 54, 14. 


sion on them, and will hear 3" P adds: hath done and. 


104 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


Levites, that they should receive offerings of the people. 
But if all this which ?* hath been appointed for the 
Church is not sufficient for you,?* ye ought to endure 
patiently, and remain *° in hunger and in thirst, rather 
than receive offerings from the enemies of God, and 
become a laughing-stock and a mockery. And concern- 
ing these the prophet saith, ‘But let not my head be 
anointed with the oil of sinners.”*! Take heed to 
receive offerings from such as do good; but from the 
ungodly receive them not. But if thou be destitute, tell 
the faithful brethren that love God, that they may give 
(thee) what thou needest. And from that which thou 
receivest from them, give unto the widows and orphans 
in righteousness. 

[iv., 9.] Solomon *? said to the people, “Give to the 
Lord of thy labour in righteousness, that he may ‘fill 
thy barns with wheat and that thy wine-press “may 
gush forth.” ** And from the toil of the faithful clothe 
the naked, and entertain them from the offerings which 
(men) bring unto you, and do service unto them accord- 
ing to the ordinance of the saints, and redeem the 
captives, and visit the prisoners, and deliver those that 
oe appointed) unto death,** that ye may find life before 
10d. 

fiv., 10.1 Behold, then, we command you that ye 
follow not the way of the ungodly and unbelievers, nor 
accept their offerings, nor take their money,** for they 
are prepared as fuel for fire, and that ye be not partakers 
with them, for the offering of sinners is unclean in the 
sight of God. This have we spoken to you, brethren, 
for the profit of your souls. 


7° P omits: which. *? P Even as Solomon. 
2° P omits: is not sufficient ** Prov 3, 9f. 
for vou, ** A reads: deliver the slain. 


** P omits: and remain. 27* P omits: nor take their 
°' Ps 140, §. money. 





bas 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 105 


CHAPTER XXII. 
THAT FATHERS OUGHT TO CORRECT THEIR CHILDREN. 


[iv., 11.] ANpb ye also, fathers,’ teach your children 
to observe the commandment of the Lord, and to follow 
the way of Christ and command them to learn a handi- 
craft and not sit idly. Now they will be pufted up in 
spirit and be far away from doing good. Wherefore train 
them, and spare not to correct them; for children die 
not by correction, but rather are saved from condemna- 
tion. For it is said, ‘Spare not thy rod from thy son, 
for the ? hope is good, and when thou beatest him with 
a rod, thou shalt save his soul from death.”* And 
moreover it is said, ‘He that correcteth not his son 
is a fool. Beat thy son and scourge his sides while he 
is young, lest he become hardened, and go far from 
thee. And he that teachcth not and * correcteth not his 
son hateth him.’’® Teach, then, your children, and 
correct them in® their youth with sharp correction, that 
they may be humble, and obedient to everyone. Teach 
them to write, and to read the holy Scriptures, and 
permit them not to live idly, lest they 7 transgress your 
commandments. And suffer them not to enter a tavern, 
lest they forget your admonition,* and be corrupted 
with fornication. But if their fathers be slothful in 
teaching and correcting * them, they become partakers 
in the sin with their children. And when they have 
come to the full time of youth,’® let (each) marry a wife 
in pure wedlock, lest the impure desires of youth assault 
them, and they be sin unto them. And because of this 
God will require the sin at the hands of their fathers in 
the day of recompense. 


‘Pp adds: admonish and * P from. 

teach. ’ P adds: forsake and. 
2 P thv. * P they be defiled. 
* Cf. Prov 23, 14: 19, 18. * P omits: and correcting. 
“ P omits: teacheth not and. 1 P when the full time of 
* Cf. Sir 30, 12; Prov 13, 24. youth hath come 


106 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


THAT SERVANTS OUGHT TO BE SUBJECT IN ALL PURITY 10 
THEIR MASTERS WHETHER THEY BE UNGODLY OR 
FAITHFUL.? 


{iv., 12.) What say ye then concerning servants? 
Let them be prudent and serve their masters in the 
fear of God. And if a servant be a Christian and his 
master an unbeliever, yet ought he to serve him in 
everything; but let him have no fellowship with him in 
faith. And in like manner let masters love their 
servants. And if a man’s master be a believer, let him 
serve him, and fear him as God, and count him as a 
father and a good master. And for this he shall receive 
a good reward for the service wherewith he hath served 
his master. And if there be a master who hath a 
servant, a believer, and he doeth his will,? let him love 
him as his son, and count him as his brother for the 
love of the faith. 

{iv., 13.] Humble yourselves and obey kings and?” 
princes * who fear God, for they are God’s ministers. 
Fear them then who are set in authority, as is fitting, 
and offer to them from that which ye have with honour 
and obedience, for so hath God commanded. Make for 
yourselves no excuses (?), but rather love one another, 
even as the Lord God hath commanded by His Son, 
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


THAT VIRGINS OUGHT NOT TO VOW UNTIL THEY PROVE 
THEMSELVES. 


[iv., 14.]  (Vircins) ought not to enter on this 
service until they prove themselves, and keep them- 


' P faithful or ungodly. ‘ Platt’s manuscript ends 
* P the will of his master. with this word, 
* P omits: kings and, 


| 





mee ees 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 107 


selves in purity. Thus we command them that they 
enter not hastily (on it) before their full time come, 
even as Solomon saith, “It is better not to vow, than 
to vow and repent.””* Let the virgin, then, be pure in 
her soul and in her body, that she may be the house of 
God, and the habitation of Christ, and the tabernacle 
of the Holy Spirit; and let her walk in the way of the 
preaching of the Gospel, and in the commandment 
which is well-pleasing to God, and let not her actions 
be after the fashion of this world, and let her not go 
about in the city, nor walk in evil ways, nor be of a 
double heart; but let her be wise and pure, without 
blame, and not desirous of praise, nor, above all, of 
idle talk. 


CHAPTER XXV. 


OF THE MARTYRS WHO ARE BROUGHT TO TRIAL AND 
AFFLICTED WITH SORE PUNISHMENT. [OF THE 
FEASTS OF THE PASSOVER. |] ! 


{v., 1.] Ir there be any Christian who hath been 
brought before the judgment-seat of the ungodly, 
whether for execution, or banishment, or imprison- 
ment, or that he may be given to the wild beasts for 
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ and for the true 
faith and the love of God, turn not your face from 
them, but send them sustenance of your substance and 
of the sweat of your brow; and give sustenance besides 
to the soldiers who guard them, that they may not 
afflict them with sore torment. And spurn not a 
Christian your brother whom they have dragged before 
the judgment-seat for the name of the Lord our God. 
He is a holy martyr, the brother of our Lord, and the 
son of the Most High, and the habitation of the Holy 
Spirit. He is a faithful (witness) who hath kept the 


® Eccl 5, 4. the chapter. This long chapter 
' The last words of the title is divided in Arabic (IT) at AC 
seem to be out of place, having v., 7. 
nothing to say to the subject of 


108 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


commandment of the Gospel and inherited the crown 
of life, and is a martyr for the sake of the sufferings 
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the t¢ fellowship t? of 
His precious blood. Wherefore, ye faithful, with your 
labour and with your substance do service to the 
saints, and let such as have no money fast for their 
sakes, and let such as have give a portion of their 
substance to the saints. And if there be anyone who 
giveth all his substance as a ransom for them to save 
them, he is blessed and a friend of Christ. If there 
be anyone who giveth his substance to the poor, he is 
elect and holy; much more then he who freely giveth 
his substance for the martyrs’ sake. He is one that 
hath fulfilled the will of God, and hath imitated the 
saints who confessed our Lord before Gentiles and 
kings and the people of Israel. For it is said, “ Who- 
soever shall confess me in the presence of men, him 
will T also confess in the presence of my Father who 
is in heaven.” * Christ, then, shall bear witness before 
the Father to those who do thus. And as for you, it 
is not right that ye should be negligent and ashamed 
to go to the prison and visit the prisoners. Help them 
rather, and comfort them, and if ye do this, ye shall 
be reckoned with the martyrs. For as for them their 
witness is written, because they have suffered and been 
afflicted: and ye also have been reckoned with them, 
because ye have done them service with a ready heart 
and a good ministry without sloth. And of these our 
Lord saith, “Come unto me, ye blessed of my Father, 
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you before the world 
(was): for IT was hungry, and ye gave me meat: I 
was thirsty, and ye gave me to drink: I was a 
stranger, and ye received me: I was naked, and ye 
clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in 
prison, and ye spake unto me. And then shall the 
righteous answer and say, Lord, when saw we thee 
hungry, and gave thee meat? or thirsty, and gave thee 
to drink? and when saw we thee a stranger, and 


2So0 AC rowwvla. Eth. has: 


> Mt 10, 32. 
heloved, 











THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 109 


received thee? or naked, «and clothed thee? or sick, 
(and) visited thee? or in prison, and spake unto thee? 
And the King shall answer and say unto them, Verily 
I say unto you, whatsvever ye did unto one of these 
little ones, ye did unto me. And then he shall say to 
those on his left hand, Depart, ye cursed, into the 
eternal fire prepared for Satan and for his angels: for 
I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, 
and ye gave me not to drink: I was a stranger, and 
ye received me not: I was naked, and ye clothed me 
not: I was sick, and ye visited me not: I was in 
prison, and ye spake not unto me. Then shall those 
on the left hand answer, saying, Lord, when saw we 
thee hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or 
sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? 
And then shall the King answer them, saying, Verily 
I say unto you, whatsoever ye did not to one of these 
little ones, ve did not to me. And these shall go away 
into eternal condemnation, but the rightcous into 
eternal life.” 4 

{v., 2.] If there be anyone who saith, I am a 
Christian; and doeth evil, committeth fornication, and 
is impure; and they pass on him the sentence of death, 
from such a man keep far away. Christians ought not 
to transgress the law or break (it) by evil doing, but 
rather (ought) to turn aside from the ungodly and 
unbelieving and have no fellowship with them. But 
as for those whom the ungodly have imprisoned, or 
banished, or bound, or delivered up to death for 
Christ’s name’s sake, take heed to save your brethren 
and your fellow-members from the hands of the un- 
godly. And if there be a Christian who hath toiled 
for their sakes, blessed is he, for he shall be reckoned 
with the martyrs, because he hath suffered for Christ’s 
sake. And on us too in like manner came suffering 
and affliction from Caiaphas, and those with Alexander, 
and Annas the high-priest, and afterwards we went out 
from them rejoicing that we were worthy to endure the 
sufferings of Christ. In like manner do ye also endure 


“Mt 25, 34ff. 


116 THE. ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


patiently and rejoice concerning suffering, tha 
be blessed in that day. Penna estar 

{[v., 3.] But as for those who are persecuted for 
the sake of the faith, and go forth from city to city 
for the sake of the commandment of the Gospel of our 
Lord, receive them and give them rest and shelter with 
you as martyrs, rejoicing that ye are companions with 
them. Understand then that they are blessed® of 
the Lord. For our Lord saith, “Blessed are ye when 
they revile you, and mock you, and speak all (manner 
of) evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and 
be glad, for your reward is great in heaven for so 
persecuted they the prophets who were before you.” © 
And again He saith, “If they have persecuted me, they 
will persecute you also.”7 And again He saith, “If 
they persecute you in this city, flee ye to the next.’ 8 
And, “In this world ye shall be sad and troubled,” ® 
for, “they shall deliver you up to the synagogue and 
their judges shall scourge you, and they shall bring you 
before rulers and Kings for my sake for a testi- 
mony ’’; 1° and, “He who patiently endureth to the 
end, shall be saved.’’!! | He who is persecuted for 
Christ’s name’s sake, and by patient endurance 
becometh a martyr is in truth a man of God. 

[v., 4.] But he who consorteth with the ungodly, 
and hath denied Christ lest the unbelievers should hate 
him and loveth himself more than his Lord, ¢ in whose 
hand his breath is t , is hated and despised and tor- 
mented of God, because he hath preferred the love of 
man, and hath become a hater of God, and taken part 
with the accursed, and not with the Saints. Instead of 
the Kingdom prepared for the blessed he hath chosen 
for himself the eternal fire of Gehenna prepared for 
Satan and his angels. And concerning such a one our 
Lord answered, and said, “ Whosoever denieth me in 
the presence of men, him will I also deny in the 


* So E. A has: called. 
* Mt s, wf. 

7 Jn 15, 20. 

* Mt 10, 23. 

* Cf. Jn. 16, 33. 


'° Mt 10, 17. 

™ Mt 10, 22. 

" The word “hand ”’ has been 
supplied from AC. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 111 


presence of my lather who is in heaven.” 13 And 
again, He hath commanded, saying, “He that loveth 
father or mother more than me is not worthy of me: 
and he that loveth his son or his daughter more than 
me is not worthy of me: and he that taketh not up 
his cross,'4 and followeth not after me, is not worthy 
of me. He that findeth his life, let him lose it, and 
he that loseth his life for my sake shall find it. What 
doth it profit a man if he have gained the whole world 
and lost his life? and what would he not give as a 
ransom for his life?” 25 And again He saith, “ Fear 
not them that kill your bodies, but are not able to kill 
your souls; but fear him who is able to destroy soul 
and body in Gehenna.” !¢ 

{v., 5-] For it is right that he who hath learned a 
craft should teach others, and if he teach not others 
he is not perfect as his master. Jesus Christ is our 
Saviour and our Master. How then shall we not love 
doctrine and admonition? For our Lord hated haughti- 
ness, and pride, and luxury, and riches, and covetous- 
ness, and revenge; and moreover He lightly 
esteemed !” sister and mother for love of His Father 
and love of man. And again, He patiently endured 
suffering, and stripes, and reproach, and reviling, and 
mockery, and yet more He was wounded '8 on the Cross 
to save all those who believe in Him. And if He 
patiently endured all this, and disdained not to be 
crucified on the Cross and patiently endured the suffer- 
ings of death, how then shall not we endure the suffer- 
ings of our Saviour? But if he suffered willingly for 
our sakes, yet we do not (suffer) for His sake, but 
rather hope for His mercy.'’® But there is nothing 
which He desireth to receive from us, but only a belief 
in the right faith. 

{v., 6.) Wherefore let us lightly esteem our parents, 


1 Mt 10, 33- ‘® This sentence is not clear. 
14 Lit. the cross of his death. It seems as if some words had 
Ss Mt 10, 37 ff; 16, 26. dropped out per homoioteleuton. 


1° Mt 10, 28, The words 8 juas occur twice 
" Lit. despised. in the corresponding Greek text 
1° Lit. received wounds. of AC. 


112 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


and our kinsfolk, and our friends, and our wives, and 
our children, and all the good things of this world. 
And if we love these, we shall not keep this command- 
ment. However let us take heed that we enter not into 
temptation; and when we are called to (bear) witness, 
let us hold fast our faith in the precious name of our 
Saviour. Let us rejoice and patiently. endure, when 
we are persecuted, that we may inherit life eternal. 
Let us, then, not love honour and praise as the people 
of the Jews who rejected the miracles of Christ, and 
believed not on Him, because they feared the chief 
priests; but preferred praise from men, and not Nile 
from God. But we have believed in the right faith, 
that we may instruct the new (converts) who have 
received baptism, and may confirm the hearts of the 
catechumens. But if we keep the faith in our hearts, 
and speak not out boldly unto men through fear of 
condemnation and affliction, we shall forfeit life eternal; 
and (shall become) moreover a stumbling-block to 
others (and)* a snare to many. And if we act thus 
we shall be requited with a twofold penalty. Let us 
take heed, then, lest we fall into affliction, and pray 
lest we enter into temptation. For the spirit is willing 
but the flesh is weak. Let us be wise, then, lest we 
fall away from this right faith through fear of the 
ungodly and unbelievers, for our years are but few. 
And if there be any one that abandons his hope in 
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, all his life long he shall 
be afflicted with suffering that hath no remedy, and 
with wrath that weakeneth the limbs and breaketh the 
bones, and hereafter he shall lose life eternal, and be 
punished in the fire of Gehenna, and in weeping and 
gnashing of teeth. But he who hath suffered for the 
Lord, and hath been a martyr, shall rejoice in God, 
because he hath chosen for himself the crown of the 
Kingdom, and his departure from this world hath been 
perfect in the right faith. And if a catechumen suffer 
and patiently endure affliction and die for Christ’s sake, 
his sufferings shall be to him instead of baptism, and 
2° The word ‘‘and "’ is added in E. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 113 


he shall win-a good hope and life eternal. And others 
too who have fought a good fight, and died for Christ’s 
name's sake in the right faith, shall rejoice and be 
glad, for they have kept the admonition of their master. 
For He saith, “Be ye worthy as your master (is 
worthy).”#!_ Our Lord Jesus Christ suffered for our 
sakes and patiently endured reviling and mockery, and 
bore the spitting of the unclean, reproach, and reviling 
and blows; and after this they scourged Him, and 
pierced Him on the Cross, and gave Him vinegar to 
drink (mingled) with gall, and when He had accom- 
plished all that was written He said unto God, “ Father, 
behold into thy hand, I commend my soul.” And 
he who desireth to be a disciple, let him patiently 
endure sufferings and affliction, and bear stripes with 
a brave heart and (with) love. And if he be cast into 
the fire, there shall be nothing that shall touch him, 
even as the Three Children were saved from the furnace 
of fire. And everyone who hath suffered for His sake 
shall receive a reward, because he hath believed in one 
God, the Father, and Jesus Christ, the great High- 
priest, our teacher and the guide of our souls, and the 
Giver of our life; to Him be glory for ever and ever. 
Amen. 

[v., 7.] He then is the Lord God Almighty, our 
Saviour Jesus Christ, who shall confirm us in His faith, 
and raise us up with those that have fallen asleep, and 
{who) fulfilled His will perfectly without omission. And 
if we be drowned in the sea, or (if) beasts and birds 
devour our flesh, (yet) not one hair of our heads shall 
perish, for the world and all that is therein are holden 
in His hand. Wherefore He hath taught us, saying, 
“By your patience, ye shall possess™ your souls.’’ % 
For at the last day every creature shall rise again, 
righteous men and sinners. And concerning the resur- 
rection of the dead, and the reward of the martyrs 

" Cf. Lk 6, 40. human race will rise at the re- 

7? Lk 23, 46. surrection, both the righteous 

** In the Arabic Didascalia and sinners. 


(II) a fresh chapter begins here 7 Or, acquire. 
with the title: That the whole * Lk at, 19. 


114 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


Gabriel said unto Daniel, ‘Many of those who have 
fallen asleep shall rise from the dust, some shall rise 
to life eternal, and some shall rise in shame and con- 
tempt; but the righteous shall shine as the sun and 
as the bright stars.” 2% Behold the holy Gabriel fore- 
told and said, And the saints shall shine as the bright 
stars. And again he bare witness concerning them 
that they knew the truth and understood His holy 
name. For he did not say this concerning the resur- 
rection from the dead of the martyrs alone, but con- 
cerning the resurrection of all men, whether righteous 
or sinners, that they may be recompensed each one 
according to his deeds. For the Jews say, There is no 
resurrection of the dead. ‘‘ Behold our bones are dust 
and our flesh dried up.’’ 2? And to those who think this 
our Lord answereth, saying, ‘‘ Behold I will open your 
graves, and bring you forth therefrom, and I will put 
my spirit upon you, and ye shall live. Now ye shall 
know that I am the Lord, (even I) who t speak t”? and 
perform.” 2% And moreover Isaiah saith, ‘‘The dead 
shall arise, and those that are in the graves shall live, 
and those that (rest) in the earth shall rejoice, for the 
dew that is from thee is their‘life.” 9° He hath told us 
much concerning the resurrection from the dead, and 
(their) abode! in life eternal, which is full of grace 
and truth, which He hath prepared for those that love 
Him; and (concerning) the judgment of the ungodly, 
their fall, shame and misery; the fire that never shall 
be quenched, ant the worm that sleepeth not shall come 
upon them. But God desireth not the death of a 
sinner, but rather that he should be converted and 
live. Behold He hath told us that Enoch and Elijah 
did not taste of death, and hath revealed unto us that 
the dead shall rise in His time. Elijah raised the 
widow’s son, and Elisha raised (the son of) the 
2° Dn 12, 2f. * Cf. Ezek 37, 11ff. 

37 Lit. grown old. 2° Isa 26, 19. ; 

%* The Eth. has: abide. A *! The Eth. word has various 
change of one letter gives: meanings. “Abode ”” seems to 
speak. LXX and AC have suit best the reading of AC 
AeAdANKA. (3:aporh). 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 115 


t Shunammite ¢ 52. Behold we understand that the 
death of the righteous is not a judgment of those saints 
who receive it with joy. In like manner Jesus Christ 
the Lord of the Apostles and the Life of the faithful 
shall raise the dead. And so let us also toil ®* in this 
world, and after a brief while we shall enter into rest, 
and the race of Adam shall be renewed, and shall rise 
with him® to life eternal. It is said, “All the dead 
shall hear his voice, and those that hear shall live.’’ * 
Wherefore we believe in the resurrection of the dead 
and the second coming of Christ.*%7 And moreover 
He who raised Lazarus from the grave on the fourth 
day raised from the dead both the daughter of Jairus 
and the widow’s son. And He Himself too rose from 
the dead on the third day by the will of His Father, 
and became.the Word of life. And He also it is who 
brought forth Jonah alive and unhurt from the whale’s 
belly on the third day, and saved the Three Children 
from the furnace of fire in the land of Babylon, and 
Daniel from the mouth of the lions. He, then, who 
hath authority and might will raise the dead at the last 
day. 

But if the ungodly who believe not the Holy Scrip- 
tures mock at us, behold the Sibyl their own prophetess 
maketh glad * their hearts, and saith thus unto them, 
“When the flesh hath decayed, and is become dust, 
the fire shall consume it by the commandment of God, 
who waxeth not old and decayeth not; (and) God shall 
taise up again the bones which were burned in the fire 
and became ashes. Then shall God pronounce the 
sentence of judgment upon all the world. Such as have 
done ® evil shall descend to the depths of the earth, 


** The Eth. is obviously a *? So E. The reading of A 
corruption of this. seems to mean: we believe that 
‘ #* The next two sentences are the resurrection of the dead is 
rather obscure. The translation the second coming of Christ. 


given is literal, but can hardly ** The Eth. word has no 
claim to be very intelligible. other meaning. It seems strange 
*“ Or, we too toil. even as a paraphrase of the 
33 Or, Him. Greek wiotwadto. 
* Jn 5, 45- ** So E reads. A has: do. 


12 


116 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


and those that have kept his commandment shall have 
eternal life, and God will give unto them the spirit of 
life; and those that are saved shall look one upon 
another.” 40 

And if they believe not in the resurrection, let them 
not refuse belief in (?) another creature.4! Behold that 
bird whose name is the phoenix will cause the ungodly 
to understand, who themselves say that it is alone of 
its kind. Of this bird they say that it lives for five 
hundred years, and then goes down to Egypt and 
brings with it cinnamon, and cassia, and aloe-wood.” 
And it alights on the image of the idol whose name is 
*Ion,*? and looks towards the east, and worships the 
Sun, and then is consumed and turned to ashes. Then 
there comes forth from the ashes a small worm and it 
becomes a young phoenix, and, when it is grown, it 
returns to the land of Arabia.“ If then they know of 
the resurrection “ of this bird, how can they question 
with us of that which we say and believe? Cannot He 
who created man out of nothing raise the dead by His 
great power? Wherefore it is right that we should 
patiently endure the various sufferings and afflictions 
that come upon us. But if we believe not in the resur- 
rection of the dead, our suffering and our affliction is 
in vain. We believe in what Moses saith, “In the 
beginning God made the heaven and the earth.” 
There was not one thing that He needed, (and) knowing 
that all things are created by His Word, it was His 
pleasure that there should be heaven and earth, and 
light and darkness, and night, (and) day,‘® and the 
stars, and birds, and whales, and beasts, and creeping 


“* The reference given by Eth. word according to Dill- 
Funk is Orac. Sibyll. iv, 179- mann. AC kas: balsam-wood. 


185, 189, 189-90. Ed. Geffcken. 

‘“' The Eth. is obscure. AC 
gives no help. The words might 
mean: let them not lead astray 
another generation. The trans- 
lation in the text is only a para- 
phrase guessing at the meaning 
intended. 

“2 Such is the meaning of the 


“? Obviously some confusion, 
with the name of the city On, 
or Heliopolis. Neither AC nor 
the Syriac Didascalia mention 
On, though both allude to the 
“altar of the sun.’’ 

“« Or, the West. 

“© Lit. renewal. 

“* Lit. brightness. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 117 


things, and trees, and herbs. Thus He raised them 
up by His will, and needed no other helper. He it is 
who is able by His power to renew the world again 
and ¢ to raise t47 the dead. Man, however, was not 
created first, but He created him from the four 
elements, and gave him a soul. And in like manner 
He will give back to this (soul) the body of flesh that 
is dissolved. I*or the resurrection is for those that 
have fallen asleep and not for those that have not been 
created. For He created (it) from what was fleshless, 
and put within it many marvels. And again He will 
raise up and save those that have fallen asleep, as He 
created flesh out of seed in the womb. As Jeremiah 
the prophet saith, “Before I created thee in the 
womb, I knew thee.” #8 And again it is said, “I am 
the Lord who created the heavens, and laid the founda- 
tions of the earth, and I create the soul in man.” # 
Even as the Scripture saith concerning this, God the 
Father said ® to his only-begotten Son Jesus Christ, 
“Let us make man in our image and in ‘our likeness. 
And then God created them male and female.” 5! And 
furthermore the holy victor Job saith thus—he of whom 
the Scripture saith that ‘‘he will rise with those whom 
the Lord raises.” 52 ‘Thou hast milked me like milk, 
and curdled me like cheese; thou hast clothed me with 
flesh and skin, and hast bound my bones with sinews; 
and thou hast shown me compassion and mercy, and 
thy visitation hath preserved my spirit. I know this 
that is with thee, that thou canst do all things and that 
there is nothing that is impossible with thee.” 53 And 
again, David, the lover of God, saith, ‘Thy hands have 
made me and fashioned me; give me understanding, 
and I will learn thy commandment.” 4 And elsewhere 
he saith, ‘‘Thou hast created me and laid thy hand 


“A slight change of reading the Father said. 
is required to give this sense. "Gn 1, 26f. 
As the MS. reads it should be : *? Job 42, 17a. In a_ pas. 
and He shall raise. sage not found in the Hebrew. 
““ Jer 1, 5. * Job 10, 10ff.” 
“* Zech 12, 1. ** Ps 118, 73. 
** So E. A reads: God said, 


118 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


upon me. Marvellous is thy work, and (that) my soul 
knoweth right well. And my bones were not hidden 
from thee, which thou didst make in secret, nor my 
substance, (which was) beneath the earth. And that 
which I have done, thine eyes have seen, and all is 
written in thy book.’’55 Isaiah also saith, “We are 
the clay and thou hast created us." 5 If, then, men are 
God’s creation, made by Christ, they shall be raised 
with Christ, and those that have done His will shall 
receive honour and the crown of life. Thus the ungodly 
and unbelieving, who have not received baptism and 
believe not in the resurrection, shall be condemned to 
eternal punishment, but those that have done good shall 
shine like the stars of light. For David saith, ‘The 
Lord is faithful in all his words and righteous in all his 
works.” 57 He who created for Himself a body of a 
virgin (and) who is the Creator of the whole world ® 
is the only one who hath risen from the dead, and 
moreover He will make all the dead to rise. He who 
maketh the grain of wheat to shoot from the earth, 
and multiplieth its fruit; “and (who) is able to make 
shoot forth again the tree that is hewn down, and to 
multiply its branches; and (who) made Aaron’s dry 
rod to blossom, is able also in like manner to raise us 
up with Him in the glory t wherewith +59 He ascended. 
He who made straight the feet of the lame, and cured 
the palsied, and healed the man whose hand was 
withered; He who spat on the ground and made clay 
and anointed the eyes of the man who was born blind; 
He who healed the wasted limbs, shall He not be able 
to raise us up also? He who satisfied the souls of 
five thousand men with five barley loaves and two fishes 
—and tney took up of what was left twelve baskets full 
—and (who) made water wine; who sent Peter, and 
he took a penny from the fish’s mouth. He it is who 
will raise the dead. Behold we are His witnesses con- 


** Possibly this and the two 
following words (one word in 
Eth.) should be omitted. There 
is nothing to correspond in AC. 


55 Ps 138, 14ff. 
** Isa 64, 8. 

*T Ps 144, 17. 
** Lit. creation. 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 119 


cerning everything which the prophets proclaimed con- 
cerning Him. We, His companions, ate and drank 
with Him, and saw His miracles and His life. And 
again, we saw His sufferings, and His agony, and His 
death, and His resurrection. And we heard His words, 
and were His friends, and abode with Him forty days. 
And after He rose from the dead He charged us to 
publish the preaching of the holy Gospel in all the 
world, and commanded us to baptize into the name of 
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, who 
is the Paraclete, the Spirit of truth, And when He 
had given this charge, He, in the flesh that He took 
of us, ascended into heaven to the Father who had 
sent Him. If ye thus believe, blessed are ye, but if 
ye believe not, ye are far from Him because ye have 
not kept His commandment. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


OF THE MARTYRS. 


{v., 8.) BeHoLD I" say unto you, magnify and extol 
with double honour the martyrs, even as the blessed 
James and Stephen the first martyr are had in honour 
amongst us. Such are blessed before God, and elect 
and holy, a people pure from sin, and without (thought 
of) revenge; rather are they peacemakers and unwearied 
also in doing His will and in keeping His command- 
ment. And concerning them David saith, ‘ Precious 
in the sight of the Lord is the death of the righteous.” ? 
And furthermore Solomon saith, ‘“‘The remembrance of 
the righteous is perfect with praise.” * And again the 
prophet saith, ‘His horn shall be exalted with 
honour.” ¢ 

{v., 9.) This we have said concerning those who 
have been martyrs in truth for the sake of the name 
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Behold, then, we understand 

*° Lit. weakness. 


' AC has: we. 
* Ps rs, 6. 


* Prov 10, 7. 
“Ps rit, 9. 


120 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


and know that those, who honour the mart 

: yrs and the 
faithful who have fought a good fight and finished their 
course, and died for Christ’s sake in the right faith, 
te win a good reward and eternal life. And those 
’ho were martyrs in truth, and judged uprightly, and 
Gleaged God iw thei nes _aiichs aball (ehientt 
Kingdom of heaven. : pee ay ne 


CHAPTER XXVII. 


THAT CHRISTIANS OUGHT NOT TO ENTER A HOUSE OF 
REVELRY AND DANCING, BUT (OUGHT) RATHER TO 
GIVE PRAISE AND SING IN THE CHURCH.' 


[v., 10.] BEHOLD, beloved brethren, we giv 
good counsel, that ye keep far from impure edi ad 
hearing of songs, and from dainty meats and luxury 
and from all works of vanity wherein is no profit 
Work not the pleasure of the desire of your flesh on 
the Sabbath day, for the prophet saith, ‘Serve the Lord 
with fear and rejoice unto Him with trembling.” ? For 
it beseemeth not a Christian to listen to singing and 
music and playing on instruments, as the foolish people 
do. And moreover, let them not take on their lips the 
names of the (falsé) gods and idols, nor name the name 
of Satan and his angels,* for, when they name his 
name, the Holy Spirit departeth from them, and in His 
stead an unclean spirit abideth on them. ; 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


THAT A CHRISTIAN OUGHT NOT TO SWEAR BY THE NAMES 
OF THE (FALSE) GODS AND DEMONS, NOR EVER MAKE 
MENTION OF THEM ACCORDING TO HIS FORMER WONT. 


[v., 11.] We Christians ought not to swear by the 
names of the (false) gods, nor make mention of their 
The title of this chapter in i ip.”” 

Arabic ay i auite i aac on aie . vente worship. 
at we shou shun evil "So E. A has: 
deeds and lying words especially The two words Rese 











THE EYTHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 121 


names with our lips, nor b 


ow before them, nor fear 


them, for he who so doeth and serveth (false) gods, 
shall be far from God, the giver * of life. Howbeit they 
are not gods, but the work of men’s hands, and spirits 
of Satan. For God said concerning’ the children of 


Israel, ‘They have forsaken 


me, and have sworn by 


strange gods, and have provoked me to anger by their 
gods.” * For despised and hateful and impure (is 
accounted) in the Scriptures every one that worshippeth 
and serveth (false) gods, and that sweareth by their 


names. 


{v., 12.] And not these only (are so accounted), but 
also astrologers‘ and magicians who practise super- 
stition. [Serve them not nor worship them.] § And 
moreover it is said, “ When thou regardest the heavens, 


worship not the sun, and the moon, and the stars. 
“Walk not then in the way 


(And elsewhere it is said), 


im } 


of the nations, nor learn their works, nor fear the signs 
of the heaven.” ’ For (God) created the sun, and the 
moon, and the stars, to give light to men, and not that 
they should worship them. For Israel in the wilderness 
bowed down before the idol, the molten calf, and they 
worshipped also the stars and the sun, even as Ezekiel 
saith,® Beasts that speak not they made for themselves 
as gods. And in like manner the Egyptians worshipped 
many (other) gods and (also the god with) the dog's 
face.* And in Judah (they worshipped) gods of gold 
and silver, as God saith by the mouth of the prophet, 
“The gods of the nations are of gold and silver, the 


1 Lit, maker. 

- AC has wepi. The Eth. 
would more naturally mean 
“to.” 

* Jer s, 7; Dt 32, 21. 

4 Lit. star-gazers. 

5 These words come in awk- 
wardly here. In AC the pre- 
vious clause mentions “idols ” 
and ‘‘luminaries."’ Perhaps the 
words belong to the end of the 
following quotation. 

* Cf. Dt 4, 19. 


‘Ter 10, 2- 

* It is not clear whether the 
Eth. translator meant this to 
refer to what follows, or, as in 
AC, to what precedes. The 
words following are not found 
in Ezekiel. 

* The Egyptian god named in 
AC is Apis. The text here 
seems to refer rather to Anubis, 
who was represented with the 
head of a dog, or rather, of a 
jackal. 


122 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


work of the hands of men. They have mouths, and 
speak not; they have eyes, and see not; they have ears, 
and hear not; they have noses, and smell not; they have 
hands, and handle not; they have feet, and walk not; 
neither speak they with their throat; and there is no 
breath in their mouths. Like unto them be all they 
that make them, and all they that trust in them.” ?° 
Behold, then, beloved brethren, ye have heard what 
God saith, that evil and defiled are all they that worship 
idols, and bow down to the sun and the moon, and the 
stars. But Christians who love God ought not to swear 
by the sun and the moon, nor by the stars of heaven 
nor by the earth. And our Master hath bidden.us never 
to swear by anything. Behold then let our words be 
prudent, for our Lord saith, “Swear not by heaven, 
for it is God’s throne; nor by the earth, for it is the 
footstool of His feet; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the 
city of the great King; neither shalt thou swear by thy 
head,” 1! for the foolish Jews swear by their heads. For 
He hath commanded that the words of the faithful 
should be one, either yea, yea, or nay, nay; and what- 
soever is more than these is evil. For he that sweareth 
falsely transgresseth the law, and honoureth the (false) 
gods as the truth, since God hath made them to err in 
the blindness of their hearts and in the evil of their 
doings, that they may do that which is unseemly. 


CHAPTER XXIX. 


THAT MEN OUGHT TO KEEP AND OBSERVE THE FEAST-DAYS 
WITH SPIRITUAL JOY. 


{v., 13.] Keep, then, the feast-days, beloved brethren. 
The first feast is the day of Christ’s Birth, on the 
twenty-fifth (day) of the ninth month according to the 
reckoning of the Hebrews, but according to the reckon- 
ing of the Egyptians on the twenty-ninth (day) of the 


© Ps 113, 12ff. “Mt §, 34ff- 





mT 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 123 


month Tahsas,' which is the fourth month. And after 
this celebrate the feast of the Epiphany, on which the 
Lord manifested the glory of His Godhead in (His) 
baptism by John in the River Jordan. Keep (it) in the 
tenth month on the sixth (day) according to the reckon- 
ing of the Hebrews, and according to the reckoning of 
the Egyptians on the eleventh (day) of the month Tobi,? 
which is Ter, (that is) in the fifth month. And after 
this observe in purity the forty days of the Holy Fast, 
which teacheth us quietness and patience, fasting and 
prayer, which bring us near unto Christ. And this 
Holy Fast shall be ended on the day of the Passover, 
on which came Salvation. But let the beginning ® of 
your (paschal) fast be on the second day (of the week) 
before the Passover, [v., 14.] for on the day after the 
(feast of) Hosanna,‘ on the second day (of the week) 
the wicked Jews, transgressors against the faith and the 
law, were gathered together and took counsel against 
the Lord in the first month*® . . . which is Miyazya,® 
and on the third day of the week they took still further 
counsel,’ and on the fourth day of the week they at 
length decided * to deliver Him up to death on the Cross. 
And Judas knew this counsel of theirs, (and) as he 
was a thief, forthwith Satan made him to fall through 
love of money, for he kept the purse® and stole the 
money of the poor. And though he did all this, the Lord 
did not thrust him away, for He knew the evil of his 
heart. And while we were eating with Him, our Lord 
desired to admonish him; and behold He gave us to 


* The name of the fourth possibly a translation of Xan- 
month in Ethionic. thicus. the month which is 


® Ter is the Ethiopic, Tobi the 
Coptic name of this month. 

®* There is some confusion 
here between the two fasts— 
one for forty davs before Holy 
Week, the second during Holy 
Week. 

“Tie. the Sunday before 
Easter. 

* A word follows in Eth. 
which means “bright.” It is 


named in AC. Dillmanff in his 
Lex. refers to the clause as 
“haud satis clarus.’’ 

‘Te the eighth Ethiopic 
month. 

' Lit, added and multiplied 
counsel. 

® Lit. fulfilled the counsel. 

* Lit. the offerings of the 
purse. 


124 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


understand that he should betray Him. Wherefore He 
said,’® Verily, verily, I say unto you that one of you 
shall betray me. And we spake among ourselves, each 
one, saying, Lord, is it 1? And | arose (being) one 
of the Twelve, for He loved me more than all the 
disciples, (and) I asked Him and said unto Him, Lord, 
who is he that shall betray thee? And our Lord told 
us not his name, but showed us by two signs (who it 
was); first, in that He said, He who dippeth his hand 
with me in the dish, the same shall betray me; and 
that He said in the second place, He to whom I shall 
give the bread, the same shall betray me. For (Judas) 
said unto Him, Is it I, Lord? But our Lord did not 
say unto him, Yea, thou; but He said unto him, Thou 
hast said. He did not wish to name him openly, but 
said unto him, It were good for that man by whose 
hands the Son of Man shall be delivered up, if he had 
not been born. And Judas, hearing this, went unto the 
chief priests, and said unto them, What will ye give 
me, and I will betray Him unto you? And they 
bargained with him to give him thirty (pieces of) silver. 
It was the fifth day of the week on which our Lord 
ate the Passover with us. And Judas took the bread, 
and dipped his hand in the dish, and went out at night. 
And our Lord said unto us, The hour hath come. 
Behold ye shall be scattered every one, and shall leave 
me alone. And we said, every one of us, We will not 
leave thee; and I Peter said unto Him, Though they 
all leave Thee, yet will I not leave Thee, but will die 
with Thee. And He said unto me, Verily, I say unto 
thee, before the cock crow, thou shalt deny thrice that 
thou .kknowest me. Behold He declared unto us this 
holy mystery, which is His holy Body and His précious 
Blood, while Judas was with us. And then our Lord 
went forth to the Mount of Olives, and we also went 
with Him, praying and singing praises, as we were 
wont. He withdrew a little from us, and prayed to the 
Father, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this 


1© The references to the vari- following passage are omitted. 
ous N.T. texts alluded to in the 


a ee ed 


THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 125 


cup pass from me, nevertheless let Thy will and not my 
will be done. ‘hus He did three times. And our eyes 
were heavy with sleep because of sorrow; and our 
Lord came to us, and said unto us, The time hath 
come, behold the Son of Man is betrayed into the hand 
of sinners. Behold Judas came, and many ungodly 
men with him, and he had given them as the sign ** 
whereby he should betray Him—a kiss, a sign with 
deceit which was full of wickedness. And when they 
perceived the sign which Judas had given unto them, 
they laid hold on Jesus, and, when they had bound 
(Him), led Him away to Caiaphas the High-priest, to 
a place where were no good men, nor holy priests, 
but rather an evil people and unholy priests, who were 
transgressors of the law. And they cease not to 
blaspheme against Him and revile Him, and beat Him, 
and spit in His face, and mock Him, and buffet Him. 
And they seek false witnesses against Him, who say, 
He speaketh blasphemy against Moses, and will destroy 
the Temple, and will cause the sacrifices to cease, { and 
is an enemy of ¢ 1? the Romans, and rebellcth against 
the kings, and maketh Himself a king. All this did 
these ‘‘many dogs and fat bulls,”'* in whom was no 
mercy, do against Him. And at night they brought 
Him forth, and led Him before Annas, the father-in-law 
of Caiaphas, and wrought much evil against Him, and 
delivered Him up to Pilate the Roman governor; and 
it was then the sixth day of the week. And they 
accused Him much in many words which it were 
unseemly to utter. And Pilate, the Roman governor, 
when he heard, believed them not, but said unto them, 
I have found in this man no fault for which He should 
die. And then they brought against Him'™* two 


11 There is some confusion in the Romans to take away the 
the text here, but the general — sacrifices. AC has: ‘‘a taker- 
meaning is clear enough. away of sacrifices, an enemy of 

12 As the Eth. text stands, it the Romans." This has been 
means: will take away the followed in the text. 
sacrifices of the Romans; or ’ Cf. Ps at, 13. ; 
possibly (construing the verb 1 Or, to him (i.e. to Pilate). 
with two accusatives): cause 


126 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


witnesses who uttered and spake lies against Christ. 
And Pilate knew that their witness agreed not. Then 
they changed their minds,'® and devised a plan by which 
to make Pilate afraid, and they said, This man maketh 
Himself a king, and focbiddeth us to do service to 
the king. They lied and gave a wicked judgment; they 
cried out and said, Crucify Him, crucify Him, that in 
Him might be fulfilled the word of the prophet which 
saith, “False witnesses have risen up against me, and 
what I know not, they have spoken against me. They 
have rewarded me evil for good.” ** And again it is 
said, ‘‘Many dogs have surrounded me, and _ the 
assembly of the wicked hath laid hold on me.” !7— And 
when Pilate was not able to save Jesus for fear of the 
Jews, he took counsel to do the will of the people— 
for before Pilate had testified, and said, There is no 
fault which I have found in Him for which He should 
die. But the wicked Jews crucified Him on the Cross, 
and pierced Him—though the Romans have a law, and 
put no man to death, unless he be convicted in trial 
before the governor. But the soldiers of the guard took 
the Lord of Glory, and at the third hour they raised 
Him on the tree,’® and at the sixth hour they crucified 
Him, and gave Him vinegar and myrrh to drink, 
mingled with gall. They took His garments and 
divided them amongst themselves, and they crucified 
with Him two malefactors, one on His right hand, and 
one on His left, that it might be fulfilled which is 
written, saying, ‘And they cast gall into my food, and 
for my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.” '* And 
again it is said, ‘‘On my vesture they did cast lots.” 7° 
And somewhere it is said, ‘He was reckoned with the 
transgressors.” 71 And then there came a darkness 
for three hours, from the sixth hour until the ninth 
hour: and then the darkness departed, and the light 
appeared, even as it is written, saying, “It was not 


‘S Lit. they turned. ™ See Add. notes. 


‘ * Ps 34, Wf, AC quotes . Ps 68, 22. 
s 26, 12. Ps 21, 19. 
' Ps ar, 17. *" Isa 53, 12. 


" 





thee, 


wets, SS, 


THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 1297 


day, nor night: and in the evening the light 
appeared.” 7? And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a 
loud voice, and said, ‘Elohe, ‘elohe, lama sab&qtani, 
which, being interpreted, meaneth, My God, my God, 
why hast thou forsaken me? And then He cried and 
said, Father, forgive them, for they do what they know 
not. And again He said, Father, into Thy hand I 
commend my soul; and then He bowed His head, and 
His spirit departed. And they took Him down from 
the Cross, and buried Him in a new tomb, f and it was 
evening. And late on the Sabbath as it began to dawn 
toward the first day of the week t 7° He rose from the 
dead, fulfilling all that He had said unto us, before He 
suffered, that the Son of Man should be in the heart 
of the earth three days and three nights. And after 
He rose from the dead, He appeared first to Mary 
Magdalene and to Mary (the mother) of James, and 
to the son of 4 Cleopas in the way. And after this 
He appeared to us, His disciples, while we were hidden 
for fear of the Jews. For this is written in the Gospel. 
And again He commanded us to keep the holy fast of 
the Passover for six days because of the transgression 
of the ungodly and the wickedness of the Jews, who 
were transgressors of the law. And again He com- 
manded us to fast on the fourth and the sixth days of 
the week—on the fourth because (on it) the Jews com- 
pleted their evil design against Him; and on the sixth, 
because of the sufferings of the Saviour.2> We ought 
not to fast on the Sabbath, except on the one day (the 
Sabbath) of the Passion; but the other Sabbaths let 
us honour because our Lord rested from all His work 
on the Sabbath day. For our Lord came, but they 
believed not on Him, and received not His teaching; 
and therefore they have missed their salvation. 

{v., 15.] But ye are blessed and a holy race, for ye 
are not as the people of old, but ye have been saved 


2 Zech 14, 7. T have left the reading of the 
39 See Add. notes. MS. in the text on account of 
34 An obvious emendation is its strangeness. 

to omit the words ‘‘the son of." 8 Lit. salvation. 


128 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


from ungodliness and idolatry.. And ye are a people of 
God, and to you have been opened the gates of life, 
though formerly ye were hateful and despised. But 
now being 7° His elect and beloved (ye are) a holy people 
unto God, who are worthy to proclaim the wonderful 
works of our Saviour. For it is said, “ They have found 
me, who sought not after me; and 1 was manifested 
to those who thought not of me.” ?’ And He said to 
the people that did not know ¢ His name,t 7* Behold | 
have sought you, and ye have not sought me; but ye 
have believed in me, and hearkened unto my Church, 
and have been saved from error (even from false) gods, 
and have followed the One God, the Father Almighty, 
and His Son Jesus Christ. And ye are reckoned with 
those who believed on me, ten thousand times ten 
thousand and thousands of thousands; and ye were not 
as Israel who believed not on me. And concerning 
them it is said, “All the day long I lift up my hands 
to a disobedient people, who neither hear, nor obey; 
but walk in an evil way, that is not good; for” (they 
are) a people who follow after sin, and provoke me 
to anger continually.” °° 

{v., 16.] Behold, then, ye have seen that they have 
transgressed against the Lord, and believed not on 
Him. Wherefore it is said, “These did provoke the 
Holy Spirit to anger,” (and) their heart was blinded, 
and punishment was increased upon them for the 
wickedness of their imagination. For they said, We 
believe in Christ, but they believed not that He was 
the Lord God, who was begotten of the Father™ 
before the Creation, the only-begotten Son, the Word 
of the Father. But they being lacking in faith knew 
Him not, and understood not the prophecies of the 





%* E reads: But now ye are 
His elect and beloved a holy, 
etc. 

37 Isa 65, 1. , 

3° Eth. “my name,’”’ which is 
unintelligible. The whole 
phrase is a corruption of the 
latter part of verse just quoted 


from Isaiah. For intelligibility 
either the suffix must be altered 
as above, or ‘‘I said '’ must be 
read. 

2° Eth. but. 

** Isa 65, 2f. 

*! Eth. (A) omits : the Father. 
The word is found in E. 


THE ETINOPIC DIDASCALIA 129 


prophets that were written concerning Him, that Christ 
should be borne of a virgin, though they read and 
heard what He saith, ‘‘ Behold a virgin shall conceive, 
and shall bring forth a son, and his name shall be called 
Emmanuel. for unto us a child was born: unto us 
a son was given, and the government *? was upon his 
shoulder, and his name is called Great in counsel, and 
the Angel of peace; for I will bring peace to the rulers, 
and life is his, and great is his beginning and of his 
peace there is no end.” ** And because of the wicked- 
ness of their doings which was without end (they 
believed not). Wherefore, it is said, ‘“‘Lord, who 
believed our word? and to whom hath thine arm been 
revealed?’ ** And again it is said, “Hearing ye shall 
hear, and shall not understand: and seeing ye shall 
see, and shall not know, for the heart of this people is 
darkened.” ** Wherefore wisdom was hidden from 
them, because, when they saw, they knew not; and 
when they heard, they understood not.. But ye are 
Gentiles, and to you hath been given the kingdom, 
thouyrh formerly ye knew not God, but now ye know 
Him by a right faith and the preaching of the Gospel of 
Jesus Christ our Saviour, the Giver of life to all who 
hope in, Him. Behold ye have abandoned the worship 
of idols that have no life, and have despised unclean 
sacrifices, and turned away from the rulers of dark- 
ness. Wherefore ye have entered into the true light 
through our Lord Jesus Christ, and by Him ** ye have 
known the One true God, the Father, and have been 
made inheritors of His kingdom, for ye have been 
baptized into His death and His resurrection. Ye must 
needs, then, be as new-born babes that have no evil in 
their hearts. Put away sin from you, for He hath 
redeemed you with His precious blood, that ye should 
worship the living God. In those days the Lord spake 


33 Lit. beginning. The word ** Isa 53, 1. 
&pxh of the Greek has been ** Isa, 6, of. 
taken by the translator in a °** Or, bv it. So the clause 
wrong sense. runs in AC. 
3 Isa 7, 143.9, Of. 
K 


130 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


concerning Israel in the case of °’ those that believed 
not: ‘The kingdom of heaven shall be taken from 
them, and given to a nation that doeth righteous- 
ness.” *8 But be ye zealous to bring forth the fruit of 
sound *® wisdom, for you He sent of old to His vine- 
yard. And they hearkened not unto you, but hardened 
their hearts, and rose up against the keepers of the 
Lord’s vineyard, and laid hold on them. One they 
killed, and one they stoned with stones, and one they 
slew with the sword, and one they sawed asunder, and 
one they killed in the temple. And the Heir also they 
killed and rejected Him, and stoned Him [with the 
stone which the builders rejected].‘° And concerning 
you it is said, “‘A people whom I knew not, hath served 
me, and at the hearing of the ear have they obeyed 
me.’? #! 


CHAPTER XXX. 


THAT WE CHRISTIANS OUGHT TO UNDERSTAND TO OBSERVE 
THE PASCHAL SEASON AND NOT KEEP IT IN ERROR ON 
ANY OTHER DAYS, BUT IN THE WEEK IN WHICH THE 
PASSOVER COMES ON THE FOURTEENTH DAY (OF THE 


MONTH).! 


[v., 17.] Ye, beloved brethren, who have been 
bought with the precious blood of Christ, ought to 
keep the feast of the holy Passover with all exactness 
and understanding. For day and night are equal on 
the twenty-fifth? (day) of the month Magabit.? Make 
your reckoning sure, for our Lord did not suffer twice 
in one year. Do you also take heed to keep the 
memorial of His sufferings once only every year. For 
our sakes He died, and (therefore) consent not to 


37 This seems to be the mean- as it stands. 
ing of the Eth. preposition used. “Ps 17, 44f- 

°° Mt 21, 43. ' See Add. notes. 

2° Lit. sweet. ? A reads: fifteenth. 

“9 Some strange — confusion > Te, the seventh Ethiopic 
here, but 1 have Ieft the reading = month. 


a 


= 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 131 


keep the feast along with the Jews, for there is no love 
between us and them. [or they in folly have erred in 
their reckoning, though they think they are exact. 
Wherefore they are dishonoured in all the earth, and 
have departed from the truth. But do you take heed 
to the reckoning of the day on the twenty-fifth (day) of 
Magabit, which is the twenty-second (day) of the month 
Magabit according to the reckoning of the Hebrews, 
and observe this reckoning until the twenty-first (day). 
And further make no mistake in the reckoning of the 
Passover, lest it be celebrated before the (festival of) 
Hosanna, that the Passover may not fall twice in one 
year through inaccurate reckoning. But let the holy 
day of the resurrection of our Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ be celebrated on the holy Christian Sabbath. 

(v., 18.) And further let the fast of the holy Pass- 
over be from the second day of the week until the first 
Sabbath,‘ the vigil of the Passover. And in the week 
of the Passion cat nothing except bread, and water 
and salt. Abstain on these days of the Fast from 
eating flesh and drinking wine, for they are days of 
mourning and sorrow. Above all in these six days, if 
any one be able to fast, let him patiently endure for 
two days; but if he be not able, let him fast on one 
day, and keep himself from evil-doing. For our Lord 
saith, “The sons of the bridegroom cannot fast so long 
as the bridegroom is with them, but days will come when 
the bridegroom shall be taken from them; then shall 
they fast.’ 6 

[v., 19.] For in these six days the Jews took our 
Lord from us, and crucified Him on the Cross, and 
reckoned Him with the transgressors. Wherefore we 
command you to fast, even as we ourselves have done 
since He ascended into heaven. And as for the other 
days, let them fast on the fourth and sixth days of the 
week until the ninth hour, and whoso wisheth let him 
fast till the sun set. And keep vigil at night until the 
cock crow, being: gathered together in the church for 

* That is, Saturday. * Mt 9, 15; Mk 2, 19of; Lk 


5, 34f. 
K 2 


132 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


praise and prayer, (and) reading the Law, and the 
prophets, and the psalms of David. And after ye have 
baptized (the catechumens), read the Gospel with fear 
and trembling, and teach the people things tending to 
profit and the salvation of their souls; and pray ye to 
God that Israel may turn to repentance, and be saved 
from ungodliness. For the Governor washed his hands, 
and said, “I am innocent of the blood of this just 
man,” but (they of) Israel cried out, and said, “His 
blood be on us, and on our children.” ® Then Pilate 
said unto them, “Shall I crucify your king? And 
they answered, and said, we have no king but Cesar: 
crucify him, crucify him, for everyone that maketh 
himself a king is a rebel against Casar.7 And they 
answered, and said, If thou let this man go,® thou art 
not Czsar’s friend.” *® Pilate the governor and Herod 
the King commanded that He should be crucified, that 
it might be fulfilled which was written, saying, ‘“ Why 
have the nations raged, and the peoples spoken vain 
things? The kings of the earth have risen up, and 
the rulers also have assembled together against the 
Lord and against his anointed.” 1° And again it is said, 
“ And vey have cast away their brother as an unclean 
corpse.” 1! Then they crucified Him on the sixth day 
of the week and He rose again on the Sabbath day. 
The Scripture was fulfilled which saith, “Arise, O 
God, and judge the earth, for thou shalt have inherit- 
ance among all the nations.” "2 And moreover it is 
said, “Now will I arise, saith the Lord, and will 
appoint salvation, and deal boldly in him.”™8 And 
again it is said, ‘Arise, O Lord, in thine anger, and 
be thou exalted above mine enemies.” And more- 
over it is said, ‘Render to them their recompense upon 
their heads.” 1.16 And for this cause offer ye also your 
sacrifice as the Lord hath commanded you. [For He 


* Mt a7, 24f. 2 Ps 81, 8. 
' Lit. the King. ™ Ps it, 6. 
* Lit. save this man alive. Meet Se eke fe 
* Jn 19, 15. * Or, unto them. LXX 
1° Ps z, if. reads: aitois. 


" Cf. Isa 14, 19. Ps 27, 4. 











THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 133 


said, “Thus do ye in remembrance of me.” 17 Finish 18 
the fast, then, with joy and gladness, and keep the feast, 
for our Lord Jesus Christ hath risen from the dead, and 
His resurrection hath given us hope. + Let this ordi- 
nance f'® be unto you a law for ever until He come 
again in glory. For the Jews have not believed in the 
resurrection of our Saviour, but we Christians believe 
in His resurrection, for all who hope in His holy resur- 
rection shall find life eternal. 

[v., 20.) Keep, then, a feast on the eighth day, for 
on it the Lord appeared. Thomas said, To me also 
He appeared, and made me glad, (shewing me) the 
marks in His hands and His feet, and the wound in 
His holy side. Though before | was faithless, and 
believed not in His resurrection, He shewed me openly 
the wound in His right side. On the fortieth day keep 
a feast, for on it He finished all (His) dispensation 
and ascended into heaven to the Father who had raised 
Him (from the dead), and He sat down on the right 
hand of power, and subjected His enemies under the 
footstool of His feet; and He shall come again in glory 
and great power to judge the living and the dead, and 
He shall render to everyone according to his works. 
And behold the Jews who crucified Him shall see the 
beloved Son of God. 

For even until now the Jews are gathered together 
on the tenth (day) of the ninth month, reading the 
Lamentations of Jeremiah the prophet (where it is said) 
“The spirit of our life, Jesus Christ they have taken 
from us, and have afflicted him.” 2 And moreover 
they read what Baruch wrote, “This is our God; there 
is none other that is like unto him. He found every 
way of life, and gave it to Jacob his servant and to 
Israel his beloved. And after this he walked upon the 
earth.” %8 And as they read this, they weep and mourn. 


Lk 22, 19. to read the nominative with E, 
‘ Lit. fast. A slight altera- as in AC. 

tion of the text would give: ** The Eth. answers to the 

“fulfil the fast.’ Greek words oixovoulay xa) té Ev. 
'* The words are in the accu- 7" La 4, 20, 

sative in A. It seems necessary » Bar 3, 36ff. 


134 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


And thus they do, making it seem a mourning for the 
desolation which Nebuchadnezzar wrought, and pretend- 
ing it is the truth.8 

And ten days after He ascended (was) the fulfilment 
of Pentecost, for on that day at the third hour Jesus 
Christ sent unto us the Paraclete, and filled us with 
His power, and we spake with new tongues, (declaring) 
that Jesus Christ is the Messiah of God, who hath 
authority to judge the living and the dead. And con- 
cerning Him Moses bare witness, and said, ‘‘ The Lord 
our God took fire, and caused it to come down as 
rain.” 74 And in like manner Jacob saw Him in the 
likeness of a man, and said, “I have seen the Lord 
our God face to face, and my life is preserved.” 27> And 
Abraham also received Him as a stranger and believed 
that He was God. This is the chief of the hosts of the 
armies of God whom Joshua the son of Nun saw; and 
moreover as a strong man in armour He helped him 
by Jericho, and then Joshua did reverence to Him as a 
servant doth to his lord. And again, this is He of 
whom Samuel the prophct knew that He was Christ the 
Anointed of God. And further priests and kings called 
Him the Anointed.2® And again, He it was whom 
David knew, and spake with fear (concerning) the glory 
of the Beloved. ‘My heart hath uttered a good word 
and I have made known my work to the king; my 
tongue is as the pen of a scribe that writeth speedily. 
His beauty is fairer than the sons of men, grace hath 
been poured forth from his lips; therefore God hath 
blessed thee for ever. Gird thee with thy sword upon 
thy thigh, O mighty one, in thy beauty and thy come- 
liness. Advance, prosper and reign, because of 
righteousness, and uprightness, and meekness, and the 
glory of thy right hand shall lead thee. Thy arrows 
are sharp, O mighty one—the peoples shall fall under 
thee—in the heart of the king’s enemies. Thy throne, 


23 ‘The translation of this last have mistaken the Greek which 
dlause is doubtful. in AC is: He (Samuel) named 

7" Cf. Gn 19, 24. the kings and priests, the 

27 (in 32, 30. anointed. 

2° The translator seems {0 





THE ETINOPIC DIDASCALIA 135 


O Lord, is for ever and ever, a sceptre of righteousness 
is the sceptre of thy Kingdom. Thou hast loved 
righteousness and hated iniquity; therefore the Lord 
thy God hath anointed (thee) with the oil of gladness 
above thy fellows.” 77 And concerning Him Solomon 
saith, ‘“‘The Lord created me in the beginning of his 
way for his works, before the world be founded me, in 
the beginning before he made the earth, and before he 


-made the abysses, and before the fountains of water 


issued forth, and before he set in order the mountains; 
before all the hills he begat me.”?8 And moreover 
Isaiah the prophet saith, “A rod shall come forth from 
the root of Jesse, and a flower shall ascend from its 
stock, and shall be set as a ruler of the nations.” 2° And 
again, Solomon saith, “Wisdom hath built herself a 
house.” °° And moreover, Zechariah saith, “Rejoice 
greatly, daughter of Zion, and publish (it), daughter 
of Jerusalem; behold thy King cometh; he is righteous 
and bringeth salvation, and is meek, and rideth on an 
ass, and on the foal of an ass.” *! And moreover, 
Daniel saith, ‘‘The Son of man came to the ancient of 
days. He then is the stone (that) came down from the 
mountain, (cut out) without hands."; 3? 

We also declare (and) proclaim unto you that He is 
the Word of God that was before the world, and more- 
over is equal with Him in everything. Believe in Him 
that ye may find life eternal; but if ye believe not in 
Him, ye shall find condemnation. He who believeth 
not on the Son shall not see life eternal, and the wrath 
of God abideth on him. 

And after the feast of Pentecost keep a feast for seven 
days, and then fast; for we ought to rejoice and be 
glad because He hath granted us that we should receive 
the gift of the Holy Spirit. Moses and Elijah fasted 
for forty days. And Daniel also fasted for three weeks, 
and ate no pleasant food, nor did flesh and wine enter 
into his mouth. And the blessed Hannah, when she 


TPs a4, uff. ” Prov. y, 1. 
™ Prov 8, 22ff. Zech 9, 9. 
2 Isaort, 1 to. 2 Dn 7, 13: 2, 34. 


136 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


made supplication to God to grant her a son [Samuel], 
said, “I have not drunk wine to be drunken, but my 
heart was strong in the Lord.” °° And the men of 
Nineveh fasted for three days and three nights. Esther, 
and Mordecai, and Judith were saved by fasting from 
the wicked Holofernes ¢ and from Hamant.*4 And 
David also saith, ‘My knees are weak through fasting, 
and my flesh is dried for want of oil.” ** Do ye also 


fast and ask of Him pardon of sin. And fast besides. 


on the fourth and sixth days of the week, giving alms 
to the poor; and honour the Sabbath being gathered 
together in the church with joy and gladness; and on 
the other Sabbaths fast not, but only on one day, the 
vigil of the Passover. And if there be anyone who 
fasteth on the Christian Sabbath which is (the day of) 
His holy resurrection, or at Pentecost, (that is) until 
the feast of Pentecost **—they who do thus, and mourn 
on the feasts of the Lord, have no remission of sin. 


ne ye keep on them a spiritual feast, and never appear 
sad. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 
OF THE DIVISIONS OF THE UNGODLY AND UNBELIEVING. 


{vi., 1.) O Bishops, first of all beware of the 
divisions of the ungodly and unbelieving; turn aside 
from the way of the impure, and keep far from them, 
for he that draweth near unto them shall burn in con- 
suming fire. Turn not, then, your hearts towards them, 
nor separate one from another, devising to obtain a 
position of authority. And if there be anyone who 
draweth near unto them, and doeth their works, he 
shall find eternal condemnation. As for Dathan and 


$27 Si 1, 18S ay He 25 Ps 108, 24. 

3* The addition of these words ** Tentecost is used for the 
which are found in AC seems _ season from Easter to Pentecost, 
necessary to make the sentence as well as for the Day of Pente- 
intelligible. cost. 





is Yommeewer 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 137 


Abiram, who were moved to jealousy against Moses, 
the earth opened her mouth and swallowed them up: 
and in like manner the fire devoured the five thousand ' 
sons of Korah, who were moved to jealousy against 
Aaron. Miriam also, the sister of Moses, when she 
reproached (him), was put forth from the camp for seven 
days, for she said, ‘‘How greatly hath Moses trans- 
gressed, and he hath married a strange woman.”? And 
further Uzziah the King of Judah usurped the duty of 
the priesthood, and offered incense which it was not 
lawful for him to do. t+ But t * Eleazar the priest, and 
eighty priests who were with him, reproved him, and 
he refused to hearken to their word; and leprosy 
appeared in his face, because the Lord was wroth with 
him. 

(vi., 2.] But if kings when they transgress meet 
with condemnation, how much more others who trans- 
gress against the priests. For the priest’s office is 
greater than the kingly; the priests minister to souls, 
and the kings by the sword have power over * the body. 
And they who transgress against the priests shall receive 
a greater condemnation than they who transgress 
against kings. Howbeit there is none that can escape 
from the condemnation of cither. And again it is said, 
Absalom® . . . and the sons of Korah, and Dathan, 
and the others who transgressed against the priesthood 
saved not themselves from condemnation. For these 
rose up against David concerning the kingdom, and 
(the others) again strove with Moses in their desire 
to become rulers, and Absalom accounted his father an 
unjust judge. And again, it is said concerning Dathan 
and Abiram, “And they answered and said unto Moses, 


‘AC has: two hundred and fallen out. The word “these "" 
fifty (as in Nu 16, 35). in the next sentence shows that 
7 Cf. Nu 12, 1. more than one rebel against 
* A slight change gives this David has previously been men- 
reading. The MS. has: those tioned. AC has Abeddadan 
of E; which makes redundant (Ohededom?), that is, appar- 
the words that follow. ently, Shimei, though — the 
‘ Lit. judge. change of name is strange. 
"Some words must have 


138 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


Is it not enough for thee that thou hast brought us 
forth from the land of Egypt, from a land that floweth 
with milk and honey, and hast plucked out the eyes 
of these men, and become a ruler over us?" * And 
then many were gathered and joined together against 
him. And in like manner the sons of Korah said, 
“Hath the Lord spoken to Moses only, and to Aaron 
the high-priest? 7 And among the children of Israel 
is there none holy save Aaron alone?” And concerning 
this* there were some who said unto Moses, “Who 
made thee a prince and ruler over us? ” 

(vi, 3.] And then they rose up against Moses the 


man of God, and the faithful one who had wrought’ 


all these signs, and performed all the wonders, and 
brought down on the Egyptians many plagues. He 
divided the water, and made the sea to stand like a wall 
on this side and on that, and brought forth the people 
therefrom as one that walketh on dry ground. And 
Pharaoh and all his hosts were overwhelmed in the sea. 
He clave the rock asunder and caused water to flow 
for them, and gave them manna from heaven, and made 
flesh to rain upon them like dust, and he led them with 
a cloud by day, and all the night through with a light 
of fire. And moreover he gave them the law at the 
mouth of God the Father Almighty, and the two tables 
of stone whereon were written the ten words by the 
finger of God: and he spake with God face to face as 
a man speaketh with his friend. And concerning him 
it is said, “There shall not arise a prophet like unto 
Moses.” * And against this man rose up the sons of 
Korah and the sons of Reuben, and they stoned ?° him 
with stones as he prayed. And he said, Regard not 
thou their offering, and the carth swallowed them up, 
and then the glory of God appeared. And there were 
some whom the fire devoured; and in like manner those 


"Cf. Nu 16, 13f. * Cf. Dt 24, 10. 

"Nu 12, 1. The words are 1° There is no reference to 
really those of Aaron and_ this fact (which is also found 
Miriam. in AC) in the narrative in Num- 

* AC more correctly has: bers. It is perhaps a reminis- 


before this (fe. in Ex 2, 14). cence of Ex 17, 4. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 139 


who unjustly sought for power—the earth swallowed 
them up; with their tents and all their substance they 
went down alive into Sheol. 

({vi., 4.] Now if God requited them with the judg- 
ment of His wrath, how much more (will He execute 
judgment) against those who follow the way of the 
ungodly and unbelieving, and blaspheme against His 
creation.!! Do ye, brethren, hearken to the word of 
admonition of the Scriptures; and beware of divisions 
of opinion; and let not your faith be lacking, and seek 
not to get power with the ungodly and unbelieving who 
destroy the people. Keep far from their ungodliness, 
and have no fellowship with them, for God saith, 
“Depart from those that do thus, lest ye perish with 
them.” 1? 

{vi., 5.] Ye ought to keep far from those who 
blaspheme the name of God. For to abide with the 
ungodly and unbelieving removeth far from God. These 
are they that contend with Him, and because of their 
evil deeds the earth is defiled. Even as Jeremiah the 
prophet saith, ‘This wicked people is far from the 
living God.” '° And again it is said, “TI have left mine 
inheritance and my house, and I have turned my face 
from them.” '4 And again it is said, ‘‘My vineyard I 
have not digged, nor pruned, nor cleansed, but within 
it thorns and thistles shall spring up, and I will 
command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it,” 7° 
and it shall become a desert. For the Lord “hath left 
this people as the tabernacle of a tent in the midst of 
a vineyard, and as the guardian of a hut, and as a 
ruined city; ’’!® and the Holy Spirit hath removed from 
them the spirit of prophecy, but hath filled this Church 
with spiritual grace as the river of Egypt in the days 
of rain; and hath exalted it as a house on the top of a 
fruitful mountain, “a fat mountain and a fruitful 
mountain, a mountain wherein God hath been well 


" Lit. the creation of His "Cf. Jer 12, 7. 

work. 'S Isa 5, 6. 
"Nu 16, 25. ‘Cf. Isa a, 8. 
"Cf. Jer 2, 5. 





140 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


pleased to dwell and (wherein) He will abide for ever.” 
And again it is said by Jeremiah the prophet, ‘The 
throne of the Most High and Exalted is the holy place 
prepared for us.” '* And moreover, it is said by Isaiah, 
“In those days shall the mountain of the Lord appear 
on the high hilltops, and the house of God upon the 
extremity of the mountains, and it shall be exalted far 
above the hills.’’?® Wherefore God hath left the 
people of Judah, and made their temple a desert, and 
rent the veil, and taken the Holy Spirit from them, even 
as it is written, ‘Behold your house is left unto you 
desolate.” 7° But to you Christians hath been given 
the grace of the Holy Spirit, even as it is written by 
Joel the prophet, “I will pour out my spirit upon all 
flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy ; 
and your young men shall see a vision, and your old 
men shall dream a dream.’’?' For God hath removed 
from the Jews the power of wisdom and knowledge, 
and hath given it unto you. Wherefore the devil hath 
been moved to envy against the Holy Church of God, 
and hath brought upon you fear and trembling, 
affliction and trouble, and all (manner of) reproach and 
division at the hands of the ungodly. for Satan 
moved ?? the people of the Jews to slay Christ; but ye 
hated them and despised the evil of their deeds. 
Wherefore he hath brought upon you temptation and 
hatred, even as he did upon the righteous Job, and as 
he contended with Joshua, the son of Josedech. Us 
also Satan oftentimes desired to sift as wheat and 
(sought) to weaken our faith. But our Lord and 
Master cursed him and rebuked him, saying, ‘The 
Lord who hath saved Israel put thee to shame.” 2° For 
He said formerly while +t we t 24 were assembled 
together, “I have prayed for you to the Father that 
your faith fail not.” 7° 


{vi., 6.] For formerly there arose divisions and 
'T Ps 67, 16 f. *2 Lit. subdued. 

‘Jer 17, 12. Cf, Zech 3, 2. 

'© Isa 2, 2. 74 So AC reads. The Eth. 
29 Mt 23, 38. has : vou (the separate pronoun) 


7" Jorl 2, 28. 2s Lk 22, 32. 


aT) 


THE ‘ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 141 


wicked enmitics in the midst of the congregation of 
the Jews; the Sadducecs who did not believe in the 
resurrection of the dead, and the Pharisees who say, 
When a man is born, there is written concerning him 
all the sin that he shall do, and also what he shall be. 
These, then, are they who believe not in the work of God 
concerning us. And again, they say that the dead 
shall be raised in one hour. But these believe not in 
the resurrection. And there are some who taste no 
food, unless every day they baptize ?® beds and pots 
and dishes and cups and seats, (that is) wash and 
cleanse (them) with water. And there are others who 
are called + Ebionites t 2? who think and say that the 
Son of God is a (mere) man, and was born by the will 
of the flesh from the union of Joseph and Mary, though 
they were pure from any such thing. These,”*® then, are 
they who from the beginning have observed the law 
of their fathers. 


CHAPTER XXXII. 


HOW SATAN INTRODUCED DIVISIONS AND ENMITIES INTO 
THE CHURCH EVEN AS HE DID OF OLD IN THE CASE 
OF THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL. 


Bruotp, then, see and understand the craft and deeds 
of Satan, the enemy of all good, how he caused 
divisions and unbelief and ungodliness in the midst of 
the people. 

[vi., 7.) The first division which he caused was 
with Simon in the city called + Gitthae t* Now this 
man was a sorcerer, and by his own impure craft, he 
clothed himself with Satan as with a garment, and 
served him as a slave, performing all the evil of his will. 


2* In AC these words refer 
to the Essenes only, a sect not 
mentioned by the translator. 

' So the word is found in AC. 
The Etn. has: Goton. 


2° The word evidently refers 
to some practice like the 
Barriopol of Mk 7, 4. 

21 The Eth. is obviously a 
corruption of this. 


142 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


And Philip the Apostle our brother wrought mighty 
works and great signs, and healed the sick in the city 
of Samaria by the grace of the Lord and the doctrine 
of the Holy Spirit. And when the men of Samaria 
saw all his deeds, they became strong in their faith, 
and believed in God, and were baptized into the name 
of Jesus Christ. And when Simon the sorcerer saw 
the signs and wonders which were not done by magic 
art, amazement seized him, and straightway he believed 
and was baptized, and after that he fasted and prayed. 
And when we heard this, we gave thanks to God for 
that the men of Samaria had believed by the preaching 
of Philip. And then we arose and came unto them, 
and taught them carefully the word of admonition; 
and on-all those who had received baptism we laid 
hands; and bestowed on them by prayer the gift of the 
Holy Spirit. And when Simon saw that when we laid 
on our hands the Holy Spirit descended on those who 
helieved, he came to us, bringing bribes (and) saying, 
Give me also this authority, that when I lay on my 
hands the Holy Spirit may descend on them. For 
Satan desired to seduce those who desired to believe, 
even as he seduced Adam—and he ate of the tree, and 
(God) put him forth from the garden and brought on 
him the judgment of death. And in like manner he 
laid a snare for us that we might take bribes. And if 
we had taken (them) we should have been deprived of 
the Holy Spirit, which we had received without price, 
(and should have had) in exchange the wealth that 
waxeth old and perisheth. Then we feared and were 
troubled. And when ft I, Peter, saw t ? this evil deed, 
I said unto Simon, Thy gold and thy silver be with 
thee unto perdition. Dost thou think that with gold 
thou mayest purchase the gift of God? For thy heart 
is not right before God. Turn from the evil of thy 
deeds, and pray to God that He pardon the sin on 


> Some change is necessary in the translation above given. 
the text. either in the order of The text as it stands runs: 
words, ‘when we saw this evil ‘‘When-we-saw, I Peter, this 
deed, I Peter, etc.,’’ or, as in evil deed.” 


THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA, 143 


which thy heart hath thought, for I see that thou art 
as bitter gall in doing evil. ‘Then Simon feared exceed- 
ingly, and said unto us, Pray ye for me to the Lord 
that there come on me nothing of all this that ye have 
said unto me. 

{[vi., 8.) Then we went forth to preach in all the 
world the word of life, but Satan sent after us false 
apostles, and he raised up also those that caused the 
preaching of the Gospel to cease, and that wrought 
lies and vanity. Then they set up one from among 
them whose name was 7 Cleobius,t * and they joined 
him with Simon, and these became disciples of + him ¢ * 
who was called Dositheus, and they removed him from 
his place. And moreover they took counsel with others, 
and made a place, and assembled togegher therein to do 
what was full of blasphemy. These were Cerinthus, 
Marcus, and Menander, and _ Basilides, and 
+ Saturnilus t * And again there are others who say 
that there are many gods,* and others that (there are) 
three orders; (and others that they are gathered 
together’ and are at variance among themselves] ; and 
there are some who worship many gods whom they 
know not, and some who teach, saying that marriage 
is not from God; and others who despise and abhor the 
union of the sexes; and others who commit fornication 
without shame; and others who deny (?) the law and 
their teacher is + Nicolas.t * : 

[vi., 9.} Moreover (it was) I, Peter, to whom Simon 
came in Caesarea, the city of ® Cornelius, the faith- 
ful in Jesus Christ. But Simon took counsel to seduce 
the blessed and holy children, Zacchaus, who was once 
a publican, and Barnabas, and Nicetas, and Aquila, the 
brother of Clement, who was ordained bishop in the 


> From this, the reading of del cuvévras davrois of AC. 

AC, the Eth. is very far re- * AC has: Nicolaitans; so it 

moved. would seem that the strange 
‘ Eth. them. form now found in the Eth. re- 
© Eth has what is evidently presents Nicolas. . 

a corrupt form of this name. * The word found in A is 
* T.e, acons. meaningless. The reading in 
' This seems to represent the text is found in E. 


144 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


city of Rome, (and) who was the disciple of Paul the 
righteous in the doctrine of the holy Gospel. And | 
spake unto him before them thrice by the word of 
frophecy, and overcame ¢ him t¢ '° by the power of the 
Lord. Then he fled away, and went into Italy. 

And when he came to the city of Rome, he disturbed 
the Church, and destroyed the faith of many, and 
perverted the Gentiles, and turned them to himself; and 
taught them to use sorcery and (do) the work of 
accursed demons. And after this he went to the house 
of their gods at midday, and made an oration unto 
them looking up into the skies, and all the people did 
reverence unto him. Then he was carried up by the 
demons and flew up into the air. But I, Peter, stood, 
and prayed, and beheld him flying in the air; and he 
said, I will ascend into heaven, and he promised the 
people cvery (kind of) benefit. And they believed (him) 
and accounted him as a god. But I stretched forth my 
hands and prayed to God with all my heart to bring 
him down to earth, and to Break the power of the 
demons, who were seducing and destroying the people. 
And again I prayed to God not to kill him, but to break 
kim as a potter’s vessel.’ Then I turned to Simon, 
and said unto him, If thou art a man of God and an 
apostle of Jesus Christ, and teachest His command- 
ments and His truth, come not down; but if thou art 


a seducer and a destroyer, O Simon—I command you. 


demons ™ that bear up Simon the Sorcerer, be ye far 
from him, and forsake him that he may fall down, and 
be made a mockery before those whom he hath seduced. 
And when I had spoken thus, the unclean spirits fled 
away and forsook Simon. Then he fell to the earth, 
and was bruised with a great [amazement] ; '® and his 
limbs were broken. Then all the people cried out with 


’ Eth.: them. man of God, ete. 

" The strange touch of this 'S This hardly seems right. 
last clause is not found in AC. The Eth. word means ‘‘amaze- 

12-The end of this sentence ment.’’ or ‘‘fright.’’ | The 


in Eth. runs awkwardly. In parallel sentence in AC has 


AC the beginning is: If I be a 


“with a great noise.” 


——. 


THE ETHIOPIC: DIDASCALIA 145 


a loud voice, and said, There is one Lord, the God of 
Peter, whom he hath preached to us in truth, And 
forthwith the people forsook Simon, and from that day 
the ungodliness and divisions amongst the Simonians 
were increased. 

Then Satan entered into the hearts of the false 
prophets who led men astray, [vi., 10] and caused them 
1o utter words of blasphemy against God Almighty, 
(saying) that He is not the Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ. Moreover, they said that He is not the Creator 
of the world, but that He is invisible and unknown and 
unnamed,'' and not begotten.*5 And again, they said 
that it was not He who had sent down the Law and the 
prophets; and they believed not in the resurrection of 
the dead, and (said that) there shall be no retribution 
at the last day, and that the soul will return to its 
nature; and they take pleasure in (their) lusts, and turn 
to evil habits. And there are others who say that there 
are many gods, and say that there are three orders, 
and others that there are two orders. And others forbid 
to marry, and command to drink no wine, and count as 
impure and abhor marriage and the begetting of 
children, and the eating of fruits; and they make them- 
selves out as pure, and receive an evil wisdom, and 
feign to be righteous and faithful. And there are some 
of them who command (men) not to eat flesh, and say 
of the beasts [that they have no reason or soul] ; '* 
moreover they say that whosoever injureth a beast is as 
a murderer. And there are some who say that the flesh 
of a clean swine is not clean, but unclean, (and that) 
we ought to keep far from every such thing; but that 
men may eat of whatsoever was clean under the law. 
And there are some who practise circumcision, and 
believe that Christ was (but) a holy man, or as: one 
of the prophets. And there are some who without 

The reading of A is mean- representation of the Greek 
ingless. E reads as ahove.  abroyévebdov. 


This answers to the reading of '§ ‘The words in brackets give 
AC. an exactly opposite turn to the 





'S This in Ethiopic guise docs 
not seem unorthodox. It is a 


corresponding: words of AC. 


L 


146 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 

shame openly teach lust, and do the pleasure of the 
flesh, and are completely given over to every deed of 
uncleanness. Now these are as instruments (whom) 
the devil hath led captive,'’ and children of wrath. 


CHAPTER XXXIII. 


OF THE RIGHT FAITH AND THE HOLY TRINITY WHICH THE 
APOSTLES PREACHED TO US IN TRUTH. 


[vi., 11.] But we, (being) children of God and sons 
of peace, preach this holy word to those who are 
obedient in uprightness. We belicve in One God, the 
Maker of the whole creation, the Father of our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ, whose existence is without 
cause (?), even as we said before, but He is existent 
at all times without beginning or end. and in Him is 
light unquenchable, and to Him! none can approach. 
He is not two, nor three, nor is He capable of increase, 
but He is One alone who abideth for ever. Yet He is 
not a hidden (Being) who cannot be known, but we 
have known surely by the Law and the prophets that 
He is Almighty and the Ruler of the whole creation. 
He is the One God, the Father of our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ, who was begotten before the world was 
created, the only-begotten Son, who is equal with Him, 
the maker of all hosts and powers and dominions; who 
was pleased to become man in the latter days, and took 
flesh of the holy Virgin Mary, without seed of man, and 
grew up”? amongst men, without sin, or trespass, nor 
was there guile in His mouth; and afterwards He 
suffered and diced without sin in the flesh, and rose from 
the dead on the third day, and ascended into heaven 
to the Father, who had sent Him, and sat down on the 
right hand of power; and He sent to us the Paraclete, 


 E. reads here: the habita- ‘ Or, to it (i.e., to the light). 
tion of the devil. This may be It is thus in AC. 
right, as it avoids the necessity * Lit. was reared. 
of supplying a relative pronoun 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 147 


the Holy Spirit, who proceedeth § from the Father, and 
hath saved the world; who is co-existent with the 
Father and the Son. We say then that every creature 
of God is good and there is nothing (to be) rejected, 
but that the spirit, the life of the flesh, is pure and holy 
in all things. We say that marriage is pure, and the 
begetting of children not unclean, for God made Adam 
and Eve that man might be multiplied. We under- 
stand then that there is in our body a soul which doth 
not die, nor perish with the body; but we abhor every 
deed of apostates from the faith, and all divisions, and 
transgression of the law, for unto us such are unclean. 
Again, we believe in the. resurrection of the dead, both 
of the righteous and sinful in the day of judgment, 
when every man shall be requited according to his 
works. Morcover, we believe that Christ was in nothing 
subjected to loss by His incarnation, but that He is 
God the Word, who became man in truth, and recon- 
ciled the race of man with God, and (that He is) the 
High-priest of the Father. We do not practise circum- 
cision then like the Jews; we know that He hath come 
who fulfilled the Law and the prophets, for whose 
coming all the nations hoped, Jesus Christ who sprang 
from Judah and from the root of Jesse, and whose 
government 4 is on His shoulder. 

{vi., 12.] For in those days ungodliness grew 
strong, and led many astray, whereby the Church was 
disturbed. Then we gathered together in Jerusalem, 
we the twelve apostles, and appointed Matthias in the 
place of Judas Iscariot, even as it is written, “And 
his office let another take ";5 and we were assembled 
together with James our Lord’s brother, the bishop of 
Jerusalem, and we took counsel with the presbyters to 
speak to the people words of admonition. For® there 


* Or, hath come forth. The translation was ‘‘beginning.”’ 
verb is in the perfect tense. * Ps 108, 8. 

“Here the Eth. gives the * In the passage which fol- 
correct translation ‘‘govern- lows [ have not given the re- 
ment.’’ Above [v., 16] in the ferences to the chapters of the 
same passage from Isaiah the Acts of the Apostles. 

L@2 


148 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


were some who set forth from Judwa, and went to 
Antioch to teach the brethren who were in that place, 
saying, Unless ye be circumcised according to the law 
of Moses, and walk according to his ordinance, ye 
shall not be saved; and there arose enmity and strife. 
Then the brethren who were in Antioch knew that we 
were gathered together and had enquired concerning 
this matter, and they sent unto us faithful men, who 
had knowledge of the holy Scriptures, to search out 
this thing. And they came to us in Jerusalem to declare 
unto us all that had happened in Antioch; and there 
were some who said unto them, Ye must needs be 
circumcised, and do what is in the ordinances of the 
Law. But I Peter rose up and said unto the people, 
Brethren, ye know that God chose the Gentiles who 
took heed unto the preaching of the Gospel, and 
believed, to whom God who knoweth the hearts bare 
witness. And to Cornelius the centurion an angel of 
the Lord appeared, and bade him send to me that he 
might hear from my mouth the word of life. And he 
sent to me to the city of Joppa, and brought me to 
Cwxsarea. And before I came unto him, I stood on a 
lofty place and prayed; and behold I saw the heaven 
opened, and a great sheet descend to the earth, held 
by its corners; and‘in it were creeping things and beasts 
and birds of the heaven. And 1 heard a voice which 
said, Arise, Peter, kill and eat; and I said, Never hath 
there entered into my mouth anything defiled, which 
was not clean. And again a voice came which said, 
What God hath cleansed, count thou not unclean, and 
the whole (sheet) was drawn up again into heaven. 
And while I thought thus, What thing is this that hath 
appeared unto me? the Holy Spirit said unto me, 
Behold (certain) men are seeking thee; arise and go 
with them without doubting, for I have sent (them) to 
thee. These were they whom the centurion had sent. 
Then I thought in my heart, and believed what the 
Scripture saith, ‘‘ Whosoever shall call on the name of 
the Lord shall be saved";7 and again it is said, “Let 
7 Joel 2, 32. 


7 





THE ETHIOPIC: DIDASCALIA 149 


all the ends of the carth remember and turn unto the 
Lord, and let all the lands of the nations worship 
before him; for the kingdom is the Lord’s, and he 
shall judge the nations.”"8 Moreover, I remembered 
that which is written concerning the calling of the 
Gentiles, and [ went with them, and entered into the 
man’s house, and preached the word. And forthwith 
the Holy Spirit descended upon him and upon all who 
were with him, even as He had descended upon us; 
and there was no distinction betwcen us in faith, and in 
the purification of our hearts. And I perceived that 
God respecteth not persons, but that all nations that 
fear God and do righteousness are well-pleasing before 
Him. Then the faithful rose up and said, How long 
tempt ye God, and lay on the shoulders of the Gentiles 
a heavy burden which they cannot bear? But we 
belicve that we shall be saved by grace even as (they). 
The Lord hath loosed us from the bond of sin, and 
lightened (and removed) from off us the heavy burden. 
And whentIt® had said this, all the people kept 
silence. Then James the brother of our Lord answered 
and said unto them, Hearken unto what I say unto 
you: behold Simeon hath before declared how God 
chose the Gentiles for His inheritance as it is written, 
“T will come and build the house of David which is in 
ruins, and I will raise up those that have fallen, that 
all the Gentiles on whom my name is named may turn 
to the Lord, saith the Lord.” © Wherefore I say unto 
you, Lay no burden on the Gentiles who have turned 
to God, but command them to abstain from all (that is) 
unclean, and not to eat that which dieth of itself,!! or 
which hath been sacrificed to (false) gods, and (to abstain 
from) fornication, (and from) what is not commanded 
in the law, and is not written in the book of the fathers, 
Enosh, Enoch and Noah and Melchizedek and Job and 
others such as thev. Then the apostles, and James, 


* Ps at, 28f. '! The same word is used in 
° Eth. he. some MSS. of the Eth. version 
Amo, ttf. of Lev 22, 8, where the English 


Bible translates as in the text. 


150 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


the bishop of Jerusalem, and the presbyters of the 
Church agreed, and chose from amongst us men whom 
they should send with Barnabas and Paul the tem- 
maker,’ both Judas who was called + Barsabbas t,!3 
and Silas, who were chosen from the brethren. Then 
we wrote and sent (a letter) to the brethren in the 
churches of Antioch and Syria, saying, Peace be unto 
you. Because we have heard (that there arc) some who 
have troubled your souls with words, to whom we gave 
no (such) commandment, now also we having agreed 
together have chosen men to send unto you with our 
brethren Barnabas and Paul, men who have surrendered 
their lives for Jesus Christ’s sake. And we have sent 
Judas and Silas that they may inform you (of these 
things). For the Holy Spirit agreed with us that we 
should lay no burden (upon you) nor add any other 
(charge) save this only, that men should abstain from 
anything sacrificed to (false) gods, and from that which 
dieth of itself, and from blood, and from fornication; 
and that what they hate for themselves they should not 
do to their neighbours. Take heed to these things 
and peace be to you. 

(vi., 13.] This letter we sent, (but) we laboured in 
Jerusalem for many days, desiring to do what was 
good for us and you (? ).35 

And after a few days we visited the brethren and 
confirmed ‘them with the word of admonition, and com- 
manded them to keep far from those who blasphemed 
against the name of the Lord and against Moses. For 
these are ravening (wolves), and make themselves like 
unto sheep, and strive against the Lord and Moses 
and the prophets, (being) false Christs and false 


'™ The AC has: of Tarsus. not found in AC occurs in the 
The Eth. has the word used Eth. version of Acts 15, 29. 
above (ii., 63) for “tent- '§ So the MS. reads. Pos- 
maker.’’ It also translates sibly ‘‘them’’ should be read. 
“tanner ’’ in Act 9, 43. Pos- ‘You ’’ may have been written 
siblv here there was a confusion from an idea that the words 
between rapoéa and Aupaéa. form part of the preceding 

13 Eth. Barnabas. epistle. 

1 This last clause, which is 








f 
THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 151 


prophets and lying apostles who destroy the natjons, 
and bow down themsclves to the earth, and think all 
(manner of) evil, and spoil the holy vineyard. And 
by reason of these the love of many shall ¢ wax 
cold t;!® but he who patiently endureth to the end, 
the same shall be saved. And concerning these our 
Lord commanded us, saying, “ Beware of false prophets 
who come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly are 
ravening wolves, and from their fruit ye shall know 
them.” 7 
[vi., 14.] And because of this we all have assembled 
in one placc—we are the apostles of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, Peter and Andrew; James and John, the sons 
of Zebedee; Philip and Bartholomew; Matthew and 
Thomas; James the son of Alphzus and Simon the 
Cananean; '8 ‘Thaddcus and Matthias who was num- 
bered with us and appointed in place of Judas Iscariot ; 
and James the brother of our Lord Jesus Christ, the 
bishop of Jerusalem and Paul the t chosen f!® (vessel) 
and teacher of the Gentiles—and being gathered 
together in one place we have sent unto you this holy 
message.” Ye also, faithful brethren, have believed 
in Christ, by whom were all things: and now also 
we say unto you that there is One God Almighty, and 
there is no other god besides Him; (and) we teach you 
to worship Him, and adore Him, and to serve Jesus 
Christ and the Holy Spirit, and to read the Holy 
Scriptures of the Law and the prophets. Honour your 
parents, and abstain from all that contendeth against 
the law; and believe in the resurrection arid the day 
af judgment; and wait in hope for that time. when 
He shall render to every man according to his works. 


‘© The Eth. has a word, one N.T. begin with Kaf. 
of whose meanings is “depart.” '* Eth. has the colourless 
Possibly puyhoeras was confused word ‘‘good.”” As AC _ has 
with some part of pevyu. ““chosen vessel,”’ I have read as 


"Mt 7. 1sf. above. The words for “good ’* 
17 have written Cananean and ‘‘chosen "’ are similar. © 
rather than Canaanite, as the 7° In Eth, the same word as 


first letter of the word is Qaf. that translated ‘‘letter ’’ above. 


-Canaan and Canaanite in Eth. 


152 THE -ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


lor the whole creation is from God, and not from 
Satan; but all evil is from Satan. And in lawful 
marriage there is no defilement nor loss, but rather it 
is from God, for in the beginning He created (them) 
male and female; and for this cause it is said “Let a 
man leave his father and his mother, and cleave unto 
his wife, and let them two be one flesh.” 2! And after 
a man is married, let him not put away his wife, but 
for fornication only, for “she is thy spirit and thy 
flesh, for I created them and not another.” Again, 
it is said, “What God hath joined together let not 
man separate.” 2% For he that separatcth himself from 
his wife, dividing the one flesh,*4 hath transgressed 
the commandment of God. le also that hath married 
one that is divorced hath defiled his flesh; and he that 
hath cleaved to an adulteress hath quite ® transgressed 
the law. Cut off the adulteress from thy flesh, for she 
is not thine. Defile ye not then your flesh, for circum- 
cision of the heart in a pure spirit is sufficient for the 
faithful. 

([vi., 15.] Make no repetition of baptism: the first 
baptism which you have received sufficeth for you, for 
ye were buried into the death of Christ; (a baptism) 
which hath not been given to the ungodly and unbeliev- 
ing, but to holy priests who have bestowed it upon you 


into the name of the Father and of the Son and of the. 


Holy Spirit. Receive not baptism at the hands of 
apostates from the faith. For there is one baptism, 
and one God, the Father, and our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ, and the Paraclete, the Holy Spirit: one 
is the death of Jesus in the flesh; and in like manner 
let your baptism which ye have received into His death 
be one. And he that believeth not, and doeth not thus, 
his portion shall be with the ungodly in their evil 
doctrine.26 To those who do thus, God saith, “ Because 

2 Cf. Mt 19, af. 2 Mtg, 6. 

22: Cf. Mal 2, 14f. The 24 Lit, making two fleshes. 
quotation in AC and Eth. is in- 25 This word should perhaps 
teresting as reading ovx &AdAos ro with the following clause. 
and not ob «adds. Cf. Swete, 4° Lit, doctrine of evil. 

O.T. in Greek (in loco). 





4 








THE EYVHLOPIC DIDASCALIA 153 


ye have rejected my doctrine, | also will reject you and 
forsake you, and not make you priests unto me. - 
And those who are baptized by ¢ them ** are not 
cleansed, but are unclean, and have no remission of sin. 
So are they who receive a second baptism, and make 
the work of Christ a mockery, and despise holy things, 
and blaspheme against the Holy Spirit, and count 
unclean His precious blood, and set at naught His 
sufferings and His testimony. But those who believe 
not, and are not baptized into the right faith, are trans- 
gressors of the law and condemned, for they reproach 
Him, and give Him not thanks. Our Lord saith, “He 
that is not born again of water and the Holy Spirit 
cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven,” 2 but ‘he 
that belicveth and is baptized shall be saved, and he 
that believeth not shall be condemned.” % And he who 
saith, Afterwards I will be baptized, and maketh light *! 
of baptism, the same shall be condemned and be far 
from God. Delay not to turn to the Lord for man 
knoweth not that which shall come upon him. And 
baptize your children, while they are babes, and feed 
them with spiritual food, and bring them up with 
admonition and wisdom, for it is said, “ Suffer the little 
children 2 (and) forbid them not to come unto me.” 38 
[vi., 16.) Behold we have written all this unto you, 
beloved brethren, that ye may understand wisdom and 
knowledge, and not receive idle words which the un- 
yodly put forth * in our name. Say not, then, We have 
apostles who will pray for us, but rather see whether 
their deeds are right. For there are some that do 
many mighty works, which are full of the poison of 
death, in the name of Christ, like Simon the Sorcerer 
and t Cleobius +, and those with them in every place, 
who lead men astray. [Ye also are they that have 
7 los 4, 6. 2 The same word as 
2 Eth. by you. The words “babes * above. 


seem to have been taken as part ce Mt 19, 14 
receding quotation. wit, make. 
7 ee. si 33 Lit. regard the beauty of 
© Mk 16, 16. their derds. 
2! Lit. counteth unclean. 3¢ Restored from AC. 


154 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


loved Christ (and) we are His servants.] 87 And others 
also of the ancients have written apocryphal 8° books 
of Moses, and Enoch, and Adam, and Seth, and 
Isaiah, and David, and Elijah, and the three patriarchs, 
who strove against those that were transgressors of 
the law.40 Moreover (certain) have written books that 
are vain; 41 who account themselves elect and pure, and 
say, Our Scriptures are sure, though they are unclean. 
From those who do thus keep far away, lest ye be 
condemned with those that have written to lead astray 
the faithful—who are blameless, the disciples of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

[vi., 17-] We said, then, concerning bishops and 
presbyters that they should live with one wife before 
ordination, but that after ordination it is net right that 
they should marry. And again we give commandment 
concerning the servants who are obedient to the Church, 
sub-deacons, and readers, and doorkeepers that they 
should live with one wife, and (in one) marriage. But 
after they have received baptism and ordination, let 
them not commit sin, lest they fall into condemnation. 
Behold we give commandment that they marry not a 
harlot, nor a servant, nor a woman that is divorced, nor 
a widow, even as it is written in the law. Moreover 
let the deaconess be a pure virgin, or a faithful widow 
who hath been married to one man. (Such) women 
ought to be appointed. 

(vi., 18.] Those women ® also who turn from sin, 
receive. This is the will of God in Jesus Christ. And 
as touching the catechumens when they understand the 
teaching, baptize them into the name to the Father, 


31 These words come in awk- 
wardly here. In AC the former 
sentence runs on: to deceive 
you who love Christ and us His 
servants, 

** The Eth. word (meaning : 
hard, difficult, strange, etc.) is 
probably intended as a_trans- 
lation of “apocryphal.”” 

»” Seth is not mentioned here 


in AC, 

“© In AC the clause char- 
acterises the books as ‘‘per- 
nicious and repugnant to the 
truth.” 

“' Lit. even as vanity. 

“2 The verb “turn” and the 
suffix of the following verb are 
fem. in Eth. AC has) rots 
MeTavooyrras, 


ae ee le | 


THE EVHIOPIC) DIDASCALIA 155 


and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit; and command 
the faithful to separate themselves from those that serve 
not God, (and not to have fellowship with them) in any- 
thing, whether counsel or word or prayer. And put 
them forth from the Church of God, for they are 
strangers, and evil, and corrupt, who destroy the sheep 
of Christ's flock ; concerning whom the wise Solomon 
saith, ‘‘ Woe to the unbelieving who account themselves 
wise, and their latter end (cometh) unto the condemna- 
tion of Sheol." 4 These are they that teach false 
doctrine, and blaspheme against the Holy Spirit, from 
whom hath bcen taken the portion of the inheritance 
which they received from Him, and who have forgive- 
ness ncither in this world, nor in that which is to come. 
For they have transgressed more grievously than the 
Jews and the heathen, who have blasphemed against 
God (who is) the Creator of all things and is above all; 
and they have risen up against His Son, and denied 
the Holy Spirit, and made void the holy Scriptures, 
and made blasphemy thcir portion,“ and spoiled the 
Church of Christ. These are the foxes* that spoil the 
vineyard. From such we bid you keep far away. For 
he that followeth a wise man shall be wise like unto him ; 
but he that followeth a fool shall be a fool like unto 
him. Ye ought not to dwell with robbers, nor be 
partakers with adulterers. Hear what the holy David 
saith, “I have hated, O Lord, them that hate thee, and 
have been troubled because of thine enemies. I have 
hated them with a perfect hatred and they are become 
mine enemies.’’ 48 ‘or God cursed Jehoshaphat because 
of the love and help of King Ahab; and to King 
[Uzziah] ‘7 he said by [Jocl] the prophet, “Thou hast 
been a help to a sinner; wilt thou then save him whom 
the Lord hath hated?’ “8 Wherefore there came on 
him speedily the anger of the Lord; because his heart 
was not right with Him, his works were diminished in 


“| Ps 138, 21f. 
“7 See Add. notes. 
“2 Chr 19, 2. 


“3 Cf. Prov 14, 12. 

“4 Lit, chosen for themselves 
blasphemy. 

“ See Cant 2, 15. 


156 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


the earth. Keep, then, far from them, and recei 
‘their salutation.” Concerning them saith dee 
The wicked have no rejoicing before God.” © These 
are ravening wolves and dogs that have no mercy 
And when the day hath drawn nigh and the hour is 
come, they will be evil, even as our Lord saith in the 
Gospel, “In the latter days faith and love shall grow 
less, and sin shall be multiplied, and there shall come 
false Christs and false prophets, and they shall do 
signs in heaven and seduce many of the elect.’ 5 
Behold then let us pray to God to save us from their 
error by Jesus Christ, and to deliver us from the 
ungodly people, that we may confirm the Church and 
save many, and heal them by much admonition, and 
by the word of grace. But those who received not our 
preaching could not be healed, and have gone forth 
from the flock, lest they should corrupt other undefiled 
sheep in whom was no blemish. Thus, then, we have 
ordained in all lands, and have set forth for you this 
right doctrine of the Didascalia in truth and in purity 
as a memorial for those who believed in our Lord Jesus 
Christ; and we have sent (it) with Clement the beloved 
and the elect Barnabas, and our beloved son Timothy 
and the blessed Mark, and with these Titus and Luke, 
and Jason and Lucius, and Sosipater. 
[vi., 19.] We beseech you therefore: imitate these 
and hear their words, and shun your former manner of 
life, for the former things have passed away; and 
become new yourselves, for ye have known our Lord 
Jesus Christ by whom are all things; and (who) hath 
given unto us a pure law (for) the salvation of our 
souls, wherein He put His own perfect name, which is 
without division or defect, or change, unspotted and 
converting souls, When the Hebrews forgot this, He 
gave them a memorial by Malachi the prophet, who 
saith, “ Remember the law of Moses the man of God 
who enjoined on you these commandments of righteous- 
ness and holiness.” 5? But our Lord Jesus Christ did 


«* Lit, peace. " Cf. Mt 
"© Isa 57, 21. aS cf Mal 4: 6 


aera 


a cats ee “ee 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 157 ‘ 


not abolish the ordinances of the Law, nor diminish 
(them), but rather said, “ One word shall not pass from 
the Law, till all this be fullilled.” | Again, He saith, 
“T have not come to abolish the Law and the prophets, 
but to fulfil them.” or Moses the legislator, 
prophet and king, and Klijah the prophet, who 
appeared with our Lord when He was transfigured 
before them, bare testimony concerning His passion 
and His death and His incarnation as friends, and men 
of His household, and not as strangers. 

[vi., 20.] ‘he Lord gave the ordinance, the ten 
words which are in the Law and the holy prophets, and 
they heard His voice continuously, before they made 
for themselves the calf which the Egyptians called 
t Apis t . For the ordinance is righteous, and there- 
fore®vas it called the law; and He judgeth in upright- 
ness. Simon and those with him hate this ordinance, 
and praise themselves, but they shall go down to 
Gehenna. But the law is good and holy, for He saith, 
“TE thou wilt make for me an altar, build it for me in 
the land,” and He saith not, “Build for me,” except 
\(it be) thy pleasure, for God needeth not sacrifices and 
offerings from us. But Abel, and Noah, and Abraham, 
the friends of God, offered up sacrifices of incense unto 
Him according to their pleasure. And in like manner 
the Hebrews did thus according to their pleasure. And 
it was not He who commanded them, but they them- 
selves did His good pleasure, and He received their 
sacrifices which they offered up unto Him with a pure 
heart. Wherefore He saith, ‘I desire not your incense, 
nor do I need aught, for the world is mine and all that 
is ¢ therein.” In days of old t the people forgat 
God, and made for themselves a calf as a god instead 
of the true God. And when they came out of Egypt it 
is said, “Is this thy god, O Israel, that brought thee 


53 Mts, 17-18. 5* If this emendation be right, 

™ Restored from AC. a letter must be added to get 

58 Or perhaps: of earth. So the word translated “therein.” 
in AC. The reference is to Fx The Eth. punctuates with a stop 
20, 24- at “mine.” 


158 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


forth from the land of Egypt?” ° They worshi 
calf in (their) fae salibess and Veins Gol ne tea 
ree Moses, and brought them out of sore afiliction. 
ne behold God wrought signs by the hand of Moses 
is servant, and with the rod which destroyed the 
Egyptians with the ten plagues, and wherewith he 
es the Red Sea, and made them pass through it on 
ry ground as it were a course for horses; but he over- 
whelmed his enemies therein; and he made’ sweet the 
fountain of bitter water; and he clave the rock and 
made water to pour forth for them; he overshadowed 
them by day with a cloud, and by night with a pillar 
of fire; and he enlightened them and led them—but 
they knew not whither they were going; he brought 
down from heaven manna for them to eat and baat 
them) flesh as the dust; and he gave them the 1 in 
the desert, and made them ready to hear His voice. 
ey forsook him who had done all this, and said to 
aron, ‘Make us gods who shall go with us.” And 
(Aaron) made a calf for them, and they bowed down 
before it. And God knew that they felt no gratitude 
for all that, He had done for them, so they were bound 
with bonds that could not be loosed, and were cast 
into a net, whence was no escape. (And God said unto 
them), “When ye make an altar, offer up thereon sacri- 
fices at all times.” For He saith, Thou didst forget 
God who saved thee, and gavest no. thanks to my 
name. Offer then your offerings that there ye may 
remember to give thanks to my name. And substitute 
not an unclean beast for a clean, for if ye do thus, I 
will bring upon you sore punishment as (on) an evil 
and slothful and foolish servant, and ye shall {not] © 
be bound with the bonds of the commandment. Take 
heed then and fall not into the error of (having) many 
gods, lest there come upon you the word which saith 
“Where is thy God, O Israel?”*' And remember 


51 Cf. Ex 32, 4. 

58 Ex 32, 1. 

8° Lit, fell. 

*© The sense seems to require 


the omission of this word, un- 

less the verb be taken as in the 

subjunctive: Be not ye bound. 
5! Cf. Ex 32, 4. 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 15y 


what is written, saying, “lear, O Isracl, the Lord thy 
God is One.” And abide ye in this ordinance, and 
know that there is no other god besides Him in heaven 
or in earth; love Him with all thy heart, and with all 
thy strength, and with all thy mind; and fear Him 
alone, and set not in thy heart the name of strange 
gods, nor make mention of them with thy mouth, for 
because of the guile of their hearts God bound them. 

[vi., 21.] But as for you, since ye have known the 
One God with a pure heart, and a good understanding, 
and have heard the voice of the Saviour, blessed are 
your eyes, for they have seen, and your ears for they 
have heard. Behold ye are loosed from the bonds and 
are freed from the servitude. Moreover He saith, “! 
will not call you my servants, for the servant knoweth 
not what his lord doeth unto him; but ye are my 
friends. Behold I have taught you all that I have 
heard from my Father.” But as for those who desire 
not to see nor to hear, their heart hath been hardened, 
and they are far from Him. 

(vi., 22.) But blessed are ye from whom God hath 
taken away His curse. lor Christ the Son of God came, 
(and) established and fulfilled the law; and He removed 
the heavy burden that was therein, (and) saved us, and 
freed us from the service of sin, and had mercy on us, 
and gave us life eternal. And again He saith, “He 
that will come after me, let him await my second 
coming.” But He received not the sacrifices and 
offerings which the nations offered, for oftentimes they 
offered unto Him; and they thought that it was by 
multiplying sacrifices that they would be saved, without 
repentance, from the scourge of God’s anger. More- 
over it is said, “ Wherefore bring ye to me incense 
from Saba, and cinnamon from a far country? I have 
no pleasure in your sacrifices, and will not receive your 
incense.” 6 And again Isaiah saith, ‘ Wherefore offer 


" Dt 6, 4. simply: let him come. What 

Jn 15, 15. meaning the Eth. translator had 

“Cf. Mt 16, 24. The second — in view is far from clear. 
clause of the quotation in AC is ** Jer 6, 20. . 


160 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


ye to me your sacrifices; I am sated with the sacrifices 
of rams and oxen and with the fat of sheep. I desire 
not the blood of oxen and goats. If ye bring (them), 
will ye not show me who hath required this at your 
hands? Ye shall not again tread the courts of my 
house. And if ye bring fine flour, it is in vain; your 
incense, and your feasts, and your sabbaths, and your 
great day I desire not; your fasts also and your prayers 
I desire not; my soul hath hated (them) and ye are an 
abomination unto me.” & Moreover the prophet saith, 
“Remove from me the sound of thine anger.” 7 Again 
Samucl the prophet said to Saul, when he desired to 
sacrifice, ‘‘To hearken is better than to sacrifice and 
knowledge than the fat of sheep, for the Lord desireth 
not that thou shouldst sacrifice to him, but rather that 
thou shouldst hearken to his word.” ® And David also 
saith, “I will take no oxen from thy house, nor rams 
from thy flock, for all the beasts of the field are mine; 
the cattle of the field also, and the oxen; and I know 
all the birds of the heaven; and the beauty of field also 
is with me. If I be hungry I will not ask of thee, for 
the whole world is mine, with the fulness thereof. I 
will not eat the flesh of oxen, nor drink the blood of 
goats. Sacrifice to God the sacrifice of praise and 
send up thy prayer to the Most High.” *® Moreover 
it is written in the Scripture that He desircth not the 
incense of those that have sinned against Him, for 
unclean before Him is the sacrifice of the ungodly who 
offer contrary to the law: everyone who eateth of it 
is unclean. But He desireth above all a meek heart 
and a humble spirit which are better than sacrifice. 
Behold, then, He came to bring to an end the sacrifices 
of blood which they offered. 

[vi., 23-] Tor He said in the Law, “The Lord thy 
God is One”;7 again He said in the Gospel, ‘This 
is life eternal that they should know the One true 


Isa i, inf. 

"7 Cf. Am §, 23. The trans- 
lation in the Eth. text evidently 
confuses épydvev with dpyav. 


1S 15, 22. 
* Ps qo, off. 
™ Dt 6, 4. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 161 


God." 7 Moreover He said, ‘Love thy neighbour as 
thyself”; 72 (and) repeated (it in the Gospel) and said, 
“T have given you a commandment that ye love one 
another, as I have loved you.” 7% For thus He said 
(in the law) Thou shalt not kill, but He hath com- 
manded us never to hate anyone. He who said t Thou 
shalt not commit adultery nor desire thy neighbour’s 
wife, behold He hath commanded (us not even to look 
upon a woman to lust after her) ft . He said (then), 
Thou shalt not steal, but He hath commanded us to 
abstain from every evil deed, and to love our enemies. 
For He who said, Ye shall not render evil to him that 
doeth you injury, hath commanded us to be at peace 
with all men; for mercy is better than those who 
desire vengeance unrighteously (?).%° He said (then), 
“Honour your parents’; but He hath commanded us 
to humble ourselves unto all men. He put an end to 
circumcision, and He Himself fulfilled circumcision : 
and He fulfilled the hope for which the whole world 
was hoping. He who said, “Perform unto the Lord 
thine oath,” hath commanded us not to swear by any- 
thing. Instead of sacrifices of blood He hath given 
us a rational bloodless offering; and instead of sacri- 
fices in one place, He hath commanded us that our 
offering should be made in all the earth from the rising 
of the sun even to its setting.”*. . . Moses saith in the 
law, Read thou the words which I have commanded 
thee while thou workest, or while thou sittest, or while 
thou standest, or while thou walkest in the way.” 7” 
And David also saith, “ But the law of the Lord is his 
delight, and in his law he will meditate day and 
night.” 78 And everywhere He hath commanded that 
they should do that which (is written) in the law, and 


"1 Jn 17, 3- sense of the omitted clause. 
7 Lev 19, 18. ™%® Lit. in evil, 
"Jn a 34. ™ The Eth. has here a word 


™ There is a corruption in the 
text of this passage, and some 
words must have dropped out. 
The words given above in 
brackets would naturally be the 


meaning “to the (or, his) priest- 
hood,’’ but I cannot understand 
how it is to be taken. 
Cf, Dt 6, 7. 
™ Ps 1, 2. 
M 


162 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


not transgress the ordinance. And again it is said, 
“Blessed are they that are pure in their way, and that 
walk in his ways, and seek him with all their heart.” 7 
Moreover it is said in the Gospel, “ Blessed are ye, if 
ye do this.” 8 

(vi., 24.] For on account of this is the law manifest 
in righteousness, and illumineth all the world, (even) 
those who believe in our Lord, and have forsaken the 
worship of idols, and kept far from wickedness and 
received all that is good. And the Jews also, who 
have rejected the covenants, whose hearts were blinded, 
and (who) followed the way of those who said, ‘We 
have no king but Casar,” ® and said again, “If we 
Iect this man alone, the Romans will come, (and) will 
take away our nation and our land,” ® prophesied 
against Him and said, ‘It is better for us to put one 
man to death, than that the nation perish.” ® (Yet) all 
nations have believed in Him, and the Romans have 
taken away their authority and all their ordinances; and 
therefore are they accursed because they have not been 
able to do His commandment. Moreover it is said, 
“Cursed is he that doeth not all the commandments 
which are written in the book of the law.” & 

{[vi., 25.] But we follow ® the way of Christ, that 
we may receive a blessing: and let us receive the law, 
and the prophets, and the holy Gospel; and turn aside 
from those that worship many gods, and let us keep 
far from the murderers of Christ, and from them that 
slew the prophets. These are the unbelieving Jews. 
And let us be humble and firm in faith in Christ the 
King who hath authority over all things, and is the 
teacher of the law, and the guardian of the ordinances. 

([vi., 26.] Keep far, then, bishops and priests and 
people, from (those that cause) division (even) from 
those that account unclean the Law and the prophets, 
being the enemies of God Almighty; and who believe 


= Hs 118, 1f. Bs sg Jn ey 50. 

n 13, 17. t 27, 26. 
Jn 19, 5. *® Or (by a change of vowel) : 
23 Jn ot, 48. Iet us follow. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 163 


not ® in Christ the Son of God, and separate (?)* 
His birth in the flesh, and blaspheme against His suffer- 
ings in the flesh, and revile His cross, and mock at 
His death, and believe not in His resurrection, and 
make void His generation from the Father before the 
whole creation, [and say (that in Him) are flesh and 
soul and not the Godhead]. And there are others 
who say that Jesus Christ is above the whole creation, 
and glorify Him and say that He alone is the Father; 
and again they say that He is the Son and the Paraclete. 
Are not these then more impious ® than all? And there 
are others who say that the resurrection of the dead 
(is of) souls without bodies. To these He saith, Depart 
into fire eternal. Keep far (from such men), beloved 
brethren, lest ye be condemned together with them. 
[vi., 27.] [And ® those that watch the stars, and 
worship the host of heaven, and observe days and hours 
—as for such, will He accept their prayers, and be 
pleased with their offerings? and will they read the 
holy Scriptures? These then are void (?)% of the 
Holy Spirit, which abideth in the heart of the faithful. 
Solomon saith concerning the saints, “Let them be 
prepared, if they sleep, to watch; if they sleep and 
awake, to be wise in truth and love.” ®] For the Holy 
Spirit is not far from faithful Christian people from the 
day of their birth, until they die. Let a woman after 
her child-bearing remain in her separation seven days. 
But if*she think in her heart, and say, How shall the 
Holy Spirit abide upon me, while | am unclean? and 
"© The negative is found in tion is quite unintelligible. Any- 
E. The whole of the following thing that is clear shows that 
passage is obscure in Eth., and the translator misunderstood his 
the translation is tentative. text, if it was anything like 


*™ | do not see the meaning 
intended. AC has “deny,” a 
meaning foreign to the Eth. 
word, which means ‘‘separate "’ 
or ‘‘discern.”’ 

“© Tit, unclean. This sen- 
tence is without the interroga- 
tive suffix, but it seems neces- 
sary to take it as a question. 

** The first part of this sec- 


what we find now in AC. 

°° The phrase “void of the 
Holy Spirit’? occurs in AC. 
This seems to represent it, but 
how the meaning is extracted 
from the Eth. I fail to see. 

"\ Cf. Prov 6, 22. The quota- 
tion is hardly recognisable, 
showings how deep-seated is the 
corruption of the passage. 

M 2 


164 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


if (her) faith grow weak, and she be without good 
works, the Holy Spirit will not abide upon her. For 
this matter is not a transgression of the law, but 
marriage, and the customary separation of women, and 
nocturnal pollutions hinder not the Holy Spirit. But 
with the ungodly and unbelieving who have trans- 
gressed the law and the ordinances, the Holy Spirit 
will not abide. And those that have not the Holy Spirit 
are the habitation of unclean (spirits): but upon those 
that have believed and (that) hope in His second coming 
the Holy Spirit abideth. [Tor the Paraclete hateth lies 
and every (evil) work; and the devil hateth works of 
righteousness and goodness. And whosoever is bap- 
tized in faith is separated from the spirit of Satan, and 
is the habitation of the Holy Spirit: and he that doeth 
His will is filled with wisdom and knowledge, and the 
unclean spirit cannot come nigh to him. The unclean 
spirit loveth such as are ungrateful, slothful, and 
sinners and sorcerers, for the devil by his want of grati- 
tude fell from his throne, and was deprived of the 
glory of God. And he himself chose to be Satan rather 
than to be an archangel. Wherefore women ought to 
beware of every evil and vain thing, and be mindful 
of God, who created all things, and to follow His law, 
(and) not work the pleasure of the flesh, except only in 
lawful wedlock. Beware then of the counsel of evil 
men, and of union with them. 

[vi., 28.] Wherefore separate yourselves, beloved 
brethren, from all the heathen who practise evil, and 
keep far from them; and count not as an abomination 
the flesh of men’s dead bodies. We believe that the 
dead shall live and rise again. And in like manner 
lawful marriage is not an abomination, for the union 
of man and woman is righteous (before God) who 
created man and woman, and blessed them, and said 
unto them, “Increase and multiply, and fill the 
earth.” ¥ Behold we understand that from God are all 
these things; without Him was not anything. Howbeit 
the men of Sodom ‘sinned; they perverted nature and 


2 Gn a, 28. 


ee | 


THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 165 


wrought abomination; % and in like manner (sin) those 
who practise bestiality, which is unclean and is a trans- 
gression of the law. They that do such things shall 
not escape from punishment, for they defile pure 
marriage, and do what is unseemly and what is not 
commanded in the law; (but as) it is said, ‘They are 
joined one to another, man with man. But they work 
their own shame, and their iniquity shall return on 
their own heads.” ™ For the Scripture saith, “If any 
man lieth with a man as with a woman; they have 
wrought uncleanness, let both of them die the death ”’ ; 
and, ‘He that lieth with a beast, let him die the 
death ’’;® and, ‘He that committeth adultery with 
his neighbour's wife, let him die the death,” ® for it is 
a shame to Israel. ‘The hire of a harlot, and the price 
of a dog they shall not offer in the house of the Lord.” °’ 
This is what is forbidden in the law, but marriage is 
pure. And God blessed the union of man and woman. 
And Solomon also saith, ‘The union of man and man 
is abominable before the Lord.” % David saith, “Let 
thy wife be as a pleasant vine in the chamber of thy 
house, and thy children also as young olive plants at 
thy table. Lo, thus shall the man be blessed that 
fearcth the Lord.” ® For a man that is a lover of God 
ought not to be subject to lust.1° 

{vi., 29.] And let the women also be obedient to 
their own husbands in love and fear, even as the blessed 
Sarah was obedient to her husband Abraham, and said 
to him, My lord. She did not name his name, but said 
of him, My lord is old. And in like manner, ye men, 
love your wives, for they are your members and sharers 
with vou in the begetting of children. It is said, “ Love 


°2 The Eth. word is not given 
in the Lex. It is very similar *' Dt 23, 18. 
to the name of Gomorrah, and * The quotation kere in AC 
may he a euphemism. Perhaps is from Prov 1g, 11 (14). 
we ought to understand “ men"? " Ps 127, aff. 
and render: and (so) did) the 100 So the sentence runs in EF. 
men of Gomorrah. A omits “not and “God,"’ and 
* Rom 1, 27. is unintelligible. 
** Lev 20, 13, 15- 


°¢ Tev 20, 10 


166 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


the wife of thy youth, as the hart loveth the fountains 
of waters; for she is thine and is with thee at all 
times, and is a member of thine.” 1 For it is said, 
“Take heed to yourselves and forsake not your 
wives.” 12 And as touching the lawful union of man 
and wife, when they rise from sleep let them not give 
heed to ceremonial washings, but rather take thought 
for prayer and supplication to God. But if a man lie 
with the wife of his neighbour, or defile himself with 
a harlot, and, when he riseth, wash himself in the sea, 
and in all the waters of the rivers, he shall not be able 
to cleanse himself; but his portion shall be rather in 
eternal condemnation. 

[vi., 30.] Take no heed then of laws relating tothe 
flesh, for lawful marriage is not unclean; nor seek 
after the way ! of the Jews, nor use at all times (such 
ceremonial) washings, nor practise their customary 
purifications. 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 


THAT MEN OUGHT TO PRAY AND MAKE SUPPLICATION AND 

. GIVE PRAISE AND SING OVER THOSE THAT HAVE 
ENTERED INTO REST; AND TO GIVE ALMS ON THEIR 
BEHALF. 


GaTuER yourselves together diligently in the church, 
and read the holy Scriptures over those righteous 
Christians who have fallen asleep, and your brethren 
the martyrs who have entered into rest in the faith of 
Christ; and celebrate for them the eucharist,' (and) 
offer in the church His holy Body and precious Blood. 
And when ye bring (them) to the church and to the 
tomb sing psalms over them, for (it is said,) “precious 
in the sight of the Lord is the death of the righteous.” ® 


11 Cf. Prov 5, 18f. 1 Lit. the thanksgiving of the 

42 Cf. Mal 2, 15. oblation. Either word can be 

'9°So E. A is unintelligible. used separately of the cucharist. 
* Ps 11s, 6 (116, 15). 


Nae sa 


THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 167 


(And again,) Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the 
Lord is thy help.” 3) And again it is said, ‘The remem- 
brance of the righteous man is with praise”; and 
“their souls are in the hand of God; even if they sleep, 
they are not dead.” 5 Our Saviour said to the Saddu- 
cees, ‘Concerning the resurrection of the dead, have ye 
not read what the Scripture saith, I am the God of 
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. He 
is not then the God of the dead. He is the God of the 
living,”® [and not all are living nor . . . .j.7 
Elisha also in his death (raised) him that was slain in 
Syria; when the dead body touched him, it was raised. 
The righteous Joseph also touched the body of Jacob 
on the bier, and was not defiled. And Moses and 
Joshua the son of Nun, when they brought forth the 
bones of Joseph from the land of Egypt and touched 
his bones, were not defiled. And in like manner, ye 
bishops and all the people, when ye touch the dead 
bodics of those that have fallen asleep, count it not 
an abomination to carry their bones, for ye shall not 
be defiled on account of them. Remove, then, from you, 
this practice, for it is a thing of folly. And as for you, 
be ye adorned with wisdom and knowledge, that ye 
may find life eternal, and a portion with the souls of 
the righteous in the Kingdom of heaven, in a place of 
rest through Jesus Christ our Saviour, who is able to 
open the ears of your hearts that ye may hear the words 
of God which have instructed you in the Gospel by the 
admonition of our Lord Jesus Christ the Nazarene, who 
was crucified in the days of Pontius Pilate and Herod 
the King: He suffered, and died, and rose from the 
dead, and shall come again with glory and with great 
power; (and) shall raise the dead, and render to every 
man according to his works; and He ascended with 
great glory to His Father. And after He rose from 


2 Ps 114 (116), 7. ™ The words in brackets (the 
“ Prov 10, 7. last word in the Eth. is to me 
* Wis 3, 1. unintelligible) are apparently a 
* Mt 22, 38. gloss. There is nothing to cor- 


respond in AC, 


168 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


the dead, we saw Him, and ate and drank and abode 
with Him forty days; and then He ascended into 
heaven, and sat on the right hand of the Father, the 
Almighty who sitteth on the Cherubim; concerning 
whom David saith, “The Lord said to my Lord, Sit 
thou on my right hand, until I bring thine enemies 
under the footstool of thy feet’”;® whom the blessed 
Stephen saw, and cried and said, ‘“ Behold I see the 
heaven opened, and the Son of Man sitting on the right 
hand of God’”’;® who created the hosts of: angels; to 
whom be great glory and honour and thanksgiving and 
dominion with His Father and the Holy Spirit, now 
and for ever and ever. Amen. 


CHAPTER XXXV. 
OF TOIL AND THANKSGIVING.! 


{vii., 1.] Moses the prophet said plainly unto the 
people, even unto the people of Israel, ‘And behold 1 
shew you plainly the way of death, and (the way of) 
life; choose life for yourselves, that ye may live.” ? 
And Elijah the prophet said unto the people, “How 
long halteth your heart concerning the Lord—the Lord 
is One; seek Him.”® Our Lord Jesus Christ said, 
“A servant cannot serve two masters; otherwise he 
will obey one, and disobey the other. Ye cannot then 
serve God and wealth. We have followed our Lord 
Jesus Christ, who hath mercy on the whole world. 

(vii., 2.] We say then that there are two ways, one 
of death, and one of life: separate and having no 
connection one with the other; one which leadeth unto 
death, and one (which leadeth) unto life. The first is 
the way of life concerning which the Law hath spoken, 


* Ps icg. 1. 

* Acts 7, 56. 

' See Add, notes. 

2 Cf. Dt 30, 15, 19. 
* Cf. 1 K 18, 20. 


“Mt 6, 24; Lk 16, 13. The 
word “mammon” is not re- 


tained here in Eth. nor in the 
Eth. N.T. in Mt or Lk. 


eae 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 169 


and said, “Love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, 
and with all thy strength and with (all) thy soul, besides 
whom there is no other god,” © and, “love thy neighbour 
as thyself,” ° and “what thou desirest not for thyself, 
that do not to thy neighbour,” 7 “‘ Bless them that curse 
you, and pray for them that oppress you,” ® and “ Love 
your enemies,” “What then is your reward, if ye do 
good to them that do good to you?”® Take heed then 
and hate no man. And again it is said, “Thou shalt 
not hate any man, neither an Egyptian, nor an 
Edomite "; for they are all creatures of God. Keep 
far from evil men and from the desires of this world. 
“And to him that striketh thee on the right cheek, turn 
the other.”!! For David saith, “If I have rendered 
a return to them that rendered evil to me, lect thine 
enemies cause me to fall naked.” #2 And again it is 
said, “If any man compel thee to go one mile, go (with 
him) twain”; and, “If any man take thy coat, leave to 
him thy cloak (also); 18 and, “Prevent not him that 
taketh thy goods”; 4 and, “Give to him that asketh of 
thee, and shut not thy door against him that desireth to 
borrow of thee.” © For God is merciful (and) a lover of 
men, and giveth all things to him that asketh of Him. 
And the Father “maketh the sun to rise on the evil 
and the good, and sendeth rain on the righteous and 
the sinful.” *' Ye ought to give to all men of the labour 
of your hands; and honour ye the saints. For it is 
said, ‘Thou shalt do no murder.” (Everyman) is thine 
image and thy likeness; and there is nothing worse 
than murder. And, “Thou shalt not commit adultery,” 
nor separate (what is) thy flesh, nor make two parts 
(thereof); for it is said, “They twain shall be one 
flesh,” and one spirit; and in form (only) are they 
separate; and “Thou shalt not steal,” for when Achan 
the Israelite stole, they stoned him with stones, and he 


* Dt 6, 5. "Mt §, 39 

* Lev 19, 18. "Ps 7, § 

yobs 18 (16). - Hy eoP 40. 
uk 6, 28. Cf. Lk 6, 30. 

"Lk 6, 33. ‘Mt 5, 42. 

‘© Cf. Dt 23, 7: “Mt 5, 45- 


170 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


perished ; and in like manner. Gehazi stole and lied and 
was clad with the leprosy of Naaman the Syrian; and 
Judas Iscariot also stole the purse of alms (from) which 
alms were given to the poor, and betrayed the Lord of 
Glory into the hands of the Jews, and then repented, 
and hanged himself, and his bowels gushed out, and 
he died; ‘Ananias and Sapphira his wife kept back part 
of the price of their possessions, and lied to the Holy 
Spirit, and died by (the sentence of) our beloved 
brother Peter the Apostle. 

_ [vii., 3-] Thou shalt not practise magic, nor use 
divination, nor consult wizards, for it is said, ‘Ye shall 
not trust in wizards.” And, Thou shalt not kill a child 
by abortion, for it is the image and spirit of God. And, 


“Thou shalt not covet the possessions of thy brother, | 


nor his wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ass, 
nor his ox.” Moreover, thou shalt never swear falsely, 
but if thou swearest, swear truly. And again it is said, 
“Thou shalt not bear false witness,” for “he that 
speaketh lies against the poor provoketh his creator to 
anger.” 18 

[vii., 4.] And the way of evildoers leadeth unto 
death. Thou shalt not be of a double heart, or of a 
double tongue, for “the snare of a man is the word of 
his mouth,” ” and, “a talkative man shall not prosper 
upon earth.” And let not your words be idle, for 
everyone that speaketh thoughtlessly shall be con- 
demned. And, Thou shalt not be rapacious, for it is 
said, “Woe unto them that wrong their neighbours.” # 

[vii., 5.] And ye shall not accept persons, nor be 
deceitful in heart, nor proud, for ‘God humbleth the 
proud.” And, Thou shalt not hate any man, nor 
curse thy brother, nor do evil unto him. And abstain 
from all evil, and be not passionate, nor envious, lest 
that befall thee that befell Cain, and Saul, and Joab. 
For Cain slew Abel his brother, and God chose Abel 


'' Lit. love. A change of '* Cf. Prov 6, 2. 
one consonant would give the 2° Ps 139, 12. 
reading : desire. ™" Cf. Hab 2, 9. 

™ Prov 14, 31. acer tee ae ae 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 171 


and accepted his sacrifice; and t Saul persecuted t% 
David, when he overcame Goliath the Philistine, (and) 
was envious of him because of the songs which the 
women sang; and Joab, also slew Abner the Israelite, 
and Amasa of Judah. 

{vii., 6.) And, Thou shalt not be an augur, for it 
leadeth to idolatry, and concerning this Samuel saith, 
“This thing is sin,” and it shall not be thus in Israel, 
for all these things are rejected in the law. 

(vit., 7-],And, Thou shalt not be a murmurer, for 
ye have heard what befell those who murmured against 
Moses. Be meck like Moses and David, for the meék 
shall inherit the earth. 

[vii., 8.] Be ye therefore merciful, for they shall 
obtain mercy. Accept every toil that cometh upon thee, 
like Job and Lazarus, that thou mayest receive a reward 
from God. 

{[vii., 9.] And honour him that teacheth thee the 
word of God, and be mindful of him day and night, 
for where instruction is, there God is. 

(vii., 10.] And reconcile those who are at variance, 
and judge uprightly, for the judgment is the Lord’s. 

{vii., 11.) And when thou prayest, be not of a 
double heart. Peter said, He said to me while I] was 
on the sea, Whercfcre dost thou doubt, and makest for 
thyself a double heart? 

{vii., 12.) And if thou givest alms to the poor, 
Doubt not; know thou then who it is that will render 
the reward; is it not the Lord? Give, then, to everyone 
that asketh of thee that which he needeth. 

[vii., 14.] And forget not any of the command- 
ments of the Lord; and confess thy trespass before 
Him, and sin no more, that thou mayest find (that 
which is) good before the Lord thy God, for He 
desireth not the death of a sinner, but that he should 
turn to repentance. 

[vii., 15.] And honour thy father and thy mother; 
forsake not thy brethren and thy kinsmen. 

[vii., 16.1 And fear the King, and know that his 


72, As the MS. reads: And on Saul who persecuted, etc. 


172 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


position is from the Lord; and h 

pad ena and honour rulers, for they 
: vil., 17.) And offer not a sacrifice whilst thou d 

evil, before thou repentest of the evil of thy ane, 

This ae ie oe of death and (the way) of life; and 

may God make you worthy to foll 

Lord Jesus Christ. : pea werah glove’ 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 
OF THE CHRISM. 


_(vii., 27.] Tou shalt give thanks thus: We gi 
thanks to Thee, Creator of all things, for the aucue 
-of this chrism, and for this oil of immortality,’ which 
ss hast agi to us by Jesus Christ Thy Son. For 

ine is the glory, and i 
for ever and ani ee cai ca ae 

[vii., 28.] And whosoever cometh to you, and gi 
thanks thus, receive him as a disciple * Cause a 
if there be anyone that teacheth contrary to the law 
which was given unto you by the Lord, receive him 
not, and let him not have fellowship with you in thanks- 
giving. Prove everyone that cometh unto you, and 
examine diligently his deeds, (and) appoint as is fitting 
for ye have knowledge of those on the right hand and 
on the left. And judge between those who rule? justly 
and (those who) rule unjustly; and to your neighbour 
that judgeth justly do good according to his doings; 
to him also that judgeth unjustly render according to 
his doing; and pray not with him, lest ye be defiled 
together with him. And every prophet and teacher that 
cometh unto you and teacheth truly is worthy of his 
meat, as a good workman who serveth his lord. 

{vii., 29.] To the priests also give the first-fruits 
that they may bless your labours; and give all the tithes 


a eae 
Lit. oil that hath no death. Iated ‘‘judge ’? in’ the next 


2 Or, judge. The word is a clause. Th 
different one from that trans- different eR Oe a 


ae 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 173 


to the widows, and to the orphans, and to travellers,” 
and to strangers. 

[vii., 30] And on the Sabbath day, which is (the 
day of) the resurrection of our Lord, gather ye together 
in one place, and give thanks to God for all the good 
things that He hath done for you in Christ, that your 
sacrifice may be perfect and acceptable before God, for 
it is said concerning the Church that they shall assemble 
therein, and offer up incense and sacrifice, (for) ‘I, 
saith the Lord, am a great King upholding all the 
world, and my name is terrible in all the world, and 
(among) the Gentiles.” * 

[vii., 31.] Appoint for yourselves bishops, pres- 
byters, and deacons, meek men and humble, who are 
chosen from the people, pure and tried in every good 
work; who desire not money, but rather teach the word 
of the Lord and the doctrine, and discern in uprightness 
the commandments of Christ * . . . as father and lord 
in love without anger and impatience, with a 
humble heart and in meekness. Observe all this that ye 
have been commanded of the Lord for the life of your 
souls. Let your loins be girt, and your lamps burning, 
and be ye ready as men who wait for their Lord when 
he cometh, whether at the first hour of the night, or at 
midnight, or at cock-crowing, or at break of day. The 
Lord will come at a time that thou expectest not. 
Blessed are those servants whom their Lord, when he 
cometh, shall find so doing. Behold, He will gird 
Himself, and go about, and serve them. Pray then and 
work, lest death come upon you suddenly. 

[vii., 32-] And when the glory of the Son of Man 
shall appear in heaven, and the archangel shall blow 
the trumpet, and the dead shall be raised, and our Lord 
shall come with His Saints in the clouds of heaven, 
and all the angels of His power with Him, then shall 
He sit on the throne of His Kingdom, and destroy the 
devil, the deceiver, and shall render to every man 


2 A change of one consonant been lost. The words that fol- 
would give “poor,’? as in AC. low are a mixture of the next 

“Cf. Maloy, ur. 14, two sentences in AC. 

* Some words have evidently 


174 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


according to his works; and then shall the sinners go 
into eternal condemnation, but the righteous into life 
eternal, and (these) shall rejoice in the Kingdom of 
heaven through our Lord Jesus Christ. © 

[vii., 33-] Be ye, then, ready that ye may receive His 
good things. Let us pray and make supplication unto 
Him, and say, O, our Saviour; Who art before the 
world (was), God of gods, the Almighty, One God, the 
Creator of every creature, the Lord of our holy fathers, 
who were without blame before Thee,® the God of 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (Who art) merciful, and 
ready to forgive sins, faithful and kind, plenteous in 
compassion and mercy, from whom nothing is hidden, 
(but) all is open before Thee: in Thee the souls of the 
righteous trust, and in Thee the saints hope ; (Thou art) 
the Father of them that are blameless, and hearest the 
prayer of the pure in heart, and hearkenest to the 
supplication of them that are silent. Make Thy favour, 
O Lord, to dwell on every creature, for Thou knowest 
that which the heart thinketh before the thought 
(cometh); and in all the ends of the world they offer up 
to Thee sacrifice and incense with prayer and thanks- 
giving; Who hast appointed days that men may do 
righteousness, and the gate of whose mercy is open to 
everyone that seeketh Thee, and hast appointed laws 
and ordinances, and caused us to understand that the 
riches of this world are transitory and that the ornament 
of beauty abideth not for ever, and that the might of 
the strong decayeth speedily. For our father Abraham 
was the first to walk’ in the way of righteousness, and 
Thou gavest him honour and riches, and in faith he 
accomplished his life; and Thou saidst unto him, “T will 
multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and as the 
sand of the sea”; ® and Thou gavest Isaac unto him; 
Thou didst bless him and say unto him, “I will be with 
thy seed after thee.”® For we have known Christ in 

* Eth. Him. In this prayer * Gn 22, 17. 

the suffixes as well as the verbs * Cf. Gn 26, 3. E reads: 
are frequently in the third per- with thee and with thy seed, 


son instead of the second. etc. 
7 Or, walked of old, 





THE RTHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 175 


our father Jacob, whom Thou didst send to the land 
of Egypt,’® and didst say unto him, “ Behold I will be 
with thee, and will surely multiply thy seed exceed- 
ingly.”'* And in like manner Thou didst say unto 
Moses, Thy holy and faithful servant at the bush, “I 
am from before the world (was), and my name shall be 
for ever”; '? and Thy memorial also is for generations 
of generations; Who didst bless the seed of Abraham 
that they might be blessed for ever. ; 

[vii., 34.] }* Thou didst create man that he might 
be a rational (creature), and Thou didst say in Thy 
wisdom, ‘Let us make man in our image and in our 
likeness ”; and Thou didst set Adam to be ruler over 
all, and didst give him life eternal. And when he trans- 
gressed Thy commandment, Thou didst put him forth 
from the garden, and didst bring death on him. Then 
Thou didst send Thy only-begotten Son and didst raise 
him from his fall, and didst restore him to the garden 
of delight. 

{vii., 35-] Thou, O Lord, alone are great, and 
powerful, dnd terrible, merciful and kind, the Almighty 
who doest wonders, and withdrawest not ‘Thy com- 
passion from any of Thy works or creatures, good and 
a lover of men, and dealing gently with sinners, and 
bringing them back in the multitude of Thy mercy, and 
though we are not worthy to look up unto Thee, nor 
raise our eyes to heaven, Thou in the greatness of Thy 
power regardest our humility. The heavens are 
supported '* by Thy commandment, and by Thy word 
the earth is established, for Thou, O Lord, art mighty, 
and the righteousness of Thy judgment hath filled the 
earth which Thou hast created. 


1% AC has: Mesopotamia: This section is very much 
which suits the following quota- shorter than the corresponding 
tion better. chapter in AC, 

"Gn 28, 15: 48, 4. * Lit. suspended. 


"Cf. Ex 4, 14f. 


176 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 


OF THE SERVICE OF THE HOSTS OF SPIRITUAL ONES AND 
THE HOLY CHURCH. 


ALL the spiritual hosts of angels are a flame of fire, 
and the holy cherubim with six wings glorify Thee with 
a loud voice, and sing with a voice that is never silent, 
and say, ‘“ Holy, holy, holy, Lord of Hosts, the holiness 
of Thy glory [is perfect and]! filleth the heavens and 
the earth.””? The (whole) number of these angels, 
thrones and authorities, dominions and principalities, 
and powers, the cherubim and seraphim cry and say, 
Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel, and blessed be 
this Church of the nations (which) is like unto the host 
of heaven. Day and night with holy soul and perfect 
heart thus they sing,’ and say, “The Chariot, of God is 
ten thousand times ten thousand and thousands of 
thousands of them that glorify the Lord in the holy 
mount of Sinai.’?* The heavens and all that is therein 
give humble thanks to Thee, for Thou hast hung the 
heavens as a vault, and hast laid the foundations of the 
earth, and established it on the waters; and Thou hast 
separated darkness from light, and numbered the stars 
in their fulness, and called them all by their names. 
The whole creation declareth Thy greatness, and the 
trees of the field also Thou hast made to grow. 
Wherefore the whole creation of mankind must needs 
offer up to Thee glory and thanksgiving, sacrifice and 
offering ¢ and incense through our Lord and Saviour 
Jesus Christ, Thy only-begotten Son. Thou alone art 
Almighty, good, and loving mercy, and beneficent, for 
Thine is the glory and power for ever and ever. Amen. 
Thou art in heaven, and Thou art on earth, and Thou 


’ The words look like a gloss. * Isa 6, 3. 
There is nothing to correspond * Ps 67, 18. 
in AC. * Or, eucharist. 








ee ee 


wee ne ee 


THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 177 


art in the sea; Who hast gathered together the whole 
creation from the confines of the earth, and there is no 
end of Thy greatness. Tor it is not we who have said 
this, but Thou didst say, ‘‘! am the Lord God who 
am above the heavens,” * and 1 am present in every 
place, and besides me there is no other god. True 
is Thy word, and there is none that is like unto Thee, 
the holy God, the Lord of the Saints, and the souls of 
all are in Thy hand. Thou art worthy of glory and 
exaltation, Whose throne is unchangeable, and (Whose) 
strength decayeth not, and (Whose) greatness none 
can declare, and the excellence of (Whose) beauty is 
marvellous. There is none that dareth to draw nigh 
to thy habitation, and the knowledge of Thy wisdom is 
without number. Thy righteousness hath no end, Thou 
needest none to counsel Thee, nor seekest any to help 
Thee; Thou hast no beginning nor any end; Thy 
kingdom passeth not away, and there is none that can 
overcome Thy power, and innumerable are the hosts of 
angels who minister unto Thee. Thou art the Father 
of wisdom, and the maker of the whole creation, and the 
framer * of the law. Thou destroyest the ungodly, and 
rewardest the righteous. (Thou art) God the Father of 
our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, the Lord of those 
who give Him humble thanks, in Whom is no false- 
hood ;. Who takest no bribe in judgment, Whose praises 
are innumerable. To Thee is due the honour, and glory, 
and worship which every rational soul ¢ sendeth up ¢ ' 
to Thee for ever and ever. Amen. 


° Cf. Dt 4, 39. 
* Lit. maker. 


' A slight change is necessary 
to get this reading. 


178 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


THAT WE OUGHT TO REST ON THE SABBATH DAYS AND 
HEARKEN TO THE WORDS OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES 
THAT WE°MAY DO HIS WILL, AND REMEMBER THE 
SUFFERINGS WHICH GOD THE WORD ENDURED FOR 
OUR SAKES.? 


[vii., 36.] O Lorp Acmicuty, who didst create the 
world by? Jesus Christ our Saviour, and didst appoint 
the Sabbath, and rest thereon from all Thy work, and 
hast commanded us to rest (on it) from all the work of 
our hands, and to be ready to serve and do Thy com- 
mandments; and hast given us feast days (for) the joy 
of our souls; and that we should remember the skill of 
Thy wisdom, that God the word was pleased to be born 
of a woman for our sakes, and appeared manifestly in 
this world (?);* and was baptized as man, though He 
was God, and endured patiently the sufferings of the 
Cross, died and rose from the dead in great might. 
Wherefore we keep as a feast the holy day of His 
resurrection, and honour the first a of ie week, = 

ive glory, and sing praise to Him who conquer 
death and cave light to the whole world, and hath 
bestowed on us incorruptible honour and glory, and 
hath gathered the scattered people, and made them to 
be one pure flock, and hath blessed them, even as He 
blessed Israel. (It was) Thou, O Lord, who broughtest 
our fathers from the land of Egypt, and didst deliver 
them from bitter bondage, and didst save them from 
the sea, and from the labour of the brick-kiln, and didst 
bring them forth from the power of Pharaoh and his 
hosts ; and leddest them through the sea on dry ground, 
and didst sustain them with all good things in the 


. . “ d mm and 
1 It seems best to take this from D. A omits “Lor 
last clause as part of the title “by,’’ thereby making the prayer 
of the chapter. It is so punc- addressed to eg does 
i . A has a stop at not agree with the AC. 
Presi iy . e * Or, matter. The Eth. 
* | have made the correction word has manifold meanings. 








THE ETIHTOPIC DIDASCALIA 179 


wilderness, and appoint for them the law of the ten 
words which Thou didst utter with Thy voice, and didst 
write with Thy hands, and didst command them to rest 
on the Sabbath day, that they might give Thee humble 
thanks, and be safe from all evil; and didst bind them 
with words of admonition, and gather them and bring 
them into the house of Thy sanctuary. Wherefore He 
hath commanded us to rest on every Sabbath day, 
because on the Sabbath day our Lord rested from all 
His work. Lect us, then, scek after all His law, and give 
thanks to Him, and bless God for all the good things 
that He hath bestowed on us, the sons of men. And 
greater than all these is (the day of) His holy resurrec- 
tion which our Lord and Saviour and Creator, God the 
Word, hath taught us (to observe), He who was begotten 
before the world was created, the Son of the Father, 
and (was born) of the Virgin Mary without human 
father: He suffered and was crucified and died in the 
days of Pontius Pilate; and rose from the dead on the 
day of the Christian Sabbath. Remember, O Lord, 
that which we offer to Thee on this day, the sacrifice, 
and the oblation, and the eucharist of Thy holy peace,‘ 
this great portion which Thou hast given unto us, that 
we may offer (?) * that which is good unto the greatness 
of Thy power. 

(vii., 37.] And Thou hast fulfilled the prophecy, and 
hast shown mercy unto Zion, and hast had compassion 
on Jerusalem, and hast exalted the throne of David thy 
servant amongst us by the birth of Christ, who was 
born of a virgin of his seed according to the flesh. Do 
Thou, O Lord, receive the prayer and supplication of 
Thy people who call upon Thee in truth, even as Thou 
didst receive the sacrifices of the righteous each in its 
own time: first of Abel, whose sacrifice Thou didst 
respect and receive; of Noah when he was going forth 
from the Ark; of Abraham when he was going forth 
from the land of the Chaldees; of Isaac when he was 
going forth from the Well of the Oath; of Jacob in 


* DE read (perhaps rightly) : ° Lit, do. 
to Thy holy name. 


180 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


Bethlehem ; © and of Moses in the mount; and of Aaron 
in the wilderness; and of Joshua the son of Nun in 
Gilgal; and of Gideon on the rock; and of Manoah and 
his wife in ¢ the plain; ¢ 7 and of Samson when he was 
athirst before he transgressed ; and of Jephthah in war ; 
and of Barak and Deborah over ® Siscra; and of Samuel 
in Mizpeh; and of David in the field of Ornan the 
Jebusite; and of Solomon in Gibeon t¢ andf{*® in 
Jerusalem; and of Elijah on Mount Carmel; and of 
Elisha at the fountains; and of Jehoshaphat in battle ; 
and of Hezekiah in his sickness and concerning 
Sennacherib; and of Manassch in the mount of the 
Chaldees after he had transgressed; and of Josiah in 
Pasa; and of Ezra when he was returning ; and of Daniel 
in the den of lions; and of Jonah in the belly of the 
whale; and of the Three Children in the furnace of fire; 
and of Hannah in the tabernacle of testimony by the 
ark; and of Nehemiah when he was building the wall 
with Zerubbabel; '° and of Mattathias and his sons on 
the hilltop (?); 1 and of Joel '? in the blessing ; now also 
in like manner receive the prayer and supplication of 
those who offer to Thee with knowledge through Jesus 
Christ. : 
[vii., 38.] We give thanks to Thee for all things. 
Thou takest not from us Thy compassion and Thy 
mercy, for Thou art merciful and full of compassion in 
all generations, Who didst receive Enosh, and Enoch, 
and Noah, (and didst help) in the days of Moses and 
Joshua, (and) the Judges, and in the days of Samuel 
and Elijah and the other prophets, and in the days 
- of David and the other kings, and in the days of Esther 


: imilarly as Bethlehem 1° Two of the sacrifices men- 
aa of Bethel. a in AC are here joined to- 

7So in AC. Eth. has ap-_ gether. 7 
parently a proper name, but in ™ AC has é re ChAy hae 
a hopelessly corrupt form. The _Eth. word has _ severa 

* No verv great change would meanings. Which the translator 
be required to obtain “in the intended, or what his idea was, 
davs of,”’ as Is found in AC. I am unable to conjecture. 

* So AC reads. Eth. omits: AC has: Jael, or Jabel. 
and. Possibly Job is intended. 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 181 


and Mordecai, and in the days of Judith, and in the 
days of Judas Maccabzus '° and his brethren: receive 
us also in like manner in our days through Thy Son 
Jesus Christ the Great High-priest, who hath saved us 
from the sword and famine, and hath fed us and 
satisfied us, and healed us from (our) sickness, and 
protected us from evil tongues. To Thee we give 
thanks at all times through Jesus Christ, who hath 
bestowed on us a sweet and articulate voice, and a 
tongue fair as the sound of an instrument, and hath 
made us to discern between sweet and bitter, (and given 
us) eyes to see, and ears to hear, and noses to smell, 
and hands to handle with, and feet to walk; and these 
Thou hast created from a tiny drop that is gathered 
in the womb; and Thou didst bestow (on man therewith) 
a soul that shall not dic, and make him a rational being. 
And Thou didst instruct him by Thy law and adorn him 
by Thy commandments; and after a while Thou didst 
make him mortal and didst. grant him a resurrection. 
How then shall man repay Thee for all this that Thou 
hast done for him? Now also we must needs give Thee 
thanks and glorify Thee according to the measure of 
our power. Receive (us) that (our service) may be 
acceptable before Thee; and save us from the apostasy 
of the wicked whose gods are many, and deliver us 
from those who contend against Christ, and free us 
from the error of Satan, for Thou didst send Christ 
Thy beloved Son to become man, though He is God, 
and didst cause the Paraclete to dwell in us, and didst 
set the angels to bless us, and didst put Satan to 
shame. Since Thou hast created us and granted us 
life, preserve us, and give us sustenance, and turn us to 
repentance; for Thou art worthy of glory and worship 
for all that Thou hast done for us through Thy Son our 
Saviour Jesus Christ for ever and ever. Amen. Follow 
after this at all times, brethren; the Lord be with you 
on earth and in heaven and in the Kingdom of His 


” Eth. Judas and Mac- '¢ Lit, from the sickness of 
cabreus. evil tongues, and hath pro 
tected us from. them. 


182 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


Father, who sent Him to free us from deeds of sin, 
and the service of Satan, and (who) hath given life to 
the sons of men, even to those that believe in the Lord 
rola the Creator, that those who belicve in Christ may 
ive. 

[vii., 39.] What thanks is it fitting that we should 
offer to God the Father through Jesus Christ? Behold 
we have told you before, and have taught you. Observe 
all this that ye may find life eternal. Amen. 


NS 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 
OF THE CATECHUMENS WHO DESIRE TO BE BAPTIZED. 


HE that desireth to be baptized must nceds be taught 
the word of instruction, and be made to understand the 
knowledge of God the Father, and be instructed as to 
the incarnation of the only-begotten Son and the good 
pleasure of the Holy Spirit. Moreover let them tell 
him that God created the world and man upon it, and 
how God sent judgment on the wicked by the waters 
of the flood, and destroyed sinners with fire, and did 
magnify the saints in all generations. These are Seth, 
and Enosh, and Enoch, and Noah, and Abraham, and 
all those that were begotten of them, and Melchizedek, 
and Job, and Moses, and Joshua, and Caleb, and 
Phinehas the priest, and all the righteous according to 
their generations; and how God pitied and chose man- 
kind, and rejected them not, but rather called them, 
and turned them at all times from error and from vanity 
to true knowledge, and brought them forth from the 
service of the adversary, and made them an army to do 
His commandments, and saved them from deadly error, 
and led them unto life. All this then let him under- 
stand who desireth to be baptized, and (then) let him 
receive baptism. And let him who layeth hands upon 
him worship God the Father the maker of all things, 
who sent unto us His only-begotten Son Jesus Christ to 
save mankind, from filthiness of flesh and soul, and to 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 183 


sanctify them according to the good pleasure of His 
goodness, and to Icad them in the way, and to enlighten 
the eyes of their hearts, that they might understand 
His wondrous works, and learn His righteousness and 
be far from wickedness, and walk in the way of up- 
rightness, that they may be worthy to be baptized as 
sons of Christ, in a hope that is full of grace and truth. 
But let them have understanding of wisdom and know- 
ledge, and receive the works of righteousness, that they 
may enter into life. And after the thanksgiving let 
them be taught the incarnation of the Lord and His 
sufferings, and His resurrection from the dead, and His 
ascension into heaven. 

(vii., 40.) And let the catechumen who desireth to 
be baptized be taught to renounce Satan, and to believe 
in Christ, and to forsake his former habits, and to 
purify his heart from all evil and revenge and impurity 
and deceit. Then let them receive the holy mysteries. 
As a wise man who purgeth his field of thorns and 
thistles, and soweth wheat therein, so ye also in like 
manner must necds be separated from all impurity, and 
cleanse your hearts from evil, that ye may be worthy 
to receive holy baptism. For thus our Lord taught us, 
saying, ‘Baptize all nations into the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.” 

{vii., 41.) And again, let them command him that 
is baptized to say thus, I renounce thee, Satan, and all 
thy works, and all thine evil, and all thy service, and 
all thine angels and all thine arts, and all thy might.? 
And after the renunciation thou shalt confess, and say, 
I believe in Christ; and again, I believe in the One 
true God unbegotten, the Father of our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ, the Almighty and the Creator of 
all things, by whom are all things; and I am baptized 
into His only-begotten Son Jesus Christ, who was 
begotten before the world (was), by the will of the 
Father, by whom all things were made, both those in 
heaven and those in earth, both visible and invisible; 
and who came down from heaven in the latter days, 


' Mt 28, «9. 7 Or, host. 


184 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


and was incarnate of the Holy Virgin Mar and wa 
born in purity; and (who) fulfilled the ae of His 
Father, and was crucified for us in the days of Pontius 
Pilate, and died, and abode in the heart of the earth 
three days and three nights, and rose from the dead 
and ascended into heaven in glory, and sat on the right 
hand of the Father; and (tio) shall come again at 
the last day to judge the living and the dead, of whose 
Kingdom there is no end. And ] am baptized also into 
the Paraclete the Holy Spirit, who proceedeth from 
the Father, and was strong (?) through the Son, and 
dwelt in the holy patriarchs; and (who), again, was 
sent upon the apostles from the Father by our Lord 
Jesus Christ; and after the apostles He was sent and 


given to the faithful in Jesus Christ; and (I am. 


baptized) into® the apostolic Church for remissio 
sins, and for the Kingdom of heaven, and for ihe tie 
to come for ever. 

; [vii., 42.] And after he has made confession, let 
him draw near to the anointing of the holy oil which 
the priests have consecrated for the remission of sins 
and let the priest pray and make supplication to God, 
and say, May God the Father unbegotten, the Father 
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, King of kings 
sanctify and purify this oil in the name of His only- 
begotten Son Jesus Christ; may it be a spiritual grace 
and power for the remission of sins; and a pledge (?) 
for this baptism by the anointing of this holy oil, that 


(he that cometh thereto) may be worthy. to keep Thy 4 
commandments. 


CHAPTER XL. 
° 
CONCERNING THE PRAYER WHICH IS SAID OVER THE WATER 


[vii., 43-] WHEN the priest standeth over the water, 
let him pray thus, saying, O Lord our God, the 
* Or, given to those that be- pected. Perhaps this whole 


lieve in Jesus Christ and in. prayer ought rath 
‘ “His "’ would rather be ex- itfe ectcndinuson eae 








THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 185, 


Almighty, Father of Thine only-begotten Son our Lord 
Jesus Christ, I give Thee thanks for that thou didst 
send Thine only-begotten Son, and He hath saved the 


- whole world, and He hearcth all who make supplication 


unto Him, and proclaimeth concerning the Kingdom of 
heaven, and remission of sins, and the resurrection of 
the dead. I glorify Thee, and give Thee thanks, and 
t praise t! Thee that Thou didst patiently endure the 
sufferings of death on the cross for all; Who hast given 
us baptism, which is the new birth. I glorify Thee, 
O God the Father, God alone, in the name of Jesus 
Christ, and the Holy Spirit that Thou the Doer of all 
wonders hast not rejected mankind; Who didst create 
Adam and set him in the garden, and when he trans- 
gressed Thy commandment, Thou didst put him forth 
from the garden by Thy righteous judgment, but in Thy 
manifold mercy Thou didst not cast him off, but didst 
send Thy Son in the latter days to become man, and 
to endure suffering without sin. I pray to Thee and 
entreat Thee; look down from heaven upon this water, 
and sanctify it by Thy power, that all they who are 
baptized thereby according to Christ’s command may 
be together with Him partakers in His 2 crucifixion, and 
His death, and His resurrection, and His ascension 
into heaven, that Thou mayest save them from the 
death of sin, and that they may live in righteousness. 
(vii., 44.] And after this let him baptize? into the 
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy 
Spirit, and anoint with the oil of balsam, and say : 


CHAPTER XLI. 
OF THE PRAYER WHICH IS SAID OVER THE CHRISM. 


O Lorp Gon, the Lord of the whole Creation, Who 
hast granted us the sweet savour of this chrism, even 

1 MS. reads: sanctify. A » Possibly ‘‘him ’’ or “them” 
very slight change gives the should be inserted here and 
above reading. after ‘“‘anoint."’ AC reads 

* Eth. Thy; and so with the ‘“‘him ” after “baptize.” 
following words. 


186 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


to all the nations who believe in Th I 

the eflicacy of this chrism as tery ( arte 
t . 

are baptized into Thy ratie: se aa RSs 

[vii., 45.) And after this he shall stand 

this prayer which our Lord hath taught tne Jon 

Father who art in heaven,” unto the end thereof. Then 

let he Priest turn towards the East, and raise his eyes 

to heaven, and say, “Glorify the l.ord, for the Lord 


is good; and sing to His name for it is yr i 
mercy is for ever.” ? Secs 


CHAPTER XLII. 


THE catechumens * who have been ba tized shall 

this prayer: O God Almighty, the Father of our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son, that 
lovest a body undefiled, and acceptest a meek heart and 
a humble spirit, and a knowledge of wisdom that hath 
no decay, make Thy Holy Spirit to dwell in us by Thy 
good will and the strength of Thy power through Jesus 
Christ, by whom to Thee be glory and power with Him 
and with the Holy Spirit for ever and ever. Amen. 


CHAPTER XLIII. 
OF THE BISHOPS WHO WERE ORDAINED BY THE APOSTLES. 


[vii., 46.] THESE are the names of those who were 
ordained by us. First in Jerusalem, James, the brother 


- Unless some verb be sup- preceding verses, citing the book 
plied the sentence will be un- by name. 
finished. * Lit. new ones. It i 
5 ‘ is not the 
ia Cf. 2 Chr 5. 13- AC refers same word as has been used 
definitely to this verse and the aboye, 


Sa 


pm 





a™ 





THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 187 


of our Lord; and after him was ordained in his stead 
Simeon, the son of Cleopas; and after him Judas the son 
of James. And in Caesarea of Palestine, first, Zacchzus 
the publican; and after him, Cornelius; and after him, 
Theophilus. And in Antioch, first, Evodius (ordained) 
by Peter; and after him Iynatius, by Paul. And in 
Alexandria, first, Annianus, who was ordained by Mark 
the Evangelist; and after him, ¢ Avilius t ? (ordained) 
by Luke the Evangelist. And in the Church of Rome, 
first, Linus (ordained) by Paul; and after him Clement, 
who was ordained by Peter. And in Ephesus, first, 
Timothy (ordained) by Paul; and after him was 
ordained John by John the Evangelist. And in Smyrna, 
first, Aristos;? and after him Strataeas, the son of 
t Lois t; and after him Ariston. And in Pergamus, 
first, Gaius. And in Philadelphia, first, Demetrius 
(ordained) by Peter. And in ¢ Cenchreae,f first, Lucius 
(ordained) by Paul. And in Crete, Titus. And in 
Athens, Dionysius. And in the three cities* of 
Pheenicia, t Marthones.t And in Laodicea, Archippus. 
And in Colassae, Philemon. And in Macedonia and 
in Beroea, Onesimus (the servant) of Philemon. And in 
the Church of Galatia, Crescens. In the region of Asia, 
Aquila and Nicetas. And in the Church 6f Aegina, 
Crispus. 

These are they whom we entrusted (with the 
churches), and ordained in Jerusalem, and sent forth to 
preach and to teach in their several regions. Remember, 
then, their toil, and receive their admonition, and 
observe their words. 

May the Lord be with you from henceforth and for 
ever, even as He said unto us when He was ascending 
to heaven to the Father, “Behold I am with you all 
the days unto the end of the world.” ¢ 

Glory be to God, to whom be glory and honour for 


1 This and the other words 2 Eth, distinguishes in form 
similarly marked in this section Aristos and = Ariston. In AC 
have been restored in conformity they are identical. 
with AC. The Eth. has forms >A translation of Tripolis. 
which are very corrupt. “Mt 28, 20. 


188 THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


ever, and ever, and ever. 


Saibe it Amen and Amen. So be it. 


Here endeth the doctrine of th i i 
: : e Didascal f 
fathers the Apostles. Their Prayer and their bee 


with their beloved B i is wi 
Ppa nels rans and with his wife, Wald Sdala, 


pa 


va 


ve 





ADDITIONAL NOTES 


A. [The “ preface '’].—The opening section which I have 
referred to in the Introduction as the ‘preface’? is not 
contained in AC. It is found, however, not only in all 
the manuscripts of the Ethiopic, but also in both recensions 
of the Arabic Didascalia, and in the Mesopotamian codex 
of the Syriac Didascalia edited by Mrs. Gibson. It com- 
prises the opening paragraph as far as the words, ‘shall 
be in the fire of Gehenna for ever, as it is written.’’ 

B., p. 1.—The Ethiopic manuscripts have after “ skilful 
singers" the word ‘nipilobanos,’’ obviously a corruption 
of some Greek word, the first syllable being the plural 
of the definite article in Coptic. Platt omits in his 
translation. Dillmann in his Lex. (sub voce) suggests 
‘‘acolyte,’? and Maclean (Handbook, etc., p. 32) rap@évous (?) 
Neither of these is at all likely. The Syriac version of the 
‘preface ’’ reads, ‘‘the singers as psalmists with intelligence 
and with constancy.’’ Arabic (I) gives no help, since the 
corresponding word in it is itself of uncertain signification, 
interpreted variously as ‘acolytes’? or ‘‘exorcists.”’ 
Arabic (II) appears to solve the riddle. It testifies [Funk, 
Vol. II., p. xxxii] that the original Greek was qdiAcrova: or 
dordvws. This agrees well with the Syriac version, and 
would explain the reading of the Ethiopic, t.e. as ‘ni,’ 
the Coptic definite article, and gAdrovos. The reading is 
important as showing probably a close connection between 
the Ethiopic and Coptic versions. 

C. [ii 1], p. 13.-—‘' Joash . . . when he was seven years old, 
etc.” The Eth. reads Uzziah both in A and P. In AC 
we find: ‘Josiah at eight years of age reigned righteously, 
and in like manner Joash governed the people at seven years 
of age.’? There is here an absence of chronological order. 
It may be that the substitution of Uzziah for Joash was an 
attempt to rectify this, and that the second clause should 
read: ‘‘and afterward +tJosiaht in his eighth year reigned 
in righteousness.’ In Mt 1, 18, owing to the omission of 
the names of three kings, we have the words, ‘‘ Joram begat 
Uzziah.” It is hardly correct to say, as Platt does in his 

189 


190 ADDITIONAL NOTES 


note, that ‘Joash is called Ozias i 
St. Matthew's Copel Ozias in the first chapter of 
- [ii 18], p. 32.—'tAnd He answered and sai 

people, etc.’? On this passage Platt's note is: ‘ Hee i 
find in the Greek Constitutions a long quotation from the 
prophet Ezekiel, containing above one-half of the 34th 
chapter of his Prophecy. Instead of which, in the Ethiopic 
version, we have only the latter end of the quotation, and 
that in a mutilated state, joined on to some words of our 
Saviour’s from St. John’s Gospel, as though He had spoken 
to the people these words from Ezekiel also.’? This is an 
accurate statement of the facts, except that the length of 
the quotation from Ezelciel in AC is rather exaggerated. 

E. [ii. 54], p- 71-—The second last word of the title of 
Chapter xil. is somewhat mysterious in Ethiopic. Trans- 
literated in its singular form it is “'Abibilosawi” in P. 
Platt in his notes says that he thought of “ philosophos ’’ 
and ‘‘diabolus,’’ but finally translated generally ‘ evil- 
doers.” In three of the British Museum MSS. (ABE) 
the form of the word is somewhat different, ‘ ’Abibolosawi.” 
The. first two syllables represent the Greek preposition 

epi,’’ as they do, for example, in the Ethiopic form of 
the Greek name Epimachos (cf. Dillmann’s Lex.). This 
being so, this second form of the word seems to be a trans- 
literation of ‘‘epiboulos,’’ or some kindred word, in the 
sense of i schemer " or ‘‘plotter.’? The corresponding word 
of the title in Arabic (II) is translated by Baumstark by 
**Widersacher.’”” : ‘ 

F. fiii. 1], p. 85.—Platt translates thus: ‘At seven years 
did she enter into the Temple, and she remained fifty-seven 
years, continuing a virgin.’? This is meaningless. The 
words ‘ther husband"? might easily have dropped out, as 
the word in Ethiopic for ‘ther husband’’ bears a strong 
resemblance to the word for ‘‘years.”” Why the number 
fiftv-seven is chosen is not clear. It may be the result of 
a calculation, taking the age of Anna at marriage to have 
been sixteen years (16+7+57=80). 

G. [v. 14], p. 126.—"At the third hour they raised Him 
on the tree, and at the sixth hour they crucified Him, etc.” 
There seems to be no difference between these two events, 
so why should they be separated by a period of three hours? 
The mistake seems to be in the word ‘‘raised.’’ In the 
Statutes of the Apostles, Statute 48 (Ethiopic) is, ‘‘Con- 
cerning the times at which it is seemly to prav."’ In it 
are found these words, “pray at the third hour... 
because in that hour thev stripped Jesus Christ and nailed 


es a 


ADDITIONAL NOTES 191 


Him upon the wood of the cross... . And again pray at 
the sixth hour; for at that hour was the hanging of our 
Lord Christ upon the wood of the cross’? (Horner’s trans- 
lation). The word for ‘raised’ differs only in one letter 
from the word for ‘‘stripped.’’ Probably the latter was 
the original reading in the Ethiopic Didascalia also. 

H. [v. 14], p. 127-—‘‘and it was evening, etc.” The 
Eth. has a stop at the word “tomb.” The first four 
words of the next sentence are: ‘and-when-it-was-evening 
at-the-dawning in-the-twilight-of the-sabbath.’’ The last 
three of these words are found in the Eth. N.T. in Mt 28, 1 
in a different order, the meaning being: ‘‘and late (?) on 
the Sabbath at the dawn (of the first day of the week),”’ 
a translation of éé 8¢ caBBdrwr, 19 émupwoxoven. The first 
of the four words is possibly a translation of the ‘when it 
was evening’ of Mt 27, 57- 1 have given as a translation 
of the last three words the R.V. of Mt 28, 1. 

I. [v. 17], p. 130.—In the title the words occur ‘‘on the 
fourteenth day of the month.” This translation omits the 
last of the Ethiopic words which correspond. The word is 
one which it is not easy to represent in translation. It 
refers to the fact that the fourteenth day is to be reckoned 
in a special way—that is, that the beginning of the month 
was to be reckoned by a particular night rather than a 
particular day. 

J. [vi. 18], p. 155.—** Uzziah . Joel.” I have left these 
names enclosed in brackets. though it might have been 
better to emend them in accordance with what is found in 
AC. There it is Jehoshaphat's alliance with Ahaziah that 
is. mentioned, for which he was reproved by Jehu the 
prophet. The change from Jehu to Joel is found in several 
MSS. of AC. a 

K. [vii. 1], p. 168.—The title “ OF toil and thanksgiving.” 
I have given the translation ‘‘toil,’’ as such is the literal 
translation. The word probably has reference to the 
“Christian life’? in general. The title of the chapter in 
Arabic (IT) as given by Baumstark runs, ‘Ueber das 
auserwihlte Leben und Dank.” The life of ascetics is 
often described in Ethiopic by this same word “‘toil.”” 

The latter part of the title, as already mentioned in the 
Introduction (p. xviii.), has apparently nothing to correspond 
to it in the chapter as it at present stands. I have sug- 
gested that the presence of the word “ thanksgiving ”’ in 

this title is an indication that at some time the Ethiopic 
Didascalia, or its original, did include that part of AC vii. 
which treats of the administration of the eucharist. 


BRIEF BIBLIOGRAPHY OF WORKS DEALING 
WITH THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA, OR 
KINDRED DOCUMENTS. 


Piatt. The Ethiopic: Didascalia, or the Ethiopic version 
of the Apostolical Constitutions received in the Church 
of Abyssinia. (London, 13834.) 

LaGarpve. Didascalia apostolorum syriace. (1854.) 

Gipson. The Didascalta Apostolorum in Syriac, with an 
English Translation. Horae Semiticae I and II. 
(London and Cambridge, 1903.) 

Hautrr. Didascalia Apostolorum fragmenta veronensia 
latina. (Leipsic, 1900.) 

Funk. Didascalia et Constitutiones Apostolorum. Vols. 1., 
II. (Paderborn, 1905.) 

MacLean. The Ancient Church Orders. (Cambridge, 1910.) 

Cooper AND MacLean. The Testament of our Lord. (Edin- 
burgh, 1902.) 

O'Leary. The Apostolical Constitutions and cognate 
documents. (S.P.C.K., 1906.) 


| : 
\ 





INDICES 


GENERAL INDEX 


(Numbers in heavier type refer to the titles of the chapters of the 
Ethiopio Didascalia. ) 


*dbibolosawi, xxii, 190 

Abd Ishaq, translator of Arabic 
Didascalia, xiii 

Acolytes, 189 

Acts of the Apostles, Reading 
of, 74 

Adultery, 3, 5 f, 8f, 152, 166 

Aeons, of Gnostics, 143 n. 

gee ae at baptism, 95/f, 
184 f. 

apo pha books, 154 

Apostles, List of, 151 

Apostolic Church Order, x; 
(Ethiopic), ix n. 

Apostolic Constitutions (i-vi), 
xi, xii, xv, xvi; (i-vii), xv, 
xvii; (vii), xvi; (vii, 1-32), 
x, xvi; (vii, 33-viii, 2), xi; 


(viii), x, xii, xvi, xxi; 
numeration of chapters 
adopted, xxiii; work of 


editor of, xvi 

Arabic Didascalia, xi, xii f, 189 

Arabic Didascalia (I), xi, xii, 
xv, 189; extra chapters in, 
x, xi, xili, xiv 

Arabic Didascalia (II), xi, xv n, 
xvi, xvin, xviii n, xix, xx 7, 
100m, 107, I13m, 120n, 
189 ff; titles of chapters 
which differ from Ethiopic, 
xix-xx 

Ascension, Feast of. 133 

Assyrians, 98 n. 


ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA 


Astrologers and magicians, 121, 
163 
Augurs and diviners, 82, 171 


Babylon, Return from, 74 

Baptism, by unbelievers, 153 ; 
formula of, 49, 96, 119, 154, 
183,185 ; not to be repeated, 
152; of catechumens, 132, 
182 ; of infants enjoined, 153 

Baruch quoted, 133 

Baths, public, 8 

Baumstark, xiii, xvi, xvi n, 191 

Berries of tstva, 61 n. 

Biblical references in this edi- 
tion, v, xxiii 

Bibliography of Didascalia and 
kindred. documents, 192 

Bickell, xii 

Bishop, Age required in a, 12 f ; 
qualifications of a, 14 ff; 
place of his throne, 74 

Bishops, Pepys and dea- 
cons, Of, 12 ff. 

Bishops and presbyters not to 
marry after ordination, 154 

Bishops, to be married, 14,154; 
to be hospitable, 14; not to 
show partiality, 14 f, 19, 30, 
66; not be slothful in fast- 
ing, 16; not to hearken to 

umnies, 24 ff, 63; not to 

be sureties, 15; to receive 


195 o° 


196 GENERAL INDEX 


the penitent, 27/f; not to 
admonish before proof of 
offence, 37 ff; to try every 
matter, 58 ff; to be peace- 
makers, 71; to relieve the 
destitute, 50, 86; to care for 
widows and orphans, 99 ff. 
Pishops not to be consecrated 
by a single bishop, 97 
Bishops ordained by the 
Apostles, List of, 186 f. 
Bloodless sacrifice, 45, 161 
Bribes, 19, 63 
Burial of the dead, 166 


Canons of Hippolytus, x 

Catechumens, 19, 61, 75, 112, 
132, 154, 182 ff; Confession 
by, 183; instruction of, 
182f; Prayer of, 186 

Chrism, 54, 172 

Christian Sabbath, i.e., Sunday 
66, 78, 179 

Christians, to forgive their 
neighbours, 70 ff; not to 
enter a heathen temple, 80 ; 
not to enter a house of 
revelry, 120; not to fre- 
quent Jewish synagogues, 
80; not to mingle with 
heathen, 82; not to swear 
by false gods, 120f; who 
are criminals not to be 
helped, 109 

Chronicles, Books of, 38, 74 

Church Orders, ix; different 
groups of, x, xi 

Church, Arrangement of a, 74 ; 
arrangement of people in, 
75; like a ship, 74f 

Constitutions through Hippo- 
lytus, x 

Cooper and Maclean’s Edition 
of Testament of our Lord, 
xiv, 192 

Coptic Didascalia, xiii, xxii, 
189 . 

Covetousness, Against, 3 

Creed, 183 


Deacon, Prayer of, 76; pro- 
clamation of (with loud 
voice), 74 

Deacons, 1, 29, 48-53, 63, 65, 
75 f, 90, 92, 95-98; duty of, 
98; like sailors, 74; not to 
baptize -women, 95; to do 
nothing without the bishop’s 
consent, 49, 52 ff, 65 

Deaconess, Order of, 48 f, 75, 
78, 90, 92, 95 ; to be a virgin, 
or a widow married but 
once, 154 

Deuteronomy, Book of, 5, 7 

Diabolos, xxii 

Atardfers trav ’AxootéAwy, Xvi 

Didache, viii, x, xvi; expan- 
sion of, 168 ff. 

Didascalia, Different versions 
of, xi-xv; parts of Ap. 
Const. corresponding with 
versions of, xv 

Distribution of offerings, 51 

Divisions, of ungodly and un- 
believing, 186 ff; caused by 
Satan, 141 ff. 

Divorce, Fornication sole 
ground for, 152 

Doorkeepers, 48, 75, 92, 154 

Drunkenness, Against, 6, 1or 


Ebionites, 141 

Egyptian Church Order, x 

Epiphany, Feast of, 123 

Essenes, 141 ". 

Ethiopic Church Order, x 

Ethiopic Didascalia, xi, xiii; 
analysis of, vii-ix; British 
Museum manuscripts of, v, 
xvii f, xx, 190; chapters of, 
and parallels in Ap. Const., 
xviii f; incomplete in Platt’s 
edition, xiv; part probably 
lost, xviii, xx n, 191 ; Platt’s 
manuscript of, xvii, 967, 
97, 106 n. 

Eucharist, xviii, 54, 176 ”, 179, 
191; to be celebrated on 
Sunday, 79, 173; for the 
departed, 166 





GENERAL INDEX 197 


Excommunicaticn of unfaith- 
ful, 64, 155 
Exorcists, 189 


Fasika (Pascha), xxiii 

Fast, on eighth day after Pente- 
cost, 135; of Lent, 123; on 
Vigil of Passover, 127, 136; 
see Paschal fast 

Fasting, as a penance, 29; 
prohibited on the Sabbath, 
127, 136; on Sunday, 136; 
on Pentecost, 136 

Fasts of fourth and sixth days 
of the week, 127, 136 

Fathers to correct their chil- 
dren, 105 

Feast-days, 122 ff. 

Feast, after Pentecost for seven 
days, 135; on Sunday after 
Easter, 133; sec Ascension, 
Epiphany, Nativity, Pente- 
cost. 

First-fruits, 45-48, 50, 55/, 
172 

Flemming, xii 

Formula of 
Baptism 

Funk, xii f, xv n, xxiii m, 116, n 
192 


Baptism, — see 


Gehenna, 2, 54, 69, 86, 110 ff, 


15 
Gentile worship, 79 
Gibson, Mrs., xii f, xxiii, 189, 


192 
Gift of tongues at third hour, 


134 

Gifts not to be taken from 
sinners, 90 

Gnostics, Contempt of marriage 
by, 143, 145; immorality of, 
143, 146; tenets of, 145, 
162 f. 

Gospel, Reading of the, 74; 
standing at the, 75 

Greek Didascalia, The original, 
xi, xvi 


Harris, J. R., xii 

Hauler, x, xii, 192 

Hippolytus, ix, x 

Holy Spirit, Descent of at 
Baptism, 53, 61 

Horae Semiticae, xii #, 192 

Horner, 191 

Hosanna, Feast of (Palm Sun- 
day), 123, 131 

Hosts of Spiritual ones, Of the 
service of, 176 

Husbands and wives, 9 


Idolatry, 6, 41, 82, 120, 171 
Idol priests, 51 

Incense, 49 f, 55, 92, 173, 176 
Iota, Church founded on, 48 


Jewish ceremonies forbidden, 
166 

Joshua, Book of, 74 

Jowett, Rev. W., xiv 

Judgment to be given when 
both parties are present, 
66 ff. 

Judges, Book of, 74 


Kings, Books of, 6, 7, 38, 55, 
74,102 . 
Kiss of peace, 76 


Lagarde, xii, 192 

Lamentations of 
Book of, 13 

Latin Didascalia, xi, xii 

Law and Gospel contrasted, 
Commandments of, 161 

Laymen, not to execute priests’ 
office, 49, 92; not to judge, 
57» 65 

Lord’s Prayer, 37, 73, 96, 186 

Ludolf, xiv 


Jeremiah, 


Maclean, ix n, x, xiv, 18y, 192 
‘* Made himself like an ass”"’ 
(of Manasseh), 39 


198 GENERAL INDEX 


Magabit, Month of, 130 f. 

Magic, 170 

Marriage not unholy, 147, 152, 
164-166 ee 

Marriages, Second, 85 

Martyrdom an equivalent of 
Baptism, 112 

Martyrs, Of the, 107 ff, 119 ff. 

Messianic prophecies of O. T., 


134 

Miyazya, Month of, 123 

Moses, Miracles of, 138, 158; 
stoning of, 138 

Mysteries to be kept from the 
heathen, 65 


Nativity, Feast of the, 122 
Nau, F., xii 

Necromancy, 82 
Nicolaitans, 143 n. 
Nipilobanos, xxii, 189 
Numbers, Book of, 4, 46 


Octateuch, Syriac, x 

Offerings not to be received 
from the unworthy, 101 ff. 

Oil ss balsam at Baptism, 96, 
I 

O'Leary, xiv, xvii n, 192 

‘orit, xxiii 

Orphans, 48 f, 98, 99 


Pascha, xxiii 

Paschal fast 123, 127, 131 

Passion and Death of Our 
Lord, Narrative of, 124 ff. 

Passover, 123, 131; date of, 
130 f. 

Paul, St., Epistles of, 74 

Penitents, 75 

Pentecost, Feast of, 134; two 
meanings of, 136 #. 

People, not to absent them- 
selves from CFurch, 78; to 
show liberality in offerings, 
4? ff. 


Peter, St., Conflict at Rome 
with Simon, 144; story of 
his vision, 148 

Pharisees, 60, 98 n, 141 

Phoenix, Legend of, 116 

Platt’s manuscript of the 
Ethiopic Didascalia, xiii, 
96", 97", 106 n. 

Prayer, for benefactor of a 
widow, 93; of Consecration 
of oil, 184; over Chrism, 
185 f; over the water, 184 f; 
toward the East, 76, 186 

Frayer of Manasseb, Version 
oO 


» 39f. 

“ Preface '’ to the Didascalia, 
xiii, xviii, 1 f, 189 

Presbyters, their place in 
Church, 74 

Presbyters and deacons to sit 
with the bishop in judgment, 
20, 66; not to ordain, 92, 98 

Priests and presbyters, synony- 
mous usage of terms, xxiii 

Priestly office superior to 
kingly, 55, 137 

Prophets, The fifteen, 74 

Psalms of David, 7, 78 

Psalms to be used in the 
evening and the morning, 78 


Reader, 1, 48, 74, 92, 154 
Renunciation by catechumens, 

Formula of, 183 
Resurrection of the dead, 113 ff 
Rich, Duty of the, 6 


Sabbath, Observance of, 178 f : 
by the Jews, 79 

Sabbath of the Passion, Fast 
on, 127, 131 

Sabbath of the Jews ( = Satur- 
day), 66 . 

Sacrifices of the righteous, List 
of, 179 

Sadducees, 141, 167 

Sahidic Ecclesiastical Canons,x 

Saitan, xxiii 





GENERAL INDEX 199 


Scripture, Reading of, 6 f, 57 

soe references in this 
edition, v, xxiii 

Servants to be subject both to 
believing and unbelieving 
masters, 106 

Seven deacons, 72 

Shaving of beards forbidden, 5 

Sheol, 21, 50, 139, 155 

Sibyl, Quotation from the, 115 

Simonians, 145 

Singers, 1, 48, 92 

Sloth forbidden, 14, 83 ff. 

Socin, xiii 

Statutes of the 
(Ethiopic), 190 

Stranger, Reception of a, 77 

Sub-deacons, 1, 15 

Symbols and abbreviations, 
List of, v 

Syriac Didascalia, xi, xii, 116 7, 
189 ; two recensions of, xii 

Syrians, 98 

Swete, v, 152 n. 


Apostles 


Tahsas, Month of, 123 
Ter, Month of, 123 
Testament of Our Lord, x, xiv, 


xv n. 
“That which dieth of itself,’’ 


149 7. 
Theatre, Attendance at for- 
bidden, 82 


Tithes, 45, 48, 50, 172 

Tobi, Month of, 123 

Tobit quoted, 4 

Toil and thanksgiving, Of, 
168 ff, 191 

Transliteration of Ethiopic 
words, Method of, xxiii, 
xxii n. 

Trinity, Doctrine of the, 146 

Two Ways, x 


Verona fragments of Latin 
Didascalia, x, xii, 192 

Virgins, 48f, 75, 95; not to 
take vows hastily, 106 f 


Wansleb, xiv 

‘Way of Death,” viii, ix n. 

Widows, 48-50, 75, 84 ff, 82 ff, 
95; requisite age in, 84 ; not 
to gossip, 87; to show 
gratitude to benefactors, 100 

Wisdom quoted, ei 

Woman taken in adultery, 43 

Women, not to baptize, 91; 
not to teach or preach, 88, 
gt; to be veiled, 12, 77; to 
sit apart in Church, 74 

Wordsworth on the Didascalia, 
vii 


Xanthicus, Month of, :23 n. 


NAME INDEX 


INDEX TO NAMES OF PERSONS AND PLACES MENTIONED 
IN THE ETHIOPIC DIDASCALIA AND THE NOTES. 


Aaron, 50, 52, 118, 137/, 158, 
180 

Abeddadan, 137 2. 

Abel, 37, 72, 157, 170, 179 

Abiram, 50, 137 

Abner, 171 

Abraham, 39/, 68, 134, 157, 
165, 167, 174 f, 179, 182 

Absalom, 137 

Achan, 19, 169 

Adam, I15, 142, (54, 175, 185 

Adonias (Jadon), 102 

Aegina, 187 

Agag, 19 

Abab, 155 

Ahaziah, 191 

Ahijah, 103 

Alexander, 109 

Alexandria, 187 

Amasa, 171 

Amon, 41 f. 

Ananias and Sapphira, 170 

Andrew, 151 

Anna, 85, 190 

Annas, 109, 125 

Annianus, 187 

Anubis, 121 7. 

Antioch, 148, 150, 187 

Apis, 121 ”, 157 

Aquila, 143, 187 

Arabia, 116 

Archippus, 187 

Ariston, 187, 187 7. 

Aristos, 187, 187 n. 

Asia, 187 

Athens, 187 

Avilius, 187 


201 


Babylon, 39, 58, 68, 74, 115 
Barak, 180 

Barnabas, 143, 150, 156 
Bartholomew, 151 

Baruch, 133 

Basilides, 143 

Benomnimén, Land of, 39 
Beroea, 187 

Bethel, 180 n. 

Bethlehem, 180, 180 n. 


Caesarea, 143, 148, 187 
Caiaphas, 109, 125 

Cain, 29, 37, 92 f, 170 
Caleb, 72, 182 

Carmel, Mount, 180 
Cenchreae, 187 
Cerinthus, 143 

Clement, 2, 143, 156, 187 
Cleobius, 143, 153 
Cleopas, Son of, 127, 187 
Colassae, 187 

Cornelius, 143, 148, 187 
Crescens, 187 

Crete, 187 

Crispus, 187 


Daniel, 22, 68, 87, 114 f, 135, 
180 

Dathan, 50, 136 f. 

Davjd, 21 f, 24, 37-39, 48, 62, 
69 f, 74, 78, 87, 117 ff, 134, 
137, 154f, 160 f. 165, 168 f, 
171, 179 f. 

Deborah, 180 


202 


Demetrius, 187 
Dionysius, 187 
Dositheus, 143 


Egypt, 70, 116, 121, 138 f,157f, 
Pa ee 38 f,157f, 
Eleazar the priest, 137 
ijah, 55, 85, 114, 135, 154, 
157, 188, 180 4 135, 154 
Elisha, 103, 114, 167, 180 
ar 72, 114, 149, 154, 180, 
182 


Enosh, 149, 180, 182 
Ephesus, 187 

Esther, 136, 180 

Evodius, 187 

Ezekiel, 20, 22, 25, 121, 190 
Ezra, 180 


Gabriel, 114 

Gaius, 187 

Galatia, 187 

Gehazi, 19, 170 

Gibeon, 180 

Gideon, 180 

Gilgal, 180 

Gitthae oe 20): 141, 141". 
Gomorrah, 165 n. 

Greece, 61 n, 


Ham, 23 

Haman, 136 

Hannah, 135, 180 
Hazael, 103 
Heliopolis (On), 116 n. 
Hephzibah, 38 

Herod, 167 

Hezekiah, 38 f, 180 
Holofernes, 136 


Ignatius, 187 
"Ion, 116 
Isaac, 30f, 68, 167, 174, 179 


NAME INDEX 


Isaiah, 28, 45, 87, 89, 114, 118, 
135, 140, 154, 159 
Italy, 144 : 


Jacob, 39 f, 68, 133, 167, 174 f, 


179 
bee or Jabel, 180 n. 
airus, 115 
James, Bp. of Jerusalem, 1, 72, 
147, 149, 151, 186 
James, son of Alphaeus, 151 
ames, son of Zebedee, 119, 151 
ason, 156 
ehoshaphat, 155, 180, 191 
ehu, 191 
ephthah, 180 
Jeremiah, 28, 80, 117, 133, 
139/f. 
Jericho, 24, 134 
qe 1g, 102 f. 
erusalem, I, 39, 67, 122, 
147, 150 f, 179, 186 
Jesse, 135, 147 
Jethro, 65 
jong 170 f. 
oash, 13, 189 2 
Job, 7, 22, 72, 74, 117, 140, 
149, 171, 180 n, 182 
jon 140, 155, 180, 191 
ohn the Baptist, 60, 72, 91 
John, son of Zebedee, 74, 103, 
151, 187 
ohn, Bp. of Ephesus, 187 
onah, 38, 115, 180 
peta 148 
oseph, son of Jacob, 58, 167 
Joseph, husband of Mary, 141 
Joshua, son of Nun, 72, 74, 
134, 167, 180, 182 
Joshua, son of Josedech, 140 
osiah, 180, 189 
udaea, 148 
udas Barsabbas, 150 
udas Iscariot, 23, 76, 123-5. 
147, 151, 170 
Judas Maccabaeus, 181 
udas, son of James, 187 
udith, 89, 136, 181 
Judges, The, 180 


ow air: Ke as 


NAME 


Korah, 19, 50, 92, 137 /. 


Laodicea, 187 

Lazarus of Bethany, 88, 115 
Lazarus the beggar 171 
Levi, 49 

Linus, 187 

Lois, 187. 

Lot, 23, 72 

Lucius, 156, 187 

Luke, 74, 156, 187 


Macedonia, 187 

Malachi, 51, 156 

Manasseh, 38-42, 180 

Manoah, 180 

Marcus, 143 

Mark, 74, 156, 187 

Marthones, 187 

Mary and Martha, 88 

Mary Magdalene, 88, 127 

Mary, mother of James, 127 

Mary, The Virgin, 72, 91, 141, 
146, 179, 184 

Mattathias, 180 

Matthew, 43, 59. 74, 15! 

Matthias, 147, 151 

Melchizedek, 50, 72, 149, 182 

Menander, 143 

Mesopotamia, 475 n. 

Miriam, 29, 137, 138 7. 

Mizpeh, 180 

Mordecai, 136, 181 

Moses, 3, 15, 17, 29, 39 59, 
52 f, 55, 65, 72, 74, 103, 116, 
125, 134f, 137f, 150, 154, 
157, 161, 167 f, 171, 180, 182 


Naaman, 19, 170 
Naboth, 6 

Nathan, 3 
Nebuchadnezzar, 134 
Nehemiah, 180 
Nicetas, 143, 187 


INDEX 203 


Nicolas, 143 

Nineveh, 38, 136 

Noah, 19, 22f, 72, 149, 157. 
179 f, 182 


Obededom, 137 #. 
Olives, Mount of, 124 
Onesimus, 187 
Ornan, 180 


Pasa, 180 

Paul, 1, 43, 72, 74, 150 f, 187 

Pergamus, 187 

Peter, 43, 66, 103, 118, 124, 
142-145, 148, 151, 170 f, 187 

Phanuel, Daughter of, 85, 190 

Pharaoh, 52, 138, 178 

Philadelphia, 187 

Philemon, 187 

Philip the Evangelist, 142 

Philip the Apostle, 151 

Phinehas, 72, 182 

Pheenicia, 187 

Pilate, 125 f, 132, 167, 179, 184 

Potiphar’s wife, 58 


Rahab, 23 f. 
Red Sea, 158 
Reuben, 138 
Rome, 144, 187 


Saba, 159 

Salome, 88 

Samaria, 67, 142 

Samson, 180 

Samuel, 49, 54 f, 103, 134, 136, 
160, 180 

Sarah, 165 

Sarepta of Sidon, 85 

Saturnilus, 143 

Saul, 19, 49, 160, 170 f. 

Sennacherib, 180 

Seth, 72, 154, 182 

Shimei, 137 #. 

Shunammite’s son, 115 

Silas, 150 


204 NAME 


Simeon, ye 

Simon the anean, 151 

Simon (Magus), 23, 103,141-45, 
153 

Sinai, 176 

Sisera, 180 


Sm , 187 

sudan 24: 72, 164 

Solomon, 7, 10, 13, 18 f, 39, 
74, 83, 87, 94, 104, 107, I19, 
135, 155, 165, 180 

Sosipater, 156 

Stephen, 67, 119, 168 

Strataeas, 187 - 

Syria, 103, 150 

Susanna, 58, 67 f. 


Tarsus, 150 n. 
Thaddeus, 151 


INDEX 


Theophilus, 187 

Thomas, 133, 151 

Three Children, 113, 115, 180 
Timothy, 156, 187 

Titus, 156, 187 

Tripolis, 187 n. 


Uriah’'s wife, 62 


Uzziah, 49, 92, 137, 155, 189, 
191 . 


Well of the Oath, 179 


Zacchaeus, 59, 143, 187 
Zechariah, 135 
Zerubbabel, 180 

Zion, 135, 179 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY R. CLAY AND SONS, LTD., 
BRUNSWICK STREET, STAMFORD STREET, S.E.1, 4ND BUNGAY, SUPFOLK 








N. MANCHESTER, INDIANA 46962 


