Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


**rr 


liliranr  of  t\ft  Bi&mttn  Srt)Ool 


THE    SOCIETY 


THBOLOQICAl.    EDUCATION 


HecfU'pif     flM^Oju    ^j         190  S"- 


^ 


The  Statutes  of  the  Apostles 


or 


Canones  Ecclesiastic! 


The 


Statutes   of  the   Apostles 


or 


Canones    Ecclesiastici 

Edited  with  Translation  and  Collation  from  Ethiopic  and 

Arabic  MSS. ;  also  a  Translation  of  the  Saidic 

and  Collation  of  the  Bobairic   Versions ; 

and  Saidic  fragments 


By 

Rev.  G.   Horner 


London 
Williams  &  Norgate 

14  Henrietta  Street,  Covent  Garden 

1904 


MAY  8      n(J5 

f 


PRINTED  BY 

NBILL  AND  COMPANY,   LIMITED, 

EDINBURGH. 


5^f 


Contents 


INTRODUCTION 


ETHIOPIC  TEXT 


ARABIC   TEXT 


TRANSLATION   OF   THE   ETHIOPIC 


»» 


>> 


>»  >> 


>»  >> 


ARABIC 


SAIDIC 


COLLATION    OF   THE   ETHIOPIC 


»» 


1 » 


>> 


yy  ly  ARABIC         • 


„        „       SAIDIC   FRAGMENTS 
„     /„       BOHAIRIC 


TEXT   OF   SAIDIC   FRAGMENTS 


PAGE 

•  • 
Vll 

I 

89 
127 

233 
295 
365 
421 

433 
445 
459 


J 


I  ntroduction 

The  texts  and  translations  published  in  this  volume  are 
chiefly  intended  to  provide  new  material  for  the  solution 
of  an  important  problem  in  Church  history,  the  sources 
of  the  eighth  book  of  the  Apostolic  Constitutions. 

These  Constitutions,  consisting  of  a  body  of  ecclesi- 
astical law,  and  of  directions  and  instructions  for  Christian 
life,  profess  to  have  been  handed  down  from  the  Apostles 
by  S.  Clement,  the  fourth  bishop  of  Rome,  yet  were  really 
in  all  probability  written  in  Greek  by  the  pseudo- Ignatius 
in  Syria  and  probably  at  Antioch  a.d.  350-400.  The 
present  publication  is  not  concerned  with  their  first  seven 
books,  but  only  with  the  eighth,  because  producing  three 
of  the  other  documents  which  contain  matter  similar  to 
the  regulations  of  that  last  book  except  the  last  chapter, 
which  for  a  reason  stated  below  does  not  come  under 
investigation. 

Of  these  other  writings,  in  Greek  several  manuscripts 

give  a  preliminary  draft  of  the  eighth  book,  or,  it  may  be, 

an  excerpt  from  such  a  draft.     The  Saidic,  Arabic,  and 

Ethiopic  preserve  two  forms  of  these  same  canons,  of 

which  forms  the  second  coincides  remarkably  with  the 

eighth   book;    and  probably  the  Syriac  also  translated 

vii 


Vlll  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

both  the  forms,  though  hitherto  only  an  incomplete 
version  has  been  discovered,  and  the  statement  of  an 
Arabic  colophon  given  below  has  not  yet  been  verified. 
Again,  fragments  of  a  Latin  version  of  the  first  form 
have  been  recently  published,  agreeing  closely  with  the 
Ethiopic,  while  the  Testamentum  Domini  nostri  sup- 
plies parallel  matter  without  similarity  of  arrangement. 
Lastly,  in  Arabic  are  extant  the  Canons  of  Hippolytus 
and  Constitutions  by  Hippolytus,  whose  name  is  found 
besides  in  the  Ethiopic,  derived  probably  from  the  Arabic. 
How  far  the  authorship  of  Hippolytus  is  to  be  accepted 
cannot  at  present  be  determined,  the  chief  interest  of  the 
name  consists  in  the  additional  evidence  which  it  gives 
for  a  Western  origin  of  the  canons. 

If  the  several  versions  now  alluded  to  had  the  same  or 
even  a  single  rendering  of  the  canons  in  question,  there 
would  be  ground  for  supposing  that  they  had  been  derived 
from  the  eighth  book,  differing  according  to  the  require- 
ment of  the  excerptor ;  some  of  the  versions,  however, 
give  not  only  two  forms  of  the  same  canons,  but  prefix  a 
third  form,  which  has  been  called  the  Apostolic  Church 
Order,  and  which  links  the  regulations  of  the  eighth  book 
to  an  earlier  state  of  ecclesiastical  affairs,  and  can  hardly 
have  been  derived  from  it 

The  existence  of  these  various  statements,  or  perhaps 
stages  of  Church  ordinance,  has  suggested  the  possibility 
of  there  having  been  a  lost  Church  Order.  Perhaps  this 
idea  is  rather  too  definite,  and  affords  too  easy  an  escape 
from  the  perplexing  obscurity  of  the  situation  and  the 
complication  of  the  documents ;  but  at  least  it  may  serve 
as  a  working  hypothesis,  distinguishing  the  position  of 


INTRODUCTION  IX 


those  who  work  upon  it  from  the  view  of  scholars  who 
seek  the  origin  of  all  these  documents  in  the  authorship 
of  Hippolytus,  and  of  those  who  would  derive  all  from 
the  eighth  book  of  the  Apostolic  Constitutions. 

As  a  contribution  to  the  further  investigation  of  the 
subject,  the  Ethiopic,  Arabic,  and  Saidic  versions  are  now 
offered  to  the  students  of  the  problem.  The  Ethiopic 
takes  precedence,  partly  on  account  of  the  extended  and 
peculiar  character  of  the  text,  and  partly  from  the  indica- 
tions, in  common  with  the  Latin,  of  a  possibly  earlier 
form  of  the  canons  ;  while  Arabic  separates  the  Ethiopic 
from  the  Saidic  to  show  that  the  Arabic  is  derived  from 
the  Saidic  and  not  from  the  Ethiopic.  Professor  Guidi 
strongly  maintains  that  the  Ethiopic  was  translated  from 
the  Arabic,  though  he  also  admits  that  the  Arabic  manu- 
script from  which  the  translation  was  made  has  not  yet 
come  to  light.  Lower  Egypt  furnishes  another  version 
of  the  canons,  translated  from  the  dialect  of  the  Said  in 
the  nineteenth  century,  and  presenting  no  important 
difference  except  the  arrangement  into  seven  books. 
This  Bohairic  version  was  edited  and  rendered  into 
English  by  Tattam  from  a  manuscript  formerly  belonging 
to  the  Duke  of  Northumberland,  and  now  in  the  Royal 
Library  of  Berlin  ;  but  so  recent  and  therefore  corrupt  is 
the  text,  that  many  inaccuracies  occur,  and  often  where 
the  version  appears  to  differ  from  the  Saidic  no  such 
variation  really  exists. 

Lagarde  edited  the  Saidic  version  under  the  name  of 
'  Canones  Ecclesiastic! '  in  his  Mgyptiaca,  and  Professor 
Steindorff  and  Dr  Leipoldt  have  translated  the  greater 
part  of  the  text  into  German.     No  edition  of  the  Arabic 


STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


nor  any  translations  have  been  published  before,  while 
only  part  of  the  Ethiopia  has  hitherto  appeared  in  print, 
edited  and  translated  into  Latin  by  the  statesman  and 
linguist.  Job  Ludolf,  in  1691,  who  gave  his  work  the 
name  of  Statuta  Apostolorum.  This  name  has  been  re- 
tained as  a  convenient  rather  than  an  accurate  or  signi- 
ficant title.  The  Arabic  heading  uses  a  word  which, 
coming  from  a  verb  whose  first  meaning  is  to  join 
together,  may  imply  a  testament  in  the  sense  of  com- 
mandment or  order.  In  the  Saidic  there  is  no  heading, 
but  both  Saidic  and  Arabic  describe  the  subject  as 
canons.  As  already  observed,  these  canons  sometimes 
show  a  threefold  composition.  Such  is  the  case  with 
the  Ethiopic  and  Arabic,  while  the  Saidic  makes  four 
divisions,  adding  with  the  Bohairic  version  the  so-called 
Apostolic  Canons,  which  have  been  omitted  from  the 
present  publication  because  not  occurring  in  the  Ethiopic 
and  Arabic  as  part  of  the  specific  collection  which  Ludolf 
termed  Statuta. 

Though  tripartite  in  form,  the  three  divisions  are 
regarded  as  one  document,  numbered  throughout  in  one 
series  of  sections  or  canons  which,  however,  betray  their 
independent  origin  by  variety  of  form  of  heading  or  title. 
These  sections  present  much  variation,  and  some  of  the 
manuscripts  of  the  same  version  do  not  agree  in  giving 
the  same  numeration,  but  in  every  case  the  numbers  are 
intended  to  follow  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  accord- 
ing to  one  order;  and  this  unity  of  form  prevails, 
although  in  the  Arabic  and  Ethiopic,  if  not  also  in  the 
Saidic,  this  one  composite  document  belonged  to  a  larger 
body,  in  which  the  sections,  beginning  to  be  numbered 


INTRODUCTION  xi 


afresh,  were  sometimes  spoken   of  as   forming   a   total 
number  of  one  hundred  and  twenty-seven. 

Professor  Cooper  and  Mr  Maclean,  in  their  valuable 
edition  of  the  Testamentum  Domini  nostril  have  made 
so  full  a  comparison  with  the  sections  of  the  second  and 
third  divisions  of  the  Statutes,  that  it  will  be  unnecessary 
to  go  over  the  ground  again  in  all  the  documents,  and 
the  main  part  of  this  introduction  will  be  devoted  to  an 
exposition  of  the  characteristics  of  the  Ethiopic  (E.), 
Arabic  (A.),  and  Saidic  (S.)  versions,  which  have  been 
only  partially  examined  hitherto. 

Comparison  of  the  Three  Versions. 

In  comparing  the  three  versions  the  connection  of  E. 
with  A.  is  at  once  conspicuous  in  the  opening  words  of 
the  heading,  while  the  absence  of  Clement's  name  in 
E.  S.  shows  also  the  occasional  independence  of  A.  The 
irregularity  of  numeration  of  the  canons  appears  also 
immediately  when  S.  marks  the  general  statement  of  all 
the  Apostles  after  the  declaration  of  their  common 
commission  as  the  second ;  whereas  A.  E.  thus  regard 
the  first  individual  statement,  then  include  both  John's 
utterances  in  one  canon,  and  make  Matthew's  the  third. 

One  of  the  few  important  differences  between  the 
versions  in  this  first  part  is  the  omission  of  Jude  by 
A.  S.,  which  in  their  eleventh  and  tenth  canons  continue 
the  words  of  Nathaniel  against  the  murmurer,  while  E. 
begins  the  tenth  canon  on  the  same  subject,  *Said 
Yehuda.'  At  the  end  of  their  thirteenth  and  fourteenth 
Bi  A.  omit  the  passage  about  the  correction  of  the 


XII  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

impudent  brawler  with  the  interesting  reference  to 
2  Tim  ii.  17,  where  Hauler's  Latin  fragment  fortunately 
begins.  It  is  noteworthy  that  E.  A.  leave  out  the 
'  asking  for  revelations '  which  S.  specifies  as  a  function 
of  the  widow.  In  the  quotation,  *  I  was  hungry/  S. 
agrees  with  E.  against  A.,  'Verily  ye  saw  me  hungry.* 
But  directly  afterwards  where  S.  quotes  a  phrase,  *  great 
boldness/  from  i  Tim.  iii.  13,  E.  A.  practically  agree  in 
the  words  *  pasture '  and  *  rest/  though  *  pasture '  seems 
to  refer  to  the  Syriac  reading,  *  a  degree  of  shepherds. ' 
The  Saidic  twenty-fourth  canon  of  Andrew  is  omitted  by 
E.  A.,  which  substitute  Andrew  for  Peter  in  their  nine- 
teenth and  twentieth,  continuing  these  canons  until  that 
of  Kefa.  Curious  differences  occur  in  the  short  reference 
to  the  institution  of  the  Eucharist. 

All  three  versions  mark  an  obvious  division  after 
Peter's  final  declaration,  which  has  the  character  of  a  con- 
clusion and  doxology,  but  only  A.  provides  a  transitional 
statement  describing  the  completed  section  as  the  first. 
E.  S.  proceed  at  once  to  their  thirty-first  and  thirty- 
second  canons  without  any  sign  of  further  separation. 
At  this  point,  after  a  break  in  the  text,  Hauler  s  Latin 
gives  eighteen  lines,  the  matter  of  which  is  evidently  the 
same  as  the  beginning  of  E.  40'**,  prefatory  to  the  series 
of  prayers  found  in  that  canon  relating  chiefly  to  Baptism 
and  Unction. 

In  the  ordination  of  a  bishop  E.  mentions  the  day  of 
the  sabbath*  as  opposed  to  S.,  Lord's  day,  and  A.,  first 
day ;  and  all  the  bishops  are  directed  to  say  the  prayer, 

^  See  p.  xxviiL 


INTRODUCTION  xiil 


which  is  given  at  length,  and  which  corresponds  with  the 
form  printed  by  Achelis  in  the  parallel  columns  of 
Canones  Hippolyti,  Agypt.  K.-O.  (Ludolf),  Con- 
stitutiones  per  Hippolytum,  and  Const  Apost,  viiL 
pp.  42-47.  E.  alone  of  the  three  has  the  prayer  of  the 
Oblation,  which  however  appears  in  Hauler's  fragment 
with  very  slight  variation,  e.g.,  *  lead  forth  the  holy  ones' 
for  *  justos  inluminet ' ;  adding  '  on  the  night  in  which  he 
was  betrayed/  *  for  the  remission  of  sin,'  *  having 
given  thanks,'  *  take  and  drink  of  it ' ;  concluding  with 
almost  the  same  doxology  in  which  *  the  holy  church  '  is 
inserted,  which  was  omitted  by  the  fragment  in  the 
prayer  for  the  bishop. 

The  Oblation  of  oil  is  also  found  in  the  Latin,  where 
the  double   mention  of  *  sanitatem '   confirms   the   con- 
jecture of  Professor  Charles  that  the  original  Greek  had 
hygiason,  *  heal,'  and  not  hagiason,  *  sanctify.'     After  the 
response  of  the  people,  the  service  in    E.  continues  to 
the  end  of  the  service,  which  has  also  been  translated  in 
Brightman,  Liturgies  Eastern  and  Western,  pp.  189-193. 
The  prayer  for  the  ordination  of  a  presbyter  agrees 
with  the  form  in  the  Latin,  and  the  reason  for  the  bishop 
alone  ordaining  the  deacon  is  practically  the  same  in  all 
the  versions.     At  this  point  the  print  of  Ludolf  ends, 
his  copyist  having  ceased  to  supply  him  with  the  text 
E.  specifies  the  reader  and  subdeacon,  where  the  others 
speak  of  clergy  in  general,  and  gives  the  prayer  for  a 
deacon,  which  begins  exactly  like  the  Latin  and  continues 
after  the  end  of  the  fragment  to  resemble  the  form  in  the 
Testamentum,  p.    105,  having  omitted  in  common  with 
the  Latin  the  additional  phrases  of  the  Syriac. 


XIV  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


With  regard  to  the  confessors,  the  passage  in  E.  is 
probably  corrupt  in  requiring  the  confessor  to  undergo 
the  form  of  ordination  as  presbyter.  A.  S.  agree  in 
allowing  him  to  take  the  Order  of  presbyter  as  well 
as  deacon  on  the  strength  of  his  confession.  In  the 
case  of  the  confessor  who  did  not  suffer  grievously,  E. 
appears  to  admit  him  by  ordination  only  to  the  diaconate, 
A.  to  the  priesthood  (sic),  and  S.  to  all  offices  of  which 
he  is  worthy.  The  form  of  ordination  to  be  used  in 
such  cases  is  not  given,  for  apparently  some  licence  was 
allowed  under  the  peculiar  circumstances ;  certain  things 
had  to  be  mentioned,  but  the  words  might  differ  accord- 
ing to  the  ability  of  individual  bishops  whose  orthodoxy 
was  unquestioned. 

E.  A.  and  the  Saidic  fragment  of  the  British  Museum 
arrange  the  other  offices  thus  :  widow,  reader,  virgin, 
subdeacon.  Lagardes  Saidic  has  reader,  subdeacon, 
widow,  virgin.  The  Testamentum  widow,  subdeacon, 
reader,  virgin.  E.  A.  include  reader,  etc.,  in  one  canon, 
combining  therewith  the  gift  of  healing.  Both  Saidic 
versions  give  a  separate  canon  to  each. 

The  Testanientum  here  announces  the  conclusion  of  the 
first  book  of  Clement,  and  begins  the  second  book  with 
the  order  of  Baptism.  No  such  division  occurs  in  E.  A. 
S.  or  Bohairic,  which  proceed  in  their  next  canon  to 
the  preliminaries  of  Baptism,  the  first  being  the  selection 
of  catechumens,  who  are  described  by  A.  S.  as  those 
who  come  in  or  are  brought  in  to  the  Faith,  and  by  E. 
as  those  who  wish  to  be  baptised.  This  slight  differ- 
ence should  be  noticed,  though  of  small  importance, 
because  E.  immediately  afterwards  mentions  the  Faith 


INTRODUCTION  xv 


as  the  object  of  their  intention.  After  practical  agree- 
ment in  the  regulations  concerning  the  condition  of  the 
catechumens  as  to  freedom,  marriage,  and  sanity,  in 
which  last  case  S.  alone  contemplates  a  purification 
from  demoniacal  possession,  S.  makes  a  new  canon  for 
the  occupations  which  must  be  forsaken  by  the  novices. 
E.  has  diviner  for  painter,  as  if  pointing  to  divination 
by  means  of  images.  E.  A.  speak  of  only  going  as 
spectators,  while  S.  condemns  taking  part  in  theatrical 
business.  E.  excludes  the  huntsman,  the  teacher  of 
fighting,  and  the  charioteer,  agreeing  with  S.,  which 
specifies  the  monomachos  or  gladiator  and  the  provider 
of  public  shows ;  while  A.  mentions  only  the  teacher  of 
fighting,  having  first  condemned  the  maker  of  potions. 
E.  A.  forbid  the  soldier  to  kill  when  ordered  to  do  so, 
S.  is  satisfied  with  his  not  'hastening  to  the  work.'  In 
a  fresh  canon,  E.  A.  repeat  the  reference  to  the  soldier, 
whose  profession  must  not  be  chosen  by  catechumens  or 
believers.  E.  A.  omit  self-mutilation.  A.  omits  the 
interpretation  of  dreams.  Where  S.  condemns  the 
psellistes,  E.  refers  to  those  who  put  on  clothes  for 
lascivious  ornament,  and  A.  those  who  sell  clothes  of 
the  diggers  of  the  graves.  Finally,  A.  S.  specify 
phylacteries,  while  E.  has  the  general  word  for  potions. 
E.  A.  begin  a  fresh  canon  for  the  concubine,  and  agree 
with  S.  in  admitting  the  special  concubine  of  one  man  to 
Baptism,  and  in  refusing  a  man  who  is  not  lawfully  married. 
It  would  appear  that  a  daily  laying  on  of  hand 
and  exorcism  took  place,  though  E.  speaks  only  of 
instructing  the  selected  candidates ;  but  they  all  agree  in 
a  final  exorcising  by  the  bishop,  E.  referring,  however, 


/ 


XVI  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


to  another  exorcism  on  the  Thursday,  combined  with 
washing.  The  immediate  preparation  or  first  ceremonies 
of  Baptism  took  place  on  Saturday.  E.  mentions  an 
exorcising  and  breathing  on  the  candidates,  but  omits 
the  signing  of  the  forehead,  ears,  and  nose,  and  the  vigil, 
though  enjoining  with  A.  S.  reading  and  exhortation. 
E.  forbids  the  wearing  of  any  ornament  of  gold  or 
precious  stones,  whereas  A.  S.  mention  *a  vessel'  as 
not  to  be  brought ;  and  they  all  seem  to  order  those 
who  can  to  bring  bread  and  wine  for  the  Eucharist,  the 
general  word  for  oblation  being  used,  which  perhaps 
might  include  oil  and  other  things,  such  as  cheese  and 
olives  mentioned  in  the  Latin  fragment  when  describing 
the  ordinary  Eucharist. 

Fresh  canons,  35,  34,  46,  are  devoted  to  the  actual 
ceremonies  of  Baptism,  E.  A.  giving  a  detailed  heading, 
while  S.  says  simply  *the  paradosis'  or  tradition.  E. 
adds  'of  sin'  to  the  'A.  'confession.'  E.  A.  omit  the 
mention  of  silver  ornaments,  which  is  only  important  as 
showing  the  dependence  of  E.  on  A.  or  A.  on  E.,  this 
relation  being  still  more  accurately  exemplified  in  A. 
transliterating  Eucharistia,  while  E.  renders  this  by  a 
native  word.  It  is  not  probable  that  A.  would  have 
used  '  Eucharistia '  in  rendering  the  Ethiopic  word. 
Tattam  wrongly  speaks  of  a  strange  'garment.'  The 
word  is  *  thing,'  referring  probably  to  a  heathen  amulet. 
E.  S.  add  *or  the  presbyter,'  when  directing  the 
candidate  to  be  given  to  the  bishop. 

In  the  confession  of  faith  before  Baptism,  E.  S.  have 
'  I  believe,*  A.  *  Dost  thou  believe.'  E.  A.  do  not 
insert    'true'    between    'one'    and    'God.'      E.    'the 


INTRODUCTION  xvii 


Holy  Spirit,' A.  S.  *his  Holy  Spirit'  Again,  E.  'equal 
in  Godhead,  A.  *  one  coequal  Godhead,'  S.  '  of  the  same 
substance  (ousia),  one  Godhead.'  E.  *  Holy  Church 
Catholic,'  A.  'Catholic  Church,'  S.  'Catholic  Apostolic 
Holy  Church/  At  the  actual  Baptism,  E.  adds  *and 
upon  him  who  answers  for  him ' ;  but  this  is  probably 
due  to  misunderstanding  the  Arabic.  E.  A.  have  only 
'by  an  incomprehensible  miracle,'  while  S.  is  more  care- 
ful to  define  '  by  a  miracle  for  our  sake  in  an  incompre- 
hensible unity,'  sc.  of  God  and  Man.  Tattam  has 
'loosing  the  bonds  (of  death),'  which  gives  a  wrong 
impression.  '  Bonds '  should  be  '  the  bound '  or  *  captives.' 
'His  good  Father'  of  S.  seems  later  than  E.  A.,  *the 
Father';  these  also  omit  'in  the  height'  A.  E.  omit 
'life  giving'  as  a  title  of  the  Spirit,  whose  office  of 
sanctifying  is  not  stated  with  precision.  S.  appears  to 
regard  the  sanctifying  to  be  exercised  upon  the  universe, 
and  leaves  uncertain  whether  'in  the  Holy  Church'  is  a 
separate  article  of  the  Faith  ;  A.  omits  '  in  the  universe ' 
and  makes  the  work  of  the  Spirit  apply  to  the  Church. 
E.  alone  has  'and  in  holy  Church.' 

At  the  giving  thanks  over  the  bread  and  wine,  E.  is 
more  specific  in  adding  '  the  bread  that  it  may  become 
the  Body  of  Christ,  and  the  cup,  (with)  wine  mixed,  that 
it  may  become  the  Blood  of  our  Lord  Christ'  The 
Bohairic,  upon  which  reliance  must  be  put  in  defect  of 
S.,  speaks  of  '  the  bread  because  it  is  the  form  of  the 
Flesh  of  Christ,  and  a  cup  of  wine  because  it  is  the 
Blood  of  Christ,'  corresponding  nearly  with  the  Latin 
fragment  In  explaining  the  milk  and  honey,  E.  S. 
mention  the  Body  (S.  sarx),  whereas  A.  adds  '  and  his 


XViii  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


Blood.'  Here  follows  an  interesting  addition  by  E,, 
beginning,  'And  the  water  also,'  which  is  found  in  the 
Latin  and  in  the  Testamentum.  E.  also  adds  *  of  life ' 
when  directing  the  bishop  to  break  the  bread,  and 
further  orders  two  Amens  after  the  reception  of  the 
chalice,  so  as  to  make  three  altogether.  This  mention 
of  three,  however,  probably  refers  to  the  three  cups 
which  in  the  Latin  contain  water,  milk,  and  wine 
respectively,  and  before  the  reception  of  each  the 
minister  has  to  say  *  In  deo  pat  re  omnipotenti.'  These 
words  are  also  found  in  E.,  after  the  mention  of  the 
honey  and  milk,  and  as  the  formula  of  their  adminis- 
tration. In  the  short  exhortation  which  concludes  the 
canon,  E.  A.  evidently  draw  a  distinction  between  the 
open  and  secret  instruction  ;  S.  has  *  in  brief '  instead  of 
'openly.'  E.  gives  some  support  to  the  opinion  of 
Rahmani,  the  first  editor  of  the  Testamentunty  that 
the  white  stone  called  by  A.  'ticket'  or  'tessera'  and 
by  E.  '  blessing '  is  the  reception  of  the  Eucharist ;  but 
A.  S.  undoubtedly  mean  thereby  the  secret  instruction 
after  Baptism.  E.  adds  a  further  direction  for  the  bishop 
to  communicate  the  people  himself  on  sabbaths  and  first- 
days,  but  allowing  the  presbyters  also  to  break  the 
bread.  This,  however,  may  refer  to  the  Agape,  and 
there  is  no  confirming  evidence  from  the  Latin,  which 
is  here  defective. 

Before  the  next  canon,  A.  gives  a  general  heading  of 
which  no  sign  appears  in  E.  or  S.,  and  this  latter  version 
breaks  up  the  next  passage  into  several  canons,  the  last 
of  which,  51,  is  omitted  by  A.  and  in  E.  is  slightly 
enlarged.     Then  follows  a  long  and  interesting  addition 


INTRODUCTION  xix 


by  E.,  consisting  of  two  unnumbered  portions,  the  first 
about  the  gift  to  the  sick,  directing  the  deacon  in 
emergency  to  celebrate  the  Eulogia  or  bread  of  blessing ; 
and  the  second  describing  the  service  of  the  Agape,  with 
the  bringing  in  of  lamps,  the  thanksgiving  of  the  bishop, 
though  without  the  Sursum  corda,  preceding  the  meal ; 
after  which  the  children  and  virgins  pray  and  chant 
psalms,  while  the  deacon  holds  the  mingled  cup  of  the 
Prosphora,  which  the  bishop  offers  with  the  psalm  of 
Hallelujah.  The  passage,  however,  seems  confused. 
There  may  be  some  trace  of  both  portions  in  the 
Testamentum  at  the  end  of  chapter  x.  and  chapter  xi.  E. 
continues  with  a  fresh  canon,  restating  the  directions 
about  the  bishop's  speaking,  and  the  distribution  of  the 
Eulogia,  which  really  belong  to  the  Agape,  and  come 
naturally  after  the  description  of  that  service.  In 
canon  39,  E.  has  mistaken  '  lot '  for  *  clergy,'  otherwise 
agreeing  with  A.  S. ;  but  canon  40'**  offers  a  long 
digression,  entirely  peculiar  to  E.,  repeating  some  of  the 
baptismal  ceremonies  and  supplying  the  prayers  belong- 
ing to  this  and  kindred  services.  The  following  is  a 
short  summary  of  the  prayers  and  series  of  prayers.  I. 
Series  consisting  first  of  a  prayer  for  those  who  give  in 
their  names,  sc.  as  candidates  for  Baptism.  This  first 
prayer  does  not  mention  the  giving  of  names,  but  it  is 
followed  by  a  form  with  such  mention,  according  to  which 
the  officiant,  perhaps  not  the  bishop,  makes  a  short 
preliminary  prayer,  the  deacon  utters  a  summons  to  pray, 
and  the  bishop  offers  a  longer  prayer.  II.  Prayer  of 
consecration  for  those  who  bring  the  bread  and  water  or 
oil  to  be  blessed  in  Quadragesima,  after  the  examination 


XX  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

of  the  candidates  for  Baptism.  This  precedes  a  direc- 
tion for  blessing  bread  and  water  and,  anointing  with 
oil  until  the  Baptism,  and  for  the  beginning  of  that 
ceremony  as  far  as  the  renunciation.  III.  Prayer 
over  the  water  for  Baptism.  IV.  Prayer  of  consecra- 
tion of  the  water.  V.  Prayer  for  the  waters  of  the 
Jordan.  This  prayer  closely  resembles  III.,  and 
apparently  refers  to  Baptism,  and  not  to  the  rite  of  the 
Eve  of  the  Epiphany,  published  by  Dr  Budge,  which 
the  name  of  the  prayer  suggests.  The  ceremony  of 
Baptism,  with  a  formula  of  trine  immersion,  is  given, 
and  a  permission  for  Baptism  by  effusion  in  the  case  of 
an  infirm  candidate.  VI.  Prayer  of  the  chrism  for 
neophytes  and  the  sick,  concluding  with  a  direction  to 
breathe  on  the  face  thrice.  VII.  Prayer  of  the  oil  for 
anointing  before  Baptism.  VIII.  Thanksgiving,  with 
Sursum  corda,   over  the  chrism  for  neophytes.  IX. 

Prayer  of  the  oil  for  anointing  at  Baptism.  S.  John 
the  Baptist  is  alluded  to,  and  at  the  end  is  a  direction 
to  breathe  thrice  into  the  oil,  and  to  anoint  the  breast, 
shoulders,  and  the  rest  of  the  body ;  this  to  be  done 
in  case  of  a  woman  by  a  virgin  under  vow.  X. 
Prayer  of  laying  hand  upon  the  catechumens.  XI. 
Form  for  consecrating  the  chrism  by  the  Chief  Priest, 
consisting  of  Sursum  corda.  Invocation  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  breathing  thrice  in  the  face  of  the  neophyte, 
anointing  on  forehead  and  breast,  described  as  unction 
and  sealing.  Here  is  some  confusion  in  the  text,  because 
the  rest  of  the  form  relates  to  the  previous  ceremonies 
of  Baptism.  Three  children  are  brought  forward  who 
make   their  renunciation   of  Satan,   and   profession    of 


INTRODUCTION  xxi 


faith  in  one  God,  the  only  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit, 
in  the  resurrection  of  the  body  and  the  one 
Catholic  Church.  XII.  Prayer  of  the  laying  on  of 
hand  after  the  profession  of  faith,  after  which  comes 
breathing  thrice  (on  the  candidates)  and  anointing  the 
heart  and  back  and  all  the  body.  XIII.  Prayer  after 
this  unction,  and  then  the  Baptism  in  the  water,  which  is 
again  called  the  Jordan,  the  formula  being  given  includ- 
ing the  name  of  the  baptised.  XIV.  Prayer  of  blessing 
and  laying  on  of  hand,  after  which  there  is  to  be  breath- 
ing (on  the  neophytes),  and  anointing  their  forehead  and 
breast  with  the  chrism,  and  finally  the  service  of  the 
Oblation  (Prosphora).  XV.  Prayer  of  oil  for  the 
neophytes  and  the  sick.  This  prayer  is  the  same  as 
VI.  with  very  slight  variation.  After  it  comes  the 
direction  to  breathe  thrice  (on  the  neophyte),  and  then 
follow  directions  for  the  Prosphora  after  the  departure 
of  the  catechumens.  Mention  is  made  of  the  three 
prayers  for  peace,  the  congregation,  and  the  Papas,  the 
svimmons  of  the  deacon,  the  dismissal  by  the  subdeacon, 
the  kiss  of  holiness,  the  shutting  of  the  doors,  statement 
by  the  bishop  that  none  are  present  but  the  Faithful,  the 
offering  of  the  milk,  honey,  bread,  and  wine,  and  XVI. 
the  thanksgiving  over  the  milk  (and  honey),  the 
formula  of  communion,  and  XVII.  the  prayer,  with  laying 
on  of  hand,  of  thanksgiving  for  Baptism  and  reception  of 
the  Eucharist  and  for  protection.  The  prayers  from 
XI.-XVII.  seem  to  belong  to  one  series,  which  fact 
would  account  for  the  repetition  of  VI.  and  the  con- 
cluding statement. 

£.  numbers  the  next  canon  as  40,  although  the  last  was 


XXM  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

thus  numbered.     A.  calls  it  39  and  S.  53,  making  a  fresh 
canon  for  the  names  of  the  fruits.     The  £.  variation  in 
these  names   is   not  important     A.    E.   omit   the   lily, 
which   S.  adds   to   the  rose.     E.   specifies  the    Pascha, 
while    A.    S.    merely   say  the    Fast,    and   thereby   on 
account    of    the    mention     of    the     *  two     days,'    viz., 
Friday  and  Saturday,  implies   the   fast   before   Easter. 
E.  A.  omit  the  salt     E.    has  *in   the   second   month' 
instead  of  *  after  Pentecost.'     S.  refers  also  to  the  second 
month,    but   the   text   is   not  certain,  and   none  of  the 
versions  are  quite  clear  in  the  end  of  this  canon.     E.  adds 
washing  the  hands  before  prayer,  ending  the  canon  with 
*  and  they  shall  bear  fruit  there,'  which  is  a  corruption  of 
A.,  *  bearing  fruit'     The  original  phrase  seems  to  have 
been  'where  the  Spirit  teaches,'  in  Saidic  *Ticb6,'  which 
word  was  easily  mistaken  for  *  Tiouo,'  *  to  break  forth  as 
a  tree ' ;  and  as  will  be  seen  later  in  A.  it  was  also  turned 
into  *  breaking  forth '  as  the  sun.     The  variation  in  the 
important   canon  about  receiving  the  Eucharist  fasting 
probably  arises  from  the  difficulty  in  translating  the  Greek 
word  'spoudaze '  used  by  S.,  but  the  meaning  of  the  passage 
is  plain  enough  in  spite  of  the  slightly  discrepant  versions. 
E.    omits  the  mention  of  a  mouse   or  other  animal, 
but  the  one  canon  of  E.  A.  agrees  sufficiently  with  the 
two  of  S.,  which  indeed  adds  the  next  canon  of  E.  A.  to 
the   sixtieth   without    any    connection    of   the  subject- 
matter.     It  may  be  noticed  that  in  the  heading  of  their 
canon   E.  A.  agree  with  S.    in   putting   deacon   before 
presbyter,  as  E.  S.  continue  to  do  afterwards.     Instead 
of  *the  earthen  vessels'  of  S.,  E.  A.  speak  of  'him  who 
guards  that  place,'  and  for  *  lest  any  of  those  who  go  to 


INTRODUCTION  xxiii 


that  place  should  be  burdened '  E.  A.  have  *  with  what 
they  offer  to  the  churches.' 

*  He  who  dwells  in  the  church'  of  E.  A.  represents  S., 
'  having  prayed  in  the  church.'     The  strange  variation  of 

*  was  stripped '  for  '  was  seen '  probably  arose  from  the 
Arabic  confusing  similarly  sounding  words.  'Third  hour' 
for  S-,  *  every  hour,'  is  a  proper  correction  of  E.  A.,  but  E. 
alone  has  at  the  sixth  hour  '  and  the  catechumens  shall 
make  a  great  prayer.'  The  Latin,  beginning  again  in  this 
canon  with  *  Deum  qui  non  mentitur,'  confirms  E.,  *  God 
who  faileth  not,'  lit.  *  who  lieth  not.'  Before  E.  S.  speak  of 
beginning  another  day,  A.  adds  '  when  thou  finishedst  the 
day.'  A.  omits  *  stars  and  trees  and  water '  of  S.  *  Plants ' 
of  E.  may  be  nearer  '  arbusta '  of  the  Latin.  It  is  worth 
notice  that  in  the  quotation  from  S.  Matt  xxv.  E.'s 
version  agrees  with  no  Greek  in  saying  *  Your  Lord  will 
come.'  S.  follows  the  received  text,  *  when  the  Son  of 
Man  Cometh,'  while  A.  and  the  Latin  read  the  neutral  text, 
omitting  '  Lord '  or  *  Son  of  Man.'  None  of  the  versions 
refer  to  S.  Peter's  denial,  but  all,  including  the  Latin, 
have  'the  children  of  Israel  denied'  In  the  exhortation 
at  the  end  of  the  times  of  prayer  A.  seenis  to  connect 

*  And  ye  shall  make  continual  remembrance '  with  the 
following  direction  for  signing  the  forehead.  '  Is  mani- 
fest against  Satan '  agrees  literally  with  the  Latin,  '  ad- 
versum  diabolum  manifestum,'  but  appears  to  have  been 
differently  translated  by  A.,  one  among  many  instances 
which  point  to  the  fact  that  there  was  another  Arabic 
version.  The  Latin  fragment  fails  when  the  text,  if  it 
had  continued,  might  have  thrown  light  upon  the  obscure 
passage  at  the  end  of  the  canon. 


XXIV  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

Here,  as  before,  E.  S.  pass  on  without  remark  to  the 
next  canon.  A.,  on  the  other  hand,  inserts  the  sig^nificant 
sentence,  *  These  are  the  canons  of  the  Church,'  notify- 
ing the  end  of  the  so-called  Egyptian  Church  Order, 
which  is  more  plainly  marked  by  the  Bohairic  statement 
of  finishing  the  2nd  (or  3rd)  and  of  beginning  the  3rd  (or 
4th)  book  of  the  Canons  of  the  Apostles  by  Clement 

Canon  (49,  48,  63)  corresponds  to  the  beginning  of 
the  eighth  book  of  the  Apostolic  Constitutions,  and  in 
the  heading  of  the  canon  concerning  the  gifts,  *  the  office ' 
represents  'ordinations'  of  S.,  but  E.  A.  add  *if  anyone 
has  obtained  such.*  E.  has  *  the  Gospel'  instead  of  'a 
place,'  and  omits  the  important  clauses,  *  whom  thou 
gavest  me '  and  *  to  do,'  which  latter  omission  A.  con- 
firms, yet  omits,  perhaps  by  accident,  *  but  I  know  thee.' 
*  New '  is  omitted  before  *  tongues,'  and  '  with  their 
hands '  added  by  E.  A.  S.  'Whom  the  word'  of  A.  S. 
is  changed  by  E.  to  *  who  by  the  Son.'  E.  keeps 
nearer  the  Greek  with  'like  Moses'  than  A.  S.,  'greater 
than  Moses.'  E.  adds  *  nor  did  they  believe  in  it'  after 
'put  to  shame,'  omitting  with  A.,  'in  the  hand  of  his 
servant  Moses.'  E.  has  'I  speak'  for  A.  S.,  'we  are 
speaking.'  E.  'the  unbelief  and  A.  'the  folly'  for  S 
'  the  veil '  of  the  Jews.  E.  omits  '  immaculate,'  and  with 
A.  also  the  name  '  Mary.'  E.  omits  '  God  the  word '  and 
the  quotation  '  endured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame,' 
merely  saying  '  was  crucified.'  E.  omits  '  forty  days.'  E. 
has  '  through  Christ,'  A.  S.  '  by  him,'  sc.  God.  E.  A. 
have  only  'of  fire'  for  S.,  'burning  fiery.'  E.  confirms 
the  Greek  of  Lagarde  with  '  all  working  of  signs.'  A.  S. 
omit  'all.'     E.  A.  S.  have  'we  have  before  said,'  but  S. 


INTRODUCTION  XXV 


connects  the  statement  with  the  following  words,  not 
making  a  fresh  canon  as  is  done  by  £.  A. 

In  Canon  50  (A.  49)  E.  has  *  nor  shall  they  say  :  The 
bishops  and  presbyters  are  taken  out  of  the  people,' 
whereas  A.  S.  agree  in  *if  there  were  no  lay  people 
over  whom  would  be  the  bishop  and  presbyter?' 
Neither  version  represents  the  Greek  of  Lagarde. 
Near  the  end  of  this  canon,  E.  omits  the  addition 
after  'graces'  and,  in  common  with  A«,  makes  a  fresh 
canon.  E.  confirms  the  Greek  of  Lagarde  with  '  they 
who  cast  out  devils,'  instead  of  A.  S.  '  if  demons  cast 
out  demons.* 

At  the  beginning  of  a  fresh  canon  (E.  A.)  *  persuaded ' 
of  E.  is  doubtless  a  mistake  for  '  pressed  down,'  but  has 
been  also  wrongly  translated  by  A.  from  S.  *  contented,' 
showing  again  the  independence  to  a  certain  extent  of 
E.  From  Zedekias  and  Akia  A.  has  passed  on  over  the 
passage  which  intervenes  before  these  names  recur.  E. 
adds  Kayafa  after  Fegor  and  styles  him  'self-murderer.' 
Hulda  (OUa)  and  Judith  are  mentioned  by  E.  A,  S.,  but 
E.  specifies  the  time  of  Josiah  and  A.  the  time  of 
Artaxerxes  (Adratarsis).  Esther  is  added  after  Ela 
( =  Hulda)  by  E.,  which  omits  to  distinguish  between 
the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  E.  A.  both  omit  'the 
daughter  of  Phanuel'  after  Hannah. 

Dr  Funk  regards  as  a  later  addition  the  warning  about 
unrighteous  prophets  and  the  like,  about  wicked  kings 
and  bishops  with  the  Old  Testament  examples,  and  the 
depreciation  of  prophets,  whether  men  or  women,  ending 
with  the  quotation  from  Isaiah  IxvL  2.  From  this 
point   E.   proceeds  to  give  a  further  very  interesting 


XXvi  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

addition,  consisting  of  two  long  passages:  (i)  chapters 
xi.,  xii.,  xiii.,  viii.  (in  this  order)  of  the  Didache,  (2) 
chapters  xxix.,  xxx.  of  the  Latin  Didaskalia  (Hauler). 
Before  the  first  extract  from  the  Didache  is  a  version 
of  the  precept  of  the  Council  of  Jerusalem  referred  to  in 
the  Didache,  chap.    vi.     Here   it   appears   without  the 

*  Western '  addition,  '  Whatsoever  things  ye  would  not  to 
be  done  to  you,  do  not  do  them  to  another/  but  adding, 
'  a  bone  shall  not  be  broken.'  The  agreement  with  the 
Didache  is  so  close  that  all  the  variations  may  be  given. 
E.  omits  'shall  be  received  as  the  Lord.'  E.  *one  day 
or  the  next  and  if  need  the  third,'  etc. ;  D.  '  one  day  and 
if  need  be  the  next,'  etc  E.  om.  section  6,  *  And  when 
the  apostle,'  etc.  E.  *  shall  be  proved  and  examined 
that  there  may  be  no  sin  in  him ' ;  D.  *  ye  shall  not  try 
nor  judge,  for  every  sin  shall  be  forgiven,  but  this  sin  shall 
not  be  forgiven.'  Section  8  E.  *And  everyone  that 
speaketh ' ;  D.  *  But  not  everyone  that  speaketh.'    D.  om. 

*  he  is  a  true  prophet'  1 1  E.  does  not  explain  the  obscure 
words  in  section  1 1,  but  improves  the  sense,  and  a  variant, 
'makes  an  assembly,'  gives  a  still  more  definite  meaning. 
In  xii.  3,  4,  E.  om.  '  and  eat,'  and  adds,  *  but  if  he  works 
not  he  shall  not  be  supported.'  E.  also  adds  after 
'trade'  *and  works  not,'  but  om.  'being  a  Christian.' 
In  xiii.  I,  E.  adds,  'thus  support  him,'  but  omits  2. 
In  6  E.  adds  'honey,'  and  says  'the  poor'  instead  of ' the 
prophets.'  Going  back  to  the  beginning  of  chap,  viii.,  for 
'Friday,'  E.  has  'the  evening,'  then  omits  'so  pray  ye* 
and  the  Lord's  Prayer. 

Before  chapter  xxix.  of  the  Didaskalia  (Hauler),  E. 
begins  the  passage  with  a   section  from  the  Ap.  Const 


INTRODUCTION  xxvii 


iL  chap.  IviL  (Syriac),  prefixing,  however,  'And  in 
your  Churches  ....  the  dwelling  of  God,'  and  ending 
with  the  disposition  of  the  congregation,  for  which 
purpose  the  ordinance  is  intended  With  the  Didas- 
kalia  (Hauler),  chap,  xxiv.,  E.  has  'districts,'  omitting 
'  other,'  also  omitting  '  aut  fidelis  et  si  de  ecclesia  est  et 
non  de  heresi.'  E.  inserts  '  The  presbyters  also  shall  sit 
in  their  own  several  places.'  Then  it  has  *  into  the  place 
which  is  seemly  for  him '  instead  of  *  communiter  in  loco 
vestro.'  E.  omits  the  direction  in  case  of  another  bishop 
coming  in,  and  continues  at  line  20  '  Si  autem,  etc,'  but 
has  *  either  a  man  of  the  district  or  from  other  districts ' 
instead  of  *aut  (peregrinus  aut)  de  ipso  loco  tuo.'  Then 
'thou,  presbyter '  instead  of  '  episcope,'  *  quiet '  instead  of 

*  inquietus,'  omitting  '  et  ipse  stabit.'  The  Latin  shows 
that  E.  should  be  translated,  *  If  youths  remain  sitting 
while  elder  men  have  risen  and  left  their  places.' 
And  again,  *  then  having  made  her  rise  up  '  corresponds 
to  *  earn  vero,  quae  non  cessit  (om.  E.)  exsurgens  facies, 
etc'  E.  inserts  *  Desire  to  make  large  churches,'  and 
continues  *Si  autem  egenus,  etc.,'  but  omitting  *et 
praeterea  senior  aetate.'  Further,  E.  has  'presbyter' 
instead  of  '  episcope,'  and  the  simpler  conclusion  instead 
of '  ut  non  fiat  aput  homines  a  te  personarum  acceptio, 
sed  aput  Deum  ministerium  tuum  placeat' 

E.  here  repeats  the  statement  which  came  at  the  end 
of  the  so-called   Egyptian   Church   Order,   substituting 

*  anything '  for  *  any  doctrine,'  and  thus  agreeing  with  A. 
S.  Then  E.  A.  S.  continue  together  according  to  Ap. 
Const  viiL  3,  but  the  first  passage  has  been  corrupted 
by  mistranslation  in  S.  of  '  tropos,'  character,  as  '  tupos,' 


xxviii  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


form  or  similitude.  Why,  however,  A.  should  have 
translated  *  charisma '  as  *  women '  is  less  easy  to  explain. 
E.  followed  this  mistake,  but  in  the  next  sentence  seems 
to  have  had  a  better  understanding  of  *  kephalaion,'  which 
A.  rendered  'chapter.' 

E.  A.  add  to  the  title  of  the  next  canon  'and  the 
ordinance  of  the  Oblation,'  using  their  distinctive  words 
Kiddas,  referring  to  the  sacredness  of  the  rite,  and 
j^uerban,  to  the  action  of  offering. 

E.  adds  'and  the  deacons'  to  those  who  are  to 
assemble,  though  A.  also  mentions  them  with  E.  directly 
afterwards.  On  the  day  of  the  sabbath  need  not  be 
inconsistent  with  Lord's  day  and  the  first  day,  by  taking 
sabbath  to  mean  '  week.'  The  Spirit  of  righteousness, 
the  Paraclete,  is  a  remarkable  addition  of  E.,  which,  how- 
ever, omits  altogether  the  praying  over  the  bishop, 
whereas  A.  mentions  the  prayers  of  the  congregation  in 
general  as  well  as  the  prayer  of  the  bishop.  E.  says 
nothing  about  placing  the  elements  (thysia)  on  the  hands 
of  the  bishop  as  S.,  nor  about  incense  as  A. ;  and 
E.  seems  to  make  all  the  bishops  sit  down,  which  is 
probably  a  misunderstanding.  A.  appears  to  allude  to 
other  reading  of  Scripture  besides  the  Gospel;  and  E. 
interposes  *  words  of  joy '  of  the  people  before  the  exhor- 
tation, and,  with  doubtless  defective  text,  makes  the 
bishop  and  not  the  deacon  go  up  to  cause  the  departure  of 
catechumens  and  others.  E.  A.  put  the  subdeacon  at  the 
door  of  the  women,  S.  makes  him  stand  at  the  door  of  the 
men.  This  is  of  small  importance,  as  also  the  variant 
of  E.  *  nor  enter  the  doors  of  the  Faithful,'  which  looks 
like  a  mistranslation.     E.  alone  directs   the  deacons  to 


INTRODUCTION  xxix 


close  the  gates  ;  and  E.  '  lest  they  should  hear  the  word ' 
again  suggests  a  wrong  rendering,  while  E.  '  lest  their 
days  should  be  few'  may  be  a  genuine  addition.  E. 
continues  without  any  rubrical  division  such  as  A.  S. 
mark  with  the  word  *  prospherein,'  meaning  that  the  action 
of  Oblation  is  about  to  begin,  though  E.  alone  adds  *  of 
the  sacrifice,'  A.  speaking  of  *  the  bread '  and  S.  of  *  the 
gifts/  E.  *  House  of  the  sanctuary '  looks  like  an 
Arabic  expression,  but  both  A.  S.  have  'altar.'  E.'s 
omission  of  *  on  the  right  hand '  can  hardly  be  correct 
Neither  A.  nor  E.  give  any  support  to  the  translation  of 
S. '  phakiolion '  as  stoles,  but  there  is  evidence  to  show  that 
stoles  were  thus  used.  Brightman,  LiturgieSy  renders 
'  linens,'  and  in  a  note  has  'phakiarion,  i.e.  facialis,'  with 
a  quotation  from  Palladius,  showing  that  it  means  linen. 
E.  adds  *  may  dwell  upon  them,'  and  gives  an  additional 
direction  for  the  bishop  to  '  say  the  coming  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.'  E.  mentions  subdeacons  and  readers  as  com- 
municating after  the  deacons.  A.  omits  subdeacons,  and 
S.  has  the  general  word  clergy. 

To  the  formula  of  communion  E.  adds  *  This  is  the 
bread  which  came  down  from  heaven,'  and  doubles  the 
Amen  after  the  reception  of  the  chalice.  E.  A.  omit 
mention  of  the  Blood  of  Christ  in  the  summons  of  the 
deacon  after  communion,  and  *  immortal,  belonging  to 
the  heavens'  as  epithets  of  the  holy  Mysteries.  A. 
omits  •  the  presbyters '  as  those  who  are  to  take  care  of 
the  fragments  which  are  left. 

In  the  heading  of  the  next  canon  E.  seems  to  make 
three  divisions:  (i)  presbyters  and  deacons,  (2)  sub- 
deacons,  (3)  deaconesses,   subdeaconesses,  and  female 


XXX  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

readers;  A.  omits  subdeacons,  while  S.  has  only 
presbyters  and  deacons,  because,  as  all  three  versions 
remark,  *  we  have  already  spoken  concerning  them.' 

The  confessor  is  not  to  be  ordained  as  such,  but  if 
need  require  £.  A.  direct  him  to  be  ordained  bishop  or 
presbyter,  while  S.  adds  deacon.  The  end  of  this  canon 
is  confused  :  £.  speaks  of  the  confessor  not  finishing  his 
course,  which  does  not  seem  good  sense.  A.  says  if  the 
confessor  is  angry  at  having  to  submit  to  ordination  for 
the  clerical  offices,  which  is  practically  the  same  as  S., 
which  describes  the  confessor  as  seizing  upon  an  office 
by  right 

E.  omits  *  exorcists  *  in  the  heading  of  the  canon,  but 
devotes  a  section  of  it  to  the  male  virgins,  who  appear 
to  have  the  character  and  gifts  of  the  exorcist.  E.  omits 
Anna  as  an  example  of  a  widow,  and  alters  the  last 
sentence  of  the  section  into  *  the  horse  and  the  mule  are 
not  controlled  except  by  a  strong  rein,'  without  any 
reference  to  the  passions. 

E.  adds  that  the  solitary  ordaining  bishop  should  be 
deposed,  as  well  as  the  man  whom  he  presumed  to 
ordain  alone ;  also,  in  allowing  one  bishop  to  ordain  in 
time  of  persecution,  adds  *  not  through  pride  and  un- 
belief E.  makes  a  new  canon  for  the  bishop's  functions, 
and  puts  the  blessing  of  first-fruits,  which  A.  S.  omit, 
before  ordination.  A.  must  be  in  error  when  saying 
that  the  Eulogia  or  *  bread  of  blessing'  is  not  to  be 
offered  by  presbyters.  E.  A.  S.  forbid  the  deacon  to 
give  the  Eulogia,  but  in  the  former  canon  it  was  only  the 
lay  people  who  were  debarred  from  this.  A.  omits  the 
section,  relating  to  the  inhibiting  power  of  the  deacon. 


INTRODUCTION  xxxi 


Among  those  whom  the  deacon  can  thus  treat  E. 
mentions  the  server  (or  minister)  of  the  Scripture,  as 
distinct  from  the  reader. 

Amongst  those  who  are  to  be  excluded  from  the 
Mysteries  E.  mentions  a  man  who  eats  of  the  house  of 
the  heretics  and  adulterers,  A.  speaks  of  a  man  who  is 
devoted  to  the  world,  while  S.  employs  the  Greek 
'pomoboskos.'  E.  adds  an  injunction  for  the  man  to 
leave  the  place  of  the  wicked. 

After  the  idol-maker,  who  may  mean  only  a  sculptor, 
E.  gives  a  general  reference  to  persons  of  another  people 
wishing  to  *  come  into  our  Law.'  *  The  diviner  with  earth 
and  ashes  and  fruit  of  trees  and  anything  else  with  which 
the  heathen  sorcerers  work'  is  peculiar  to  E.,  which 
differs  considerably  in  the  occupations  of  the  other  ex- 
cluded persons,  A  and  S.  being  in  closer  agreement 
about  them.  A  E.  make  a  fresh  canon  for  the  con- 
cubine, and  E.  enjoins  the  emancipation  by  a  believer  of 
a  slave  in  this  condition,  and  his  marriage  with  her.  A. 
S.  speak  of  putting  her  away,  but  this  may  rather  mean 
setting  her  free.  A.  S.  refer  again  to  the  theatre  and 
other  amusements  besides  those  who  go  after  Jewish 
and  heathen  fables,  E.  significantly  omitting  to  condemn 
words  of  the  Jews.  A.  E.  begin  a  fresh  canon  for 
morning  prayer  and  going  to  instruction,  in  which  canon 
A.  *  better  than  work '  need  not  imply  any  difference  of 
reading,  *  work '  and  *  thing '  being  the  same  word  in  S. 

Before  introducing  a  long  passage  which  is  peculiar  to 
E.,  that  version  shows  the  later  character  of  this  new 
text  by  a  confusion  of  arrangement.  Canon  65  of  E., 
like  S.  in  Canon   75,  continues  with  an  injunction  for 


XXXli  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

believers  to  treat  their  servants  with  kindness ;  but  after 
heading  a  new  canon,  '  Concerning  the  resting  on  both 
the  sabbaths/  it  repeats  the  previous  order,  with  the 
same  reference  to  former  teaching. 

Then  comes  the  insertion,  a  long  amplification  of  the 
reason  for  not  working  on  the  sabbath  and  First  day. 
This  short  homily  speaks  of  the  institution  of  the 
sabbath  in  Genesis,  and  quotes  Exod.  xxxi.  13;  then, 
with  just  a  mention  of  the  First  day  as  being  kept  in 
honour  of  the  Resurrection,  refers  to  the  prophets  by 
whom  God  ordered  the  observance  of  the  sabbaths. 
Many  words  of  Isaiah  Ivi.  3-8  are  cited,  and  two 
sentences  of  commentary  set  forth  that  the  plural 
'sabbaths'  means  the  two  days  Saturday  and  Sunday, 
and  that  the  words  'those  who  are  gathered  from 
another  people*  (the  sons  of  the  stranger)  foretold  the 
Christian  people.  Omitting  this  passage,  A.  devotes  a 
new  chapter,  66,  to  the  other  days  upon  which  work 
must  not  be  done.  S.  continues  75  and  E.  begins  67 
with  similar  text.  E.  alone  mentions  the  forty  days 
in  reference  to  the  Ascension,  and  describes  the  Holy 
Spirit  as  Paraclete,  and  with  A.  omits  'upon  us  the 
Apostles.'  E.  gives  a  special  word  for  the  Nativity, 
explaining  it  as  *  the  birth  of  our  Lord  Christ.'  E.  A. 
omit  'of  the  Father'  after  the  Word,  and  the  title 
Theotokos,  A.  saying  '  Mary  the  Virgin,'  and  E.  '  our 
Lady,  Mary.*  E.  alone  mentions  the  name,  '  Epiphany,' 
of  the  day  which  S.  A.  call  the  feast  or  solemnity  of  the 
bathing  or  washing.  The  following  words  about  the 
witness  borne  at  the  Baptism  of  our  Lord  appear  con- 
fused in  all  three  versions,  of  which  S.  is  nearest  to  the 


INTRODUCTION  xxxiii 


Greek.  Stephen  is  called  by  E.  *  chief  deacon  and  first 
martyr/  by  A.  *  the  first  martyr/  and  by  S.  *  martyr  and 
chief  deacon.' 

In  the  heading  of  the  next  canon,  A.  S.  (continuing 
the  canon)  omit  mention  of  the  time  of  sleep  and  mid- 
night, but  all  three  agree  afterwards,  speaking  only  of 
prayer  at  night  (or  evening)  and  cock-crow.     Providing 
for  an  impossibility  of  going  to  church,  E.  does  not  specify 
Kiddas  (A.)  or   Synaxis   (S.),    but  says   merely  'make 
prayer.*     E.  A.  omit  '  what  part  has  Christ  with  Belear  ? ' 
E.  substituting  '  believers   with  doubters.'     E.  A.  *  ex- 
communicated'  is  probably  an  error  for  '  be  separated,' 
i.e.  from  one  another.     E.  seems  to  have  a  special  word 
'  memorial '  for  the  observance  which  A.  S.  describe  as 
the  'days  which  it  is  right   to  observe,'  and   adds   the 
thirty  days,  forty  days,  and  a  half  year,  and  among  other 
small  differences  alludes   to   the   object   of  giving  the 
goods  of  the  dead  to  the  poor  as  *  propitiation  for  their 
soul.'     E.  throws  no  light  upon  the  supposed  apocryphal 
quotation,  but  after  saying  'from  his   work'  instead  of 
'and  his  work,'  adds  'and  lo!  the  man  who  is  good — 
they  say  his  work  is  also  (good).'     E.  appears  to  enforce 
the  duty  or  propriety  of  praying  for  the  departed  ;  S.,  and 
perhaps  A.,  refer  to  the  power  or  ability  to  benefit  by 
prayer.     The  authorities  of  the  church  in  A.  E.  are  the 
presbyters  and  deacons,  in  S.  the  bishops  and  presbyters. 
•  Who  follow  the  name '  is  probably  a  misapprehension  of 
A.,  which  can  hardly  have  translated  S.  in  the  quotation 
from  Proverbs  xxiii.  29,  30,  or  have  been  translated  by 
E.     There  is  some  confusion  in  the  heading  and  canon 
about  the  victims  of  persecution,  and  the  use  of  the  w 


XXXIV  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

*  together,'  omitted  by  E.,  and  translated  *  withal  'in  A., 
is  obscure.  A.  further  confuses  the  end  of  this  canon 
with  the  beginning  of  the  next  subject,  which  S.  numbers 
as  a  new  canon,  but  without  the  usual  heading.  E.  adds 
'  the  Father,'  where  S.  has  only  *  God,'  and  A.  *God  the 
Lord,'  but  the  form  of  the  sentence  is  changed.  E.  A. 
have  'day  and  night,'  S.  'night  and  day.'  E.  alone 
mentions  *  winds '  and  '  days,'  omitting  '  the  elements,' 
omitting  also  with  A.  *  if  the  elements  transgress  not  the 
limits  which  God,  the  demiurgus  of  the  universe,  defined 
for  them.'     Instead  of  *  we  are  knowing,  etc.,'  E.  A.  have 

*  they  fear  not  his  judgment  which  is  prepared  for  them 
who  do  this  thing.'  E.  has  'who  think  to  do,  etc.,' 
making  two  sentences,  with  the  same  result  as  A.  S. 
E.  omits  'some  turned  aside  after  their  vanity.'  E.  A. 
spoil  the  meaning  of  the  sentence  by  leaving  out  *  not ' 
before  '  with  signs,'  led  astray  perhaps  by  the  form  of  the 
S.  sentence,  which  placed  the  negative  particle  after  the 
verb.  E.  has  followed  A.  in  rendering  *  the  whole  * 
(ministration)  by  'all  the  world,'  which  indeed  it  can 
mean  in  other  context.  It  is  perhaps  remarkable  that  the 
only  place  where  the  literal  rendering  of  the  unpointed 
Arabic  makes  an  impossible  sense  occurs  at  the  end  of 
this  sentence,  as  has  been  pointed  out  in  the  footnote  of 
E.  A.  numbers  thirteen  Apostles,  but  agrees  with  S.  in 
making  Clement  and  James  the  speakers,  E.  retaining 
the  fiction  of  the  Apostles  speaking.  E.  speaks  only 
of  *  presbyters   and   deacons,'  A.  adds  *  reader,'  and  S. 

*  subdeacons  and  readers,'  in  this  order.  E.  alone 
makes  Stephen  the  first  martyr  and  omits  '  Father,' 
while  A.  has  only  *the  Father.'      In  the  last  sentence 


INTRODUCTION  XXXV 


E.  seems  to  have  mistaken  the  word  *  true '  for  *  they 
believed/ 

The  prayers  which  conclude  the  E.  Statutes  are  placed 
in  another  position  in  the  earlier  manuscripts,  before  the 
canon  (67)  which  defines  the  times  of  prayer.  Except  the 
first,  '  of  early  morning,'  they  all  occur  in  the  baptismal 
service  published  in  Latin  by  Petrus  Abbas  in  1548. 
MigTie,  Patrologue  cursus  completus  Latitue^  vol.  cxxxviii. 
col.  938  and  foil.,  republished  them  at  length,  but  they 
are  omitted  by  Denzinger  as  not  really  belonging  to  the 
service,  in  which  point  he  may  be  incorrect,  because  a 
similar  series  of  prayers  is  introduced  into  the  form  of 
consecration  of  churches  and  of  the  chrism  published 
by  Tuki.  The  order  differs  in  Migne  (Petrus).  After 
the  rivers  come  the  prayers  for  peace,  the  Papas,  the 
King,  the  congregation,  the  catechumens,  the  offerers, 
the  departed. 

In  this  brief  comparison  of  the  versions,  the  printed 
translations  have  been  followed  without  regard  to  the 
collations,  which  should  be  carefully  examined  by  the 
student,  who  will  find  many  omissions  in  the  earlier 
manuscripts. 


THE  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  MANUSCRIPTS 

Ethiopic 

All  the  following  MSS.  contain  the  whole  Sinodos  or 
collection  of  Canon  Law  in  somewhat  various  forms,  two 
of  the  MSS.  (793  and  795)  beginning  with  the  Testa- 
mentum  Domini  nostri ;  and  are  written  on  vellum  : — 

a.  Brit.  Mus.,  Or.  793,  in  three  columns  and  38  lines  of 
small  excellent  writing,  dated  by  the  name  of  the  king  lasu 
II.,  1 730-1 755,  marked  in  the  collation  as  a.,  and  having 
the  same  text  as  795,  of  the  same  date,  but  rather  larger 
writing,  in  three  columns  and  31  or  32  lines.  In  the 
printed  text  the  letters  have  been  usually  changed  to  suit 
Dillmann's  lexicon. 

b.  Brit.  Mus.,  Or.  794,  in  two  columns  and  34  lines, 
undated,  but  ascribed  to  the  earlier  part  of  the  fifteenth 
century,  marked  in  the  collation  as  b.  This  MS.,  usually 
agreeing  with  e.  and  v.,  gives  undoubtedly  an  earlier  form 
of  the  text  than  a.,  but  on  account  of  many  imperfections 
it  was  thought  better  to  print  the  more  continuous  and 
intelligible  text  of  a.,  while  calling  special  attention  to  the 
earlier  readings. 

c  Brit  Mus.y  On  796,  in  three  columns  and  27-29  lines, 

dated  by  the  name  of  the  king  1 730-1 755,  marked  in  the 

collation  as  c.     This  MS.  contains  a  third  form  of  the 

xxxvi 


THE  DBSCRIPTION  OF  THE  MANUSCRIPTS        XXXVti 


text,  which  sometimes  suggests  a  nearer  relation  to  a 
Greek  original,  particularly  in  the  numeration  of  the 
canons,  but  the  frequent  omissions  due  to  homeoteleuton 
prevented  the  choice  of  it  for  printing. 

A  Berlin  396,  in  two  columns  and  20  lines,  dated  by  the 
name  of  the  king  and  the  queen  (mother)  Walatta 
Giorgis,  circa  1758,  marked  in  the  collation  as  d 

e.  Berlin  398,  in  two  columns  and  23-30  lines,  and 
placed  by  Dillmann  in  the  fifteenth  century,  marked  in  the 
collation  as  e. 

V.  Vatican,  in  two  columns  and  31  lines,  probably  of 
the  fifteenth  century,  and  marked  in  the  collation  as  v. 
This  was  Ludolfs  MS.,  but  he  appears  to  have  made 
emendations  in  the  small  part  which  he  printed. 

There  are  three  other  MSS. :  at  Tubingen,  in  the 
Abbadie  collection  (65),  and  in  Paris  (121),  but  these 
have  not  been  examined 

Arabic 

a.  Vatican  149,  150  (Mai,  p.  275),  marked  in  the  colla- 
tion as  a.  This  MS.  is  said  by  Assemani  to  have  been 
written  by  the  compiler  of  the  collection  of  canons  and 
decrees  of  Councils  which  it  contains,  but  the  date  a.d. 
1372  will  scarcely  allow  this,  because  Makarah  probably 
died  before  1350.  He  was  a  monk  of  the  Nitrian 
monastery  of  Bu  Yuhannes  the  Little,  and  wrote  either 
during  the  patriarchate  of  Cyril  Laklak  (i 235-1 243)  or 
soon  after  his  death.  This  information  is  derived  from 
IRiedd,  Kirchenrechisquellen,  p.  122,  which  appeared  in 
1000,  after  it  had  been  decided  to  print  the  text  from 


•  •• 


XXXVm  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


MS.  The  Bodleian  Uri  6i  (Hunt.  31)  contains  the  same 
compilation,  but  dates  from  a.d.  1681.  Brit.  Mus.  19 
(Rich.  721 1),  imperfect  and  dated  1682,  gives  the  name 
of  the  compiler,  Makarah  (Macarios). 

b.  Bodleian  40  (NicoU,  p.  41  ;  Hunt.  458),  marked  in 
the  collation  as  b.  This  MS.  of  the  fourteenth  century  is 
imperfect,  and  was  restored  in  a.d.  1667.  The  text  differs 
very  slightly  from  a.,  and  is  more  correctly  pointed.  The 
fifth  section  contains  the  following  statement,  which  is  of 
considerable  importance :  *  The  Canons  of  the  Apostles 
by  Clement  which  the  Melchites  and  Nestorians  trjins- 
lated  into  the  Arabic  and  united  in  one  book.  Among 
the  Melchite  and  Jacobite  Syrians  they  are  counted  as  83, 
and  in  the  Law  of  Christendom  of  Ibn  et  Tajjib  82  ;  the 
Copts,  however,  have  made  them  into  two  books,  of  which 
one  has  71  and  the  other  56  canons.  The  contents  of 
the  two  are  in  great  measure  the  same.  This  explanation 
is  taken  from  the  preface  to  the  Nomocanon  of  the 
Shaykh  as  Safi  ben  al  'Assal.'  These  canons  are  the 
Statutes,  and  it  appears  from  the  above  that  they  existed 
in  Syriac.     They  have  been  collated  with  a. 

Saidic 

The  Saidic  fragments  of  which  the  text  or  collations 
have  been  printed  were  indicated  to  the  editor  by  Mr 
Crum,  who  examined  the  volumes  at  Paris  and  Oxford, 
and  has  catalogued  those  of  the  British  Museum. 
Meanwhile  Dr  Leipoldt  discovered  some  of  these  frag- 
ments, and  edited  and  translated  the  most  important  of 
them  with  his  translation  of  the  third  part  of  the  Canones 


THE  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  MANUSCRIPTS        XXxix 


Ecclesiastici.  He  generously  allowed  the  editor  to  see 
the  publication  before  it  came  out,  and  relieved  him  of 
the-  necessity  of  printing  the  Coptic  text.  The  editor 
desires  to  express  much  gratitude  for  this  service,  and 
also  to  acknowledge  the  help  given  him  by  Professor 
Margoliouth  of  Oxford  and  Professor  Guidi  of  Rome. 
Through  the  kindness  of  the  latter  he  was  enabled  to  give 
a  collation  of  the  Vatican  MS.,  and  he  is  also  indebted  to 
him  for  corrections  of  the  translation  of  the  Ethiopia 


Or*  Tos 

Cft-tn* 
frft  I  tiCft-f  ft  ■ 

Xl^Cf  A  >  •nchA-'l^A  1 0J&IM  *  mfbJHk  ■  X-t4i*  ■  AX*T 

lUt  > '  AKxr cii  *  hknxoA  >  A.r  a>a  >  iicA'f  a  >  ••j^i  i 
ACKAh*^  I  h««  I  f.Vf[h  ■  tf-A*  I  Miftkrva^  >  «»ii?  <  nh 

d:  *  t4«*A^  a  0^414:  >  ^4Rt  a  •A'flP  i  hfT'^Affl.A  i 
•tfa^Ail  I  HKIflA  *  Aih-H- 1  mr^uac  ■  H^>lA'  >  h«a  i  J&JC 
?A  I  ^v»C;^  I  AIM*  >  llCAi;r>  *  AA/WO-  a  «ipii  i  li«a  i  J&«1 
IK-  *  KrAA  I  lltfA- 1 0-A+ 1  A*T^^i  «h«ai  J^^^O-iXr 
i  I  tf'A*  >  CA<h^  I  «^rf>  I  XA«a  ■  tfAF«a-  <  f  «-/^h>>  OA 
A-h  *  ll^*}  1 0X1+ 1  HA^o*  <  •A.^tlh  I  «KHHi  i  lltfa  i  liL 

>•  >  ln•^  t  >74:  *  ^-A-f  <  l^A•  <  ^Af*  a  9f.%^<aii  I  ii«a  iito* 

1  •  tf-A*  I  AAfiXrU  t  nh^a  I  Kllli;  >  AI  ■  XlltXt  *  A-i*  i 

A I  «iiiiic  I  ^A- *  ii«a  I  txinni' 

£+ 1  XX^9>  a 


h0"  I  l^rfii-^  i  OK'}  I  i- 1  tf-A'  1  Hi-«<ua  I  A)  > » A.IVTX  * 

?f  >  aii'ttf.  i  Af-JilA  I  j&^?1C  >  4»£-0"  ■  j&lk  >  r-AlA  i  XA 
fl" » |fl"Il9^ » fSA-^ll* » K*n* «  fcA-t «  AAJ&«^  •  oiXA 
•t « h'P^  •  ••A+ » Ht « |fl"W^  •  ¥Afli^  •  «»fl"W « AJt» 
^  I  iftf-Xi:  I  h0"  I  ;l^4>f;  t  AXf  tLX-fUbC  >  Xr  Atih  i  aA 
A|^  I  Oitdr  I  A-ah  >  a»^A«(k  >  XA^"  ■  m-h*  *  tJ^ih  <  X 
i*^  a  Ht:  >  j&X*  •  «*W*  •  l-XHTI  •  «llAX;^l  I  HI:  I  JB.X 
•fc  I  h0v  I  ;l-f:4»C  *  fUlh  >  ho"  >  )f:Ah  i  ain't:  <  tf-A*  *  A1* 
at(Lf  ^  *  hVit^tt  >  n't:  • 

3.  1*XHTHpi  ^Ik  i  •7*?»A  «  tf-A- » HX.I-K.+A- 1  J&lfl 
f*  ■  Ah  I  M+t  >  X.^ac  <  AhAXh  •  'Ulii  I  0-Xi:  >  II^X 
AX  >  ACXAh  >  Kt-nac »  AIiAM  «  mM-n  *  XilTCA  i  X 

4.  *XHll  •  g^ » i&a.  I  KfCh « A,1-*1'A  I  K:A  •  nKt 
na»- 1  «X.^^A7  i  Af  *  I  IdAi-  •  A.1*/»'C4»  •  •X.^-lhl  • 

x.^^A'  i  f  xf  X  >  1X-A I  a«-Ai-  >  hciM  *  x<^  >  •x.xr 

f^i,  I  t-OAA  >  X.^^A-  ■  tfX.^^'f:  >  71V-  >  AhAXh  *  m 
KT'i'fX  •  a»X.1-ffAX  • «"« « XrA-OX « aiX.^thl  i  Ar5« 
IMiA^  ■  mK'tWi  <  MIL  *  Wtf-  *  AdA  <  <>")•%  «  •X.+rfi 
A.  I  h0»  I  ^f  OC I  Xthf  I  tfX.^lh?  I  HllAib  ■  Afh  1  •HtlA 
K I  A4>>|  XA0"  1  HtlAiW'  A4)>>0»/^'IC^i«-X'|:iAi*^a 

aXj&lh?  I  tiCh  I  h  I  ^-f  I  oiX.^lh?  I  <h4t  •  ttX.^thl  1 
'ilAX>        "YAAi        *^««ic        'tfX.^tl'^i 


5-  1-XHTI 1 6'  i  ^IL I  MJC'C^A  •  ikOiAJCT  i  T*f  ^  •  W» 

A^  I  flo^^"  i  MA'tt » ••A+ 1  tl-A  ■  Xfttf"  1  tf»9^i  J»k1i 

^  I  t^A  I  XAo"  I  mi:  *  fJdn  1 0^«CA  ■  xii-r  • 

6.  1-Mni  I  J»  I  j&&  *  ^AikA  >  MDA£Y  *  X.^th7  >  /L;^ 

^^AT- 1  A'OXA.  >  cJit  >  «AAt  I  Alrf-A*  »  XAo"  *  9^n^  * 
piVi  I  <i»Aih^  I  ^K-fc  >  XAo"  i  /tn  I  f 't'OC  i  PVi  i  0"<l^  > 
f*AA  I  <:^0^  1 XA0"  *  «*X'|:  I  UT'A  *  AHJ^lflC  i  m-VH  *  0 
ft-  *  0»7/ik  I  diHk  >  ffoUkt  >  ••K'i:  I  AM:a  >  AX0»  *  ^hOi 

i/^  I  r  A^tf-  ■  Irf-ft- 1 0"f  «Ai-  *  C1[|-4t  I  a^a«-K>  i  AM  i 
J&X'fc*  *  Wh  •  atKt^f:^P  *  ht^h*  ■  •flXA.  i  tfX^^hU 

A»  •  j&^A^A  •  1«^^  i  hfl»  I  j6Cfcj&  i  JTA-t  ■  A:*"!!  •  fl"^ 

«.  f  ^^  I  JM<:  •  fl"911i*^  •  hfl»  »  hJ»'/^¥«^  •  A^«l 
">»  0^+ » 7fU>  Xh-i& »  ^JM*  1  fl'^l" » m^^m't  •  Kti* 

J&  *  I  tf-Xi:  a  0^0 1  j&VOf*  *  ^Jf-f  t  0»f  dA  t  HX^OA  i  f  m.  Mb. 
♦*C<. «  00^4-^ « j6h*+  •  Xjn'»+  •  oi^a  I  f^JfJp^  • 
Xi?71^  I  AA«X  I  f^-dt'  I  M:^0o*  ■  0^0  i  fOgrthpa^'  i  A 
IIU  •  Xa4  *  •^a»f  I  j&4A4f*0<»*  i  0j&^K./*'4i.  >  O^T'A  1 1 


'>rti>        'AJtAi        *XAae.        *t*o.e. 


Wtf*  I  aA.Al^A  I  ^J&l  ■  XA0»  i  ami:  *  fM9^  t  n*^  • 

8.  I-KHH  •  g'  1  j&Oi  •  ^**«  1  XoiAXrf  «  K'tWi  » 11* 

•OA I  a^'hrc^  *  «A.i-iii/^  I  fl/«  *  hA0"  I  Uli:  *  tf- 

A*  I  f^ati  •  -Mk  I  Xr Ab  I  <q^*  ■  mK't\t'i  ■  '•^lAfl  I 

>•  All  •  "I^l*  • 

« *  hH*^  >  rfiA*  *  f^oiiX:  I  'M  i  AC^  a  mK^XtJ  *  «^t 

&  >  mC't  I  «\.009t&  >  i'«J('A  I  h*}-!:  >  XA0"  >  Ifli:  >  tf-A*  * 

fs-hm*'}  I  :iinjki- 1  a^aA'A  ■  "litt  <  AC^  ■ 

10.  tMH  •  1 1  ^Ik  •  j6ih>S  •  ik« AJef  i  A.l'lhl » «•"»• 

^th?  ■  ^fh  >  ttJk.i-lJ'^  >  mKt^A, '  KM  >  hAo"  ■  fllll 

CA1» » A«»7"l/»'+  •  A^y*  ■  thl  •  fl'A'MUA  •  «0»<ii^  •  • 
AATt  i  a7iuai  I A-O I  Xn^A•  ■  XhJ&  I  VKitUi  ■  :»aUi*  • 
«)!•'}  >  -U  >  «*4i.i-  *  ai+<l4Hl  •  a<:<l£- 1  M*^A  i  II  |  A*V 
Mu*  a  «A.**<iaj&  I  wK'tdiL  I  )«Ah  >  9*AA  I  dttfi  *  K 
A » 7*AA « A«X  •  HXr^l  •  a»1-Hi.;M  •  tftf-A- 1  UdMh  *  +• 

11.  ^XHIf'TSi  ^Oi  •  -f^A  I  hnfiif^  I  hUHOi  >  ^A I 
X^fc-OfkC  >  HM I  Ah  I  rWif-t  <  AA1J&0*  ■  tfttUAh  1  Jh 

A++ « iHic  •  hv^e « hfl»  •  -01+  i  9^ih  i  oii-Hhi;  1  ••^ 


'  A^i*  •      •  fun  i 


JW/^Jk. » XT^+  ■  Mk  i  Of •«  I  hrhC  I  Kft+  i  ttoMkWt  I 
mftcar  I  AX^HLK « aXA  *  flffjiy*  *  fOim^  •  /*'A'A»  i  Ad 
A  *  tf-A*  1 0"AMi^  *  mfifjipa^  •  jB.)h>*  i  AtA«-A^  >  0^9* 
4A  >  H^m^t  I XA I  MAf  I XIL  •  hr-t^Cfi  I  -OhA.^  > « 
M+f.  •  r/^m.i  I  »•  AA I  hA.A » ♦*»  •  •i6l-^A'M»  •  fl»^ 
A-  *  llhl  •  fliJ^Ji'ttK- 1 094*^  I  ?A%ir«»-  •  a»tA«-A^  i  h 
A  i  flf«n  i  J&JCU4I  •  •jtl'^JS'Jk.  i  ••A+ » TP'^b*  hfl»i  j6 
lh>*  i  J(-Aft  I  AtHIC  t  oij&AJK'A^  I  MLf»%^9  *  A>1^  •  «t 
49*A^A  t  XA I  Vi9>r  ■  f  «hA(^  >  aXlt  >  tf-A- 1  AiH-a  I  h0"  I 

15.  tXHTI  I  Tg  I  0M+ » •t.««»+  i  Kfr7Affl.A  •  JtlL  1  / 

*>  I  f  AH- 1  vf  f  *  m^v*d»  I  i**f  J&  ■  Ufd/n  ■  <hie^  <  AAd 
Ai:  I  -M  *  a.•^  I  tlCAi:^  *  UJ^llhC  ■  Our  ■  If^k  «  aij^lh?  t 

^«iflc  I  fliiMaa  1 0iij&«"AK  <  xm  >  iiam  *  ^a*  ■  Mi)- 1 

16.  tKHH  •  2X  >  ^Oi  1 1*Ph  •  V+Vl* »  ^ff'ffli'- 1  a 
<•  I  flXTi*  I  tf-A*  *  0"AMl^  ■  X7H  ( J&h0-y-  *  ft>0^  I  Af*^  1 

A>  I  ^1^- 1  nijcai  *  01IW'  I  tioMlfi  *  «^lil.;^)  •  aiHX.ti>>  > 

^Yhi'T-^i  •  0  Mh  AJk  I A470O*  1  «A.0"^1*'7)  1 XA 
«»94-r  ■ /*TA?  •  A'OXAi  I  fliM  "  •X^A'Atf- 1  Alfl  t 


aid"!-!:  t  r  A<WU-  ■  itlh  i  IQC^i  ■  ikn  >  ACKAtl*^  t  0I114. 1 
0X7+ » M+C* » ^A+ » mthmt  I  «7aitl  •  IWih^ » II 

+Xinft  I  O*  i  Wf-lUt  i  tf-A-*^  » /5+97C » iLTITA  • 
14.  t-hntl  i  18  •  0K7+ 1  "tfli»+ 1  fc.A.A  •  *1tH  •  AXfl"  1 
bL  as>.  14 1  ahh*  •  -fMbC  >  HP  I  ilrOh  1 1  't^l  >  aoyf^qj  *  «AX 
0»  >  Jk.OlPV  I  Alt'O  >  hao  I  j&f  Of.  I  t-O^i- 1  A;wA.Ai4Mk* 

h*  >  •fUbC  I  mfao^CPn^  i  aXA+«h9'1*  >  OMi-  *  IIJ&IIA 
^•*- 1  AlfU  >  vf  i&  ■  AXtf"  >  W  >  ••hi:  I  -aXA.  >  IIP  *  Id 
If  I  tf^J&  *  M^ihU-n  >  HhlflA  I  ffoUi^  1 011  K^QA  •  0"^  1 

0"¥+6  >  X^JC'V^  >  hf:A  >  AChA- 1  mhjli^  *  «Jft.a"M 
f  >  02k.lf J&0»AA*  >  Ain't: «  OMf?^  I  mhh^  I  Ii)  >  t^h-P  I 
HMQA I  'flhA.^  I  «AK0»A  I  ^••Aa  >  hth-t  >  ttXlflA  *  )&«• 
f 7*  i  M.A  1 4 jtA  <  J&inc  >  ^-A^y  ■  mf'ttt  >  11+4+^  •  ^ 
rvC-t  >  u^f  >  ajB.lh'}  <  IIJ&tiA  I  -tCT^  I  0"Ji;h«+  •  «A 

•am  i  «^<:  ■  r  aa  >  irf-A*  i  A-ox  ■  h0»  >  x^^h-)!  i  xA. 

A  *  «M  >  01^.7"}+:^ '  AJ&th?  I  IIA-iL  •  f»Q,  •  f-ihlA  1 KK 
A  >  4AA  >  H^ff  9"  1  AXtf"  1  XX0"£  >  i-^4>P  *  «¥^£  ■  Kn, 
hHUU:  ■  H^l^Atf-  •  rUl^ih  I  j&ipf  flv  I I+40OA+  *  XA  • 
X0"hCP«»- 1  rnfiAh'  1 1rf-A*«^  I  Mi  I  ll Aiki:  1 X  A  *  v^Ai:  1 


^i/^h.  •  itT9+ » XA » Of -n  I  hrhc  I  WW-  •  A^AMrt-  • 
0f  tea-  *  AX^HLK  >  oXA  >  a0;'r  >  j&b^-t-  >  /^A'<qt  *  Ad 

A  •  tf-A*  ■  0"  AXIl^  I  nfM^MPa*- 1  J&)|<).  i  At A«-A^  <  flfcr 
4A  >  h^m^t  1  hA  •  MAf  I XIL  >  Xr•^^CP  I  •QhA.^  >  • 
^•H-  *  9*/**^.^  >  9*AA  I  ikA.A  1 4 M  t  m9^i^f:\jp  i  an- 
Ar  >  MM  I  «^^J>'flh>  I  W9^t  >  7ACir<^  •  «tA«-A^  i  K 
A  >  Of «n  >  jBrJClHi  I  ff^^J^K- 1  «-Ai- 1 9*/*'4»A  I  h0»  I  j& 
lih)-  >  £-A1^  I  AtKIC  >  nfJti?:f:9 1  AllJ&JlAF  >  AA^  «  «t 
4«*A^AiKAia0Ji9*  I  fihAfi  <  OXl-h  1 1rf-A- ■  ailHl  i  ho"  ■ 

15.  thHH  I  IS  I  0M+  i  «l.fl»+ 1  K9T7Affl.A  •  JM.  i  ^ 
^-  >  X^lhl  *  '011-^  *  YkC '  »KM&  *  0A.i-AAt  ■  tfj&tl' 

Ai:  i  -)a  I  &+  *  hcftiin  >  iii&ithc  *  auf  ■  im  •  a^ihii 

^inc  i  ONMOa  ■  a»HJ&«"AK  I  Km  >  ilAM  I  ^A- 1  fclD*  ■ 

16.  ^HHiIJiJ&O.  •  •T'tPA  »  V+Vl* »  fM»ta^  I  a 

h«"  *  tftlfV  I  fUir^  1  |«C  *  fAtr  *  tf-A*  I  iic  ■  0  j&t0"h 
<-  *  OKH- 1  tf-A*  *  0"AKtl^  •  MU I  i&ll«^i  ft>0^i  Af*9  ■ 
If-A-^*  *  <|i1HI  *  h«»  I  UKi  I  fUlA-fc  I  -flXA.^  *  «X  All4i  1 0 
A*  I  ^^-  *  mXlh  I  •HMh  *  0"<hC^V  *  «t-iiH;l-)  •  «iH\.ti><  1 
^•TI-^I^^V  a  tfAjni AJw  •  A4?«^  *  mh^0»^^Mi  *  KA«»  < 
«»94^  ■ /^A?  •  AilM.  I  Aifl.'d  a  •Jk^A'A*- •  AIA  *  K 


8 


Irf-A*  I  tHlC  I  adflj&  t  mOVCtt  i  a  j&^9tfl-  i  airf-A-  >  t$:!h  ■ 
00 » Kf^aHA***^  I  H|6*li)CP*^  ■  am  i  KT'^-A***** » 
IIMKAF»«^ » am  I  Kf'^'A** *^  •  lljW/»'*F»«^  I  am  I II 

17-  t-KHH « li  •  OM't » fl"1A^l « J&ailli4^»J6»»f"Ti 

vAA  >  0"^Aa^  I  tiAjk  I  hnm » fh+oin  >  ajuH-  ■  nx 
*>  I  nil)  >  XjitA  <  hrjan  i  ^7ac  i  -)a  i  ma^  <  m  ■  r^ii 

119 1  ttihfir » hfl» » ^l/^ht  •  ni»»9|6  ■  •1'1'9+il  I  a»;^ 
Xrc  *  i-AKb  I  Mhm'h^  i  a»A.^)h7  •  n^V^d-t  i  ^QA  * 

fpA.^li-7  >  Ah&i- 1  h0"  >  KJ'f:CA  i  ifl.^  i  ^j>y  i  oijiAf- 1 

(UkA.^  •  aiAX0"  I  d.tS^t'  <  XJit:  >  ^flC  <  9^Q^  i  v^f  > 
A1"f  nc  •  ah0"  >  ^Mru  >  h0"  I  ^nn  >  Afl  t  ')ik^  I  Ml 

a.  «sb.  i8.  1*KHTI  •  Tg  I  nK1+ 1 V+S"^ » hfl"  1 1  jth**. « inc 
/*  I  rinc » w»¥|6  •  J&fk  •  X^A-cy  A » V#91- « ^h**- » IOC 
fi » 7*ia<: » w»¥|6 » fl^A.^ »  •flfl"9Al' »  flW-A-  »  ••A+  • 
tf-A*  >  ""h*}  >  a» Jij&^<in»  >  AdA  •  >i{^  >  of^iOifn  •  oiA. 
/£>A^  *  Am  I  K-OdA^  •  0|h^F*<^  I  MA  >  KAPo"*  •  mf 
OUpa^ » W"» » B+CiL « a»f  fcinfF»fl«»*  1 AXA  •  |i«^  •  h«»»  i 
/A+ V*h. » A-«^  •  ^•JM»+  •  h«»  I  ^IIK.  I  nfi4L  •  X^HLKV » 
XA0"  >  C^-ttlb  I  K-QAdfi^^lt  I KA0"  >  ll'^AXh  ■  u*9f  i  a»A 
Xhf- 1 HXIOA  ■  ^mjfk^  I  ^CA  t  ^hi  t  A^«^  • 


n 


/"A'Q?  >  ii«iHih  •  Arfirc/tih  I  mffr&k  •  ne  «-y^  i « 

WiUJtk  I A-O  t  Mil  >  ftCik  •  Ah  1 0"9H  I TH-^  >  a«A£-h  > 

KfMi  i  liCA-fA  •  HP*!:  I  Ah  i  A'ttrfi^  >  m^f^  i  tfh^c  *  A 
^•11  >  mm^f:  i  mif»'ilA  *  ^^  i  n4>A-A^  >  Iki-  <  liCA'fcf  7 
h  a  ^XU^  I  oillA A '  «A9A0»  •  ^A^"  >  K17  »  mhrS^O 
•tvf^  •  A.A.A » ♦**  •  WATf* « **••«»• « SS »  nXff  I  M 
H  >  f-h,r!hy  •  AH  *  M  •  Jk.A.A '  <^M  i  tfAHhiLA-  •  HI'h  ■  X 
p  •  m^*'i  •  ^-aX  I  Art  ■  t^cm'ffMO.CiXlhiXJliM 
■111 » ♦MSr*  i  f^AA  i  tf-A-fl"*  i  ♦jS.^'J  •  •♦4«»'A1*  •  JUIA  • 

MH  i  rhtH-  >  h«^  I  x^tUk-oau:  >  rhh  <  ii-Ah<^  ■  «j& 

•OAr  I  ihtt-fl  I  ^$^0*  1 9*AA  *  a"7iLAh  •  jB.h*7  ■  0J&IIA  >  K 
A.A  1 4XA  *  hPibtt  *  XAnil.h«** "  mfHUt  >  tf-A*  •  AlHl  • 
•01  *  "M  t  MH^'QilkC  I  hf*AW  ■  «i^A  <  ikA.A  >  #itA  > ) 
KlH^  I  AX^iUh'fUiiC  •  aijUiA^  ihlMI  >  Cisd  i  ^iUkx  oiXr 
£^  •  m'kmr*  JUIA  >  JkA.A  *#M  >  Ht^CH? > ^AiDt  ■  ) 
KtH-h  I  X^K  >  a«:4ic  i  a»A£-h  t  X.f  A*A  •  liCA-f  A  >  HnA 
^<S  *  ^9  dA  *  A)^h  I M '  iDAAh  1 0»J(^)  >  aiABQi'lltf  1 00 
AKh  I  mCh  •  H^A  >  M±  *  M*-lfl>h  I  ff-XI:  >  iUli:  >  II- 

Ar  I  -inch  I  lAsfJ^  I  aiiL)«-h  ■  X9*A«V^  i  oAAh  >  «•A•^  > 
•Titf*  i  tnnPk.  I  «/»•;»  •  M I  a-Mltf-^  i  ••A+  •  he/"  •  ffloi 
AJ^  ■  -fl^*^  ( Ko^liLA  <  4»J|Uk  ■  M*£-7f  A  <  f 

h«"  t  i^fjik  I  jfi/jrr  I  ttaina  i  Ah  *  ^inc  ■  a^Ji  >  m^ 
f ih  ( Aihnf* I ho"  t  iii^-^  t  fj^^hi  •  AXAii-«hA' >a 
AMwh  I  ii'i-0-iiii  I  lu^^f.  I  Aaifir  *  ho"  •  r*i-  >  ^/*"ici 

tfflOUS  ■  A^<V>  *  J&fl^  1 0j&hje- 1  A.XA  1 0^^ 


lO 


X^M  <  KtMt  >  taCA-f  A I  UHr*  i  IHIC  i  •A'flWi^  t  A9A 
fl"  i  9A** » hi.'}  • 

cn-t  •  t^cQ?  I  ciid  i  j&vry*  I  M.A  >  #M  I  ah0»  t  x^j^ 

>•» « n<S » ll+:*Cf  •  fl-^fl  •  Irf-A-  •  AlMl « 'ID'^  •  r AA^  ♦* 
••Al* » m^4*:^  i  n*A+ « AIM*  •  mH-lirt^  •  JkA.A « ♦** 

fJCf:h«^  >  «J&^A-  >  ""'liLA  >  ^^A  t  ^biM'  •  aii&]iA»  *  SS 
KrJkA.A  >  #it4^  >  ai1rf-ft>aB-  •  AASS  i  MH  •  J&t«-«^  i  f 

A»  •  AA^U*  I  hoBlf  1 X7H  >  j&«A-  >  X^K'ttflbC  *  Mhtf-i  A 
XniU>  *  ^f  A*A  •  taCA-f  A  >  hfl  I  r!hd^ »  mhnujH  *  tf- 
A*  I  at^;H-  •  Hi-:)A-C  >  A  AlM7  >  fli^ih.;!^  i  f^K  *  •!! 
i-Kr C I  tf-ft*  I  UK^flA  •  ^th?  ■  M-l'  i  «IHIh  i  /*'C^i-  *  A 

«•  1  ^f'Jt « ^Jt^l  ■  KJ-h-nCVr  •  fl»WI+  •  a»lill?+ » 

«T<:i-  >  9Ar  ■  iL4>lh  >  ttH^dfit  I  i-Anaih  »  wf,}M,X  I  h 

1«- 1  nh9^h  <  :^JM  >  0»7iLA  1 4»J|JI  •  ii«ii'ah  >  Ii9*c  * 

oiAJK'h  >  A.f  A*A  i  hCA'f  A  i  HXl^-h)  i  A^4^7  >  ih4>C^4-> 
KC4il.h  •  atL+  >  taCA-tnh  I  fldfU.  1 0"AtAh  *  «a0"l|V  I 
4»>t&h  I  Ah  I  A««h^  I  mV'iiA,  i  HXA0  >  dd^  *  AA0"  *  ll.h 
h  •  ll-O  •  "TXr  ^  I  Afl  I  «^>*  I  «»7iLA  i  ^^  I  AdA  I  TflCh  * 

ii:^^li  I  AA-A-Af  I  ho"  I  i&Cfi^  1 0«c%t-h  t  mfA'tun  *  A 

h  I  HK7nA  I  iM  ■  Mil  I  J&^>^  I  Ah  1 0»9Ai- 1  •A^l.i** 


Z3 


A  *  HOi:  I  Ah  I  riU^ih  i  ai9*AA  1 4><^A  >  0»7^A  *  A«<h^  i 


A I  «itA  >  vnjti-Mtj:  I  HA^Ar  ■  TXrc  ■  wiorh  I  oiHiy 

£■  *  Ah  t  fct-rfii:  •  CK/kdiN ,  ^ilHlh  >  «Ah  i  Kl^<- 1  tiLi-i 
A-O I  •/•'P » CK  •  XT A-A**  •  -WRCh « QCti » hjir*^  • 

•hJiT*  i  Mf9^  •  A"«^ » Mi»h  i  mhrP«^  i  »*•*•«»•  •  • 

IL  i  *•«••  I  h-l » A/»'P  i  <dAM:AI  « oiAll » A-o«^  •  |  nhVk,  •  /  '•»•  *a^ 
f^Vf-fXk  t  anjif-tfi  1  flS«AJth  I  HOi:  <  Ah  i  fhtMh  t » 
f*AA  I  ^^  I  a"7iLA  t  A'OWi^  >  aiXIfH '  i&MLlt '  OHA^  i 
•A^A0"  1 9A9*  I  hi?  •  ajbOAi  ^^t  >  7>1PC  ■  0XA. 

*^  •  S«AXr  •  4»JS.A  •  S«-Xi:  •  ^o^^A  >  ^^A  ■  KKH  *  * 

M  *  j&OA  *  Mnjtk-Mtx:  i  r  AA  ■  irf-Ah«^  •  ^j&aA*  i  ihit 

•n  1 9*AA  I  t^tdMh  •  «Xni  i  fi/^h- '  3^Cir0^  *  AA« 

A^  I  «juiK>  I  jhiMk  *  nhi-t  1 0"A-^+  i  >¥A0»*  <  nHj&^:> 

rA>A  •  liCA'fA  ■  ihlMrh  •  hAo"  *  h^LAh>  •  Ifnh  »  hT* 

A I  M:A  *  a/^P  i  a0"7^  >  nSiDAJth  *  m*  *  Ah  >  9*A^ 
tf-  *  «r  AA I  ^J|Jk  1 0»7K.A  *  A-OJi^  <  mMM  >  ^Ml.3:  >  mu 

tax  *  •A^A**  *  9Ar  •  Km  •  iDj&aA*  >  Aitii  >  fct?  • 


J 


n 


A^»  I  hriuh  9  0^0 1  ^i-ncp  I  Ami:  i  -miik:  >  nM  *  n 

a{<  ■  Kin  •  lUhc  I  Xlh  t  r*i-h  i  ai^l'^Jk.h  i  ftc-o  ■  Ah  i 

tflt  i  'i'ttAi-  <  aHli*  I K9^  >  K7H  >  iXtf-i-h  i  HO'I:  >  i.Af' 
M I  Ai-J(-A  I  h0»  *  "i^r  >  4»X-«lh  i  oiAh  *  '}^hll7  «  7AX 
Ah  <  KlXUk  <  0?  Ai'at^lh  I  ho"  I  t-iL>*  *  0"7iLAh  ■  ^4-A  * 
^flll  >  t^CQ?  >  Hlki*  >  hCA'I:^'}  a  f.'nxXk  >  i*tf po"- 1  A1l-Ar 
•^ « AXA I  «/^h.  •  Xf^tO- « J&ll^*^ » A^Jtft*  I  «A9*A 

A+  i  fl»i/.A »  ♦jj.a  •  nhhmp » yjt'Wl' « ofc«r»  i  h«»  t 

hjh  *  ^A'ttfif  1 0J&0X- A*  1 00  AA-h  *  aof:^^  i  A.r  A*A  >  ll 
CA'f  A  •  IIO'I:  i  Ah  >  Albh^  >  ai:>j&A  t  O^X-A^  i  fLiMbCA 
•1:^7  •  J&MUt  *  «H  A  A  *  »A^A0»  >  9Ar  >  h17  •  WPf* 

♦Hiaii  ^A I  ^tC'tt  I  flho"  *  ts:o>  >  't-aA^ « ttttj&i  i  h 

•?»•  •  XIH  •  f  hiM- 1  Oil  >  /"CM- » AKfl»t » O^'X'I:  •  WC » 
Aj&lk  >  flHH.fcU'  I  iS'J&A  i  rhlH- 1 M  <  oiflhAKl  *  I  >'>C '  X 
7H I  J^A  I  h0"1l  1  ¥fih  I  t^Ah  >  ^ll-n  *  Alrf-A*  *  XA*  jB4* 

t«K>  >  iDjB.iiM'h.  I  HHi:  >  MXh  I  hufi-  *  aMLf i-  ■  aHan 
u-  >  AXA*  >  alAl^A•  >  H^M*  •  X:»^A  i  m*f:h  >  AXA  t  ^> 

/*'h^  ■  IDihU'O  <  J&nA*  >  nh0»  *  Uft*  I IIA0  >  «^%A*  >  A^ 
••A5i  •  l-tf-AJS"  •  mMhi^  •  ^A** » h11  ■  ^fl A I  Jk.A.A  * 
$jtATiDf|4fl  >  f  A+at^d  I  Htf-ft-  >  j&XtH  I  X^X'ttfibC*  fc 
•a  >  AX111.K  <  ««"£^)  ■  Jk.f  A*A  >  taCA-f  A  i  ho"  i  f  llfl)  f  fl 
n^h^  I  'i'i'Hk  >  il4>Jf.A  I  rfm.C  •  mK'U'VL  >  ra*»'M: 
frh  >  ik^CAai  >  M I  Alf-A*  ■  tX-Alf  •»-  >  f^lL  *  AXA  ■  /&4^ 


5 

MJk  *  ^Mk  >  btf"  I  MAC  ■  ^XHH I  H-hAHH  1 0-1:  >  HXr-lfk 

*>  I M  i  jKlh'}  I  HJ&'IA.'  >  fMtSJt  •  •l&'>^i:  I AMLA  >  «it 

tf JUH-^  t  t40*A4*  I M  ■  Aff<h^  I  anf'fA'  I  htf"  I  J&X«i>7 1 
KKit  *  #M  ■  mfMlP  I  nil«i>«:t«-  •  XA^*  i  KKit  >  <^M  * 

iUhrtft  *  M^HIC  ■  XXiO-  ■  AMVO*  •  «At4«-A^A  i  XAtf"  • 
^|*A.A  *  «MA  I  •Itf-A*'^  I  t40-A^  <  j&A'hf*  *  rA^O*  ■  « 

AAArfh  •  •tA.A  ■  nUvfP  >  AAH  ■  UimiC  ■  MA**!^ •Tilt  >  A 

fl^AmJk  I  ••>«♦  •  V*T1-  •  Xr*A.A  •  n  At*  I  M » i& 

tf*»fciLA  t  «jtA  *  OA'trli  I  0r>'ac  •  hfjh  >  AMih  ■ 
ft  *  hCA-f  A  *  ndJi^'ti  I  i&^AAh  *  fUJ^f.  >  ii>h  •  oj&hA*'^  < 

Al  I  m^ta  *  t'Adf'  a  IHI  *  0a7/.A  i  oT'lA  *  olC^t  >  -^fl  • 
iTMi  ■  I'Adl  I  H^^J&ti  I  boa  I  fith'i  i  V#>  I  tf-Ai-  ■  M± 

M I IM*  I  hCAi:/'}  I  <D/^<a  I  n^^A  i  ♦iC-Aiih  •  HAh  i  ^ 

^  I  *<:'0  •  hr^a » /^tr  •  a.*  •  hw±h » AA-oAi'  •  Arh » fci  .9.. 


*  VlBilAi,  I         *  LndolTs  priat  •nda  here. 


»4 


AAAtifov  I  vcy^-h  •  aHii.Kh  I  dttfi.  I  Mcrt  >  ohiUA  •  r<h 

Ah  I  r  AA.U'  I  o  I  rtUi  I  ^^A I  «»'»/.A  >  A«<li^  I  •Xt'H  > 

fi-hnx  >  tfHA/.^  i  0A9A0"  I  ?Ar  >  Al*}  •  ^AA^  ihrnn  • 

A^l*}  a  0j^aA>  AA.A  •  #Mt  >  X^K-n^kC  *  r  AA  •  tf-Ah 


« oi&acA')  >  ;ih'H'fl  I  r  AA  •  ^"fAAh  >  o^ha  •  v*"*  * 

*f^  >  iwA.A  I  MA  •  h0*  I  ^-tr  <  ♦A.d  •  n'AC  •  hfJh  i  Ad 
A I  Chtt  •  0t49-A^  >  t^A•^■  >  ^AIHSP  ■  oj&JlAfi  *  AdA^ 
U*  I  HKrAA  I  mfk  1 14<7,  >  fiM,  >  X1H  •  J&4A  ■  Kr AtUf  > 

fl  •  mis  I  -HlCtl  I  oIlfA*  *  ^tdJk  *  KP  >  «tHl4:>  ^XrAV  I 

ho*  >  ^htf A I  oflA^:  *  ^hiiflh  I  fl^jUK  ■  A-o  I  flhtf*  ■  CK 
h  I  fltf-Ai*  >  Aif-n  I  t<-j&  a  ahnnit » ^^|^iL » J&t^A  *  t4 

tf-Ai-  •  AKA  *  0»AXti0a*  I  «v7ilA  >  ¥^Jk  >  AHA7t  i  JIIOH 
Ii  I  Al-nCh  •  iDt^A'kh  I  oi^iL  I  «J&XIL^  I  VTlLh  >  UP  ■  AH 

fii  >  i-nch  I  iL?  I  HA.r-)A^  •  Mn  >  i-?^  ■  A>  •  «»7aA  • 

flAh  a  oh¥A>  <  0"A.Xh  >  A)  I  KrAhi-h  I  fltf-A-h  >  A-O 
i  •  Af 0-U^  •  X7H I  ^^-flilih  a  Aid AA-h  i  X.r A^  i  liCA-f  A  ■ 
Ifpii  <  Ah  I  A«<h^  I  m^fifii  I  Ah'A  I  diiDAX:  >  O0»7AA  *4> 
^A  •  n^XrA^  1 0>t » hCA-tnh  >  fi-hUX  i  0HA/Jt '  0A9A 
«• » ^Ar  •  hnt  a  ffJ&flA'i  »^A•|»»•  •  ATMI  •  Kl**  a  0K 
"«ij6>lAPa 

04.  I-XHH I  S8 1  0X'»+ 1  "!«•+ 1 V*^^  »  •AXtf» » 


^ 

"MC  •  XA0"  I  A.•^vJ&«•  I  Ahin^  *  HX^OA  ■  A^vAXhi-  > 
MLA » «Mt  I  btf"  •  MAC  i  1r\m  i  N-MkHM  •  Qi:  •  MXr-)IL 
!►  •  mKirvf^  •  hfl»  i  AM » «»fV<: » Alf-A-*^  •  /"t*? 
1  i  M  i  Athi  •  HA'^A.'  ■  OHAJ^A*  I  atVIC  ■  A^JLA  i  M 
A  ■  <dAIi i  n-ftpf^  I  htf"  I  AClHI 1 0"7iLA  I ?a.r  >  It'l'hi 
llA4'ff>  I  tA^A^  I M  ■  f-KJti^  i  flllAfUk'  i  hfl*  i  AX«^  > 
MLA  i  «M  ■  mfMip  I  ail0*«^0-  •  Xfttf*  i  KKfn  *  <^Mk  • 

^  I  'A.A  •  «M  ■  •1tf-A*«^  I  t4«-A^  >  AA-ff- 1  r  Aittf*  •  • 
rHK>  •  Xjlf  ir^*  I  \b§M'  I  XA«"  *  tf^AA  I S I  HAtDCA*  ■ 
AdiWih  ■  iDtA.A  ■  naiti:  I  KAP  I  NAl-flC  >  mff^inx  *  ik 

fl^AnuA  i  o'YVt  ■  V«f ^  I  X9*tA.A  >  0 A-tii  i  M  •  A 

tr  ifcjLA  ■  «itA  I  Qih-irii  >  on-flc:  >  hfjh  *  aaa.u-  « 

•n^Ah  I  KAOh  •  AfhO*  >  AX^X>  >  ma»f:^t  •  A.rA- 
A  i  tiCA^A  >  HA>0-b  ■  A^AKh  I  n^L^A  •  il.Kh  i  mf.\^f't  > 

mil  ■  MCh  •  M^4:A)i  *  ho*  *  AH-?  >  V«)  *  O'Mr  >  X?*!: 
M  i  IM*  ■  Wlhtfi  >  0/^*0  •  fl^J$.A  *  ^f:M:ti  •  HAh  i  A 

*  I  t^-ii  •  Kr-^n  •  /^tr  •  a.*  •  huv th » AA-nAi*  •  Arh  •  fot  •« 

li«m  I MOA I  <li.A  •  nriUh  ■  ^AH  •  i^AXti  >  0"?C1  >*%«• 

'  NI^SA.  >  '  Ladolfa  pfint  mda  here. 


x6 


tifrh  ■  A.f M  >  hCA-f  A I  hnUM  *  HHii  •  Ah  ■  rhlMh » ft 

fihUX  *  0HA/.!t '  0A?A0*  >  Mr  *  A17  • 

25.  ^MH I S6 1  0X1+  •  3kA  i  rXr*- « MA^^K*  t  OX 
1•^  •  l|0*  I  XflLM  i  KfMl  i  tlCA-f A 1  WhTJ  >  AX«»  •  II 
A- 1 0-A+ 1  nf-97  •  ati^^^Hirt  I  nX7+  •  ftfl"  I  hCA-f  ft  • 
A^T-Of- 1 X jl  I  AAA.U*  >  Ao»AMl^  •  Xfttf"  1  J&X'I:  *  Inad  • 
^#7  «  K^  •  tl-flC  •  A^ftftf  I  «Pis  *  IMI^  •  H^ftf  I  AHf  A 
9*7 1  f.'V  >  JwiLA  >  «itA  *  MO.!?  >  hfLih  *  iiitMh  ■  MAX 
0"  I  h)  I  Hrfcf*7 1  HA.Ph  I  *)(!  i  «»M7^i  0AX«»  1  A.f'to- 
» >  fl'M'^A  ■  0A.1*?d0  <  0-A1*  *  IL■^  >  ^^A  ■  mKOti  > 

0-ftt  >  9nm,  I KA I  'tfl'4:  >  tAAf^  *  an;ihirii  •  ax7•^  ■ 

A«»»  •  Mll.h«  •  0A.+b-W  •  7fl't+  •  Irtk  •  0Al*Jktf»7  •  tf- 

CP  i  ^«)  1 0;XtM'  >  KKh  <  #Mt  I  nhtf"  I  A^iir>  >  n 

nf^  >  fli-^^p  •  0/xtf-f  *  AX'M.K'fl'ibC  *  nhtf"  I  fisut  *  a 

AS£  >  f-^M-  •  0AX0"  ■!!)•£•  HJ&hA  1  AXA.  i  aXAi-CIl 
P I K0*  I  RA*1*  <  ?Qr  >  0AikAi*  >  00-Xiait  *  <*'?A  >  0AX 
0"  >  IlAf  1 0jMli  >  A-OJii- 1  fl^^N*  ■  Aj&hA  I K  *  0^%  *  ll 

a6.  t-XHIl  •  S2 1  flX7+  •  •TL«»+  •  «»9 A-O  •  •T*A^I  •  AK 
«■  I  •jrwf'Ooif ,  x.^^9*  I  XA  » l^lflC  •  fl  Af*  •  0AX^  i  l» 

» I  Hi»+  •  r;** » xrr'7JWi  •  0»9b^ « ^-w*? r »  0AX0"  • 

XOi^  I  ^^0BhC  •  'OM'^  •  fl^dA  •  XA««» »  ¥^0^  •  J^H'OX 
7  •  AXA  •  J&i»»f  T « A0"h7 » m^w^r  •  •TdA-O  •  II^A  •  aA 
•fc*  I  m^B^f: » rAA  •  XA  •  +C4. » tf»7Aa^ » 0X,/7iK- » 
A«A.y  I  XA  I  XA«»  •  X^7Cn  I  a^f^b^ » mhMH:  •  «"A 


X? 

^ii  I  A'flXA.  *  ffAXtf"  *  KAUtt  ■  9'^^*mMi^*K*Cia 
^  * 'to  I  liAX  I IIXIIUW1M  M*«h«r  *  ffAK^vA  *  tcn^  • 

•AX0"P  I  ll^l(*n  i  «^<h.  ( OlIAIUI*  1 1  XA«» » tf-A»  I  «i>7  A 
A  •  XHUlikkC  "lit  • 

>  •  Mrih  •  ^A  •  4*riic^  *  tfAXtf"  *  bt  •  ro'^:  I  tff  hr 

<- •  fUi'li  *  NM^ih  ■  A-ii  • 


•+Kr^  •  An  I  wjtr  •  *M^c » 7/^*  •  AHAfr » twi  • 

llCAtrt  •  aoA-l:*^  •  +/A.in^ » xrx«Ki » »fi*n  • 

KiA^  i  «-Ai*  •  0"hn  I  niki- 1  mchtn  >  •aha/  i  ma 
^  •  rk«^i- 1  ambm^t  •  cma^  » ih.A+  •  incM:n  ■ 

A  •  llCAtf t  >  r AA  *  rXf*?l  t  KA«»  I  ^^u- »  A.tit  >  7ft. 

A  •  fcr^m  ■  •M'Kf^  •  rK«»« » on  wtif*^ » -OK 

ii^^  I AI10*  *  MAi*  i  Atf-A-I  ■  K7A^  *  A^IAOO  >  CXA 

1 1  miA.rt '  km- 1  oojtcn  *  »Kh  ■  0A7Jf.n  *  nuiti'  >  k 

A^  •  TTHi  I  M»  *  A^7  *  n-trn'Otn  • 

33-  tXHH  •  mt  *  llX7i*  I  MhiC  *  XA-  t  AAA  1 71WI  >  tl 
CAtn  •  AXfJ^t^  *  lUH- 1 AA  i  XTO^:  I  hXjh  I  «M"0 


C  ■  MA  I  IhiA  •  iMUItn  *  MA.  •  •AiLTF'^  •  tfAK' 

k« 


z8 


■B 


IIP  •  jJki » ffAjbAf*^ » ^A » ^rrvc^  •  OM* » naci» 

IOC  i  «W»+  •  tfAXtf^A  *  XJ&A^A*  •  IMJM  •  «!/»+  •  lUkA 
JC- •  oAX«»  *  M I  fi  •  Hf  «Ii«h:  * -)0 1  tCM  I  AAiA^  >  M- > 
AAM-  i  «AX«"  ■  M  t  S I HAIUC  i  A«^  *  liU:  *  HM'  >  5A 
f*  a  ffiMfA  *  AX«"  *  ^J^l  >  tfAXtf"  *  XAfI  ■  ilAX  *  74IC  • 

flHfJif  I  AA^f  >  AHi  •  mWthm^  *  ^  •  iHUii-  >  XfAh 

»$b.  Ufi^VC  >  1d«+  i  K9- 1  II)&1in:  I  ^A  ■  Koh  1 1  Hill  ■  h 
«•  I  «»C0t  ■  KV^A  •  AJ&t>^^  *  K0- 1 AAAJ^  >  oAX«*  < 
M 1 1^  I  KTAti^  I  X«-  *  ?^fk  >  KTAIi^  I  AJbtJn  ■  h 
•■  *  IMM*  I  Affile  ( 0"to>T7 1  iU&^«h«:p  *  cAK^vA  ■  4- 
«IK:P  I  AXtf"  *  •MUfH  I  Ot^A  ■  iU&lflC  ■  MAXtf"  *  K>f^ 

29.  I-XHH I  Si  *  0X74- 1  A'OX  I  iiAX7  >  X0* »  Ufitm' 

7 1  ih^c  I  xrX0i>f7 1 0X'fxr4«7  *  X0*  1 4:iiib  *  mmi  ■ 

hah  I  ^u»i:j&  1 0HA^AA-  a  •«»to>77 1  HfllW ^  ■  hm- » C 

XA  >  /*'fi'r}  I  •Hj^'fiA  >  Af  ■  nfi^xn  *  X0-  >  i&am-  ■  • 

7X-A 1 1iCA'l:^7 1  hOh  •  rX«"7 1  AXtf"  *  iLt^  •  fi'M'  *  <h 
^  >  J&AllJf.  •  XAtf"  I  Clh*  I  XrXIH.K'fblbC  >  H'V^  *  h 

0-  >  -nxA.  i  HX7nA  I  r!hd^  I X0*  I  •uXA.  *  nf>fQC  ■  uhjs> 

AA-  *  iftlC'lt  •  Mf.^  i  XA«»  I  >lU-7 1 0Cta<47 « X^^^ii  * 
atK^^^Oh » /-IIXF » A0"ACU&  1 0«A+  •  •MflC^  •  A^y 
^f*?7  a  0AX^  I  hi  I  ^Mb  I  hh-a  1 0^A^A  *  fl0«iij&  •  0 

•hXT^  I X0- 1  lh&  I  AiAf*  ■  X0*  I  «»A<h'fe  I  aiH-n  I  X0*t 
MJ&A'OA  >  XAQA  I  ACT"  ■  II0"C^  1 X0*  ■  llUi  /^^*hfi- 


19 


save 


30.  i-Mni  ■  #  1 0X1+ 1  Mtfi^  I  AX0"n  *  ii^j(«n  *  9^ 

^ii  *  A'flXA.  *  tfAhtf*  *  KAU^  I  tf-A-^  *  tfAXtf"  *  ^.tca 

liAA  I  •flXA.  ■  ^M^  •  ^OXA.  *  MP  *  4f«^  *  AJMJn  I K 

•AX«»P  t  ll^j(*n  I  «^A*  I  Om&lUk'  *  I XA0"  *  tf-Ai  *  «OA 
A  ■  X^HjiikkC  I  •Ot  • 

xrjMi  •  mnc  •  itiw.  t  c^-h-  i  ifc-A  •  hcA«n  •  m 

<•  •  fUhii  ■  HM^ A  ■  AHi  a 


iiciHtn  *  ooiK'fc'M^  •  -tiJUM^  *  xr  x«*<n  *  •jb^mt  t 

1-  •  rK0»vt  I  aa;K'i:-f'»  ■  mh'it^^•  •  '>fc.A+ 1  ticAtn  ■ 
•Ax«» « i-Aiitf" » juH- » Aj6*xr+  •  niuw-tir*^  •  ■jx. 
A I  iicAtr>  •  r  AA I  rhm  ■  xa^*  >  9^0*  *  x.m  >  7ft. 
A « xr^m  •  mfi^hr^  •  rx«»«  •  on  wtir*^ » -ox 
A.  *  rXf*^'  *  A-nxA.  I  ««XA.^  >  4-xr^ « A-nxA.^  *  •x.r 

X^^  I AI10*  I X7A4-  ■  tftf-A-?  *  X7A^  *  i&^IAOa  *  CXA 

7  *  fifiA.f7 1  x«*  I  aotre:* »  axi*  i  0  A7  ji.?7  *  nih-tP  >  x 

A^  i  TTHt  •  XI*  *  A-f 7  *  uf^m^at  • 

33.  fOkiPinie^  nX7i*  I  X74Ur  ■  XJC*  I  AAA  1 7XiA  I  tl 

cAtn  •  0xr JM^  •  luH-  >  Ao  •  X7IU:  *  xjui*  *  «m*u 

C  t  AAA  ■  7XiA  I  kCAtn  •  MA.  •  •/BA7F«^  «  tfAK^ « 


k« 


«^  •  MAXtf*  *  KrVHp  I  A^Mk  I  Inctttn  *  flX'>•^  ■  i 

AXIlUk)  *  A.fA'A  I  tlCA^A  i  lU&th7  *  HI  Alh  i  OK'H' » h 


hm- 1  HtlUV*  1  A'Pf*** » WiHi  •  1*H«^  «  AXtf»  » «liJ6 

tf*  I  ttvcf't  t  x^K'Oiia:  ■  uxtaa  *  f^^^  *  ax^*  t  mi 
f<  *  tf-A- 1  iMf  r  I  ffAXtf"  I  Ar?  I  tifptf^  I XA  ■  hrtehy 

«^  I  tfAXtf"  •  1«f<  •  htf^  >  J&Af*lh  I  ff^lA  >  XrXA  *  i-d. 
Aflh  i  •/7'0{-  ■  Xll  I  Ad^lf  0^  •  Mltf-A*  i  ^A•^  >  fifVC^  * 

•All  *  tCfl^  I  dA^  •  nHAfli0"4i  ■  Qi:  *  ffvtir^^  *  lkA.A  > 

#M  •  AASfiXrklf  «^  I  htf"  I  ^XrC  I  AX«»  ■  TjUh?  ■  X«»- 

fit  I  MAXtf"  •  •^^ha  >  fi  >  llx.^t  >  ^juh  •  ^ai/^p  •  qua 

•Irli  I  h<hh  «  XA«»  *  X.Ar9  >  ^A 1 4^UC^  >  0X1'>  •  X 

A«»  •  Kfifjip  •  Aiiuc  •  fjnnc  •  1^^ « mt^rvcp^  • 

AXA  •  AflitfHi  •  b0"  I  J&^'0fh  *  mf^C¥f' » fl^TA  i  AlO 
1"  ■  <DAX0" » brt"  •  XrflHA**  "^  •  •flXA.^  >  lUli-f  I M^ 
'h/*'  I  lUhh  I  ham  I  ^flitf"^  I  flhAX^  ■  AM"  ■  •|KJU«^  *  X 
A  ■  f-4J¥JI,  ■  f>maoii  *  OdAf*  ■  ^CH  i  •/Ai-J'-nX*^  ■  IkA. 
A I  #JtA  I  AXA  I  fimaoii  ■  nM•^  >  ^C-fl  >  0•A•^  ■  S^viil  • 
orXlIHa^  I  At^A-«^  I  Mrt  >  <dA1,>^  ■  cAO  >  X^fl^  >  XH 
U*  I  Aitkira^  I  A/«<^  ■  hao^dM » CthA  *  h0*i  J&TY^iX 
rkir<n»  I  tfXJMIX  >  ^0"  I  AAA^ir^*  ■  mhham  I  AIV«*  *  X 


'  A. 


UMUbC  ■  tf^Ul^lM^  I AXA' •  JK-Afl  •  Aai'^lH*  ■  N^ir  > 

A  •  ^4Jk  *  h^  *  jB^AXth  ■  AA^Xll  I  JHblv^  I  A  Jk'fl  I  •« 
AA- •  ««^AA  ■  ^M I  ll4»JMk^  1 0.+ •  llCAtn  •  XT J&X 
K I  XAb  ■  Mh^  I  Mf*  ■  •XrjMAtf'  t  tfAr*!  tAiAitf- 
ft+ •  XJlO*  ■  MM- *  C*r  •  J&l^  i  ••A+ 1  CXd  >  I^A•«»  ■  X 
-» *  A«A  *  X^«Xll  •  iH'flXi^^A  •  IIA«"iX1HLX'IUbCi 
JM  •  X^  i  I^A>  ■  •OIlCAM  i  X.f  A4k  I  •  AJ|.  •  r  AA*  I  « 
^7AA  •  ^4iA  *  I  a-Vtr  t  Atf-A*  i  •-A•^  I  f«1»«»  I  rXr  «L  >•> 
•?«^  1  tf^OA  I  XHA-fUbC  I  r AA  •  tf-Ah^  ■  •«+«• 
a  ■  hM  *  Ma*- *  M^dA  ■  rAA  ■  «^AAll  a  aXTJ^^ 
"■  •  M  i  M^  ■  1^A- 1  AAJiXfnrH>  •  A^]IA»  ■  r AA I  tf- 

A*  I  iXlM  i  •XJ&4»X^- 1  XAr  *  r AA  ■  50^  ■  llCAtn  • 

X4  ■  xrjM^  t  <MK.  ■  ^iu:  I  rHk  I '>;h»  •  tfxr A^^  i  Aft 
^  •  xAr  •  ^9-fiNh  •  Av»  *  nfl^ftir^**  i  iixf4r«^  •  • 

/•fiXi  ■  V«K^  •  fH»»  I AXJLA  >  4M 1  •fXlH- •  IJLA  > 

XIHAi  •  li^A44k  *  «JK:f*  •  •/&'}  i  •MM  I  lM»  i  J&H-'}  •  j( 
«•  >  X1IJk>  illCAfA  •  VHi*  ■•HlA*  *  dXTtXi  *  •OX? 
■f  •  1fA>  I  lA}  I XA  *  X«^  ■  flir  ■  •AA.'llAi0^%i'Mk> 
Al  I  nOIKft^^  I  tf^A^^r^  1  XrUf-  >  IIXTf  •  •Mai 
l+i'HM.a  NXAA^^t  AXd^  *  XIH  >  A«A  *  XlHIli 
^ » r JS-^  •  XTfr  •  l-^-A-M  I AAJI  •  ••^^  •  •«♦  • 
ii  a  ^;yiM  AX^IILXI  ■  llCAM  ■  ■•on  *  AXA  ■  0'li  * 


■  ttm  abcda. 


tf-A>«»  1 0«f fWii*  *  CthAI  I  btf"!!  t  JU»TP  I  AAA.A  *  #lk 
A  *  Mf4aii^  I  *^-«  ■  •K0"%  ■  AtA.ft  *  Mf^m^  *  AM  • 
If  >  TTtt  i  A/l^^Jt  I  rMUh  I  ^^T  t  AM  ■  •VI&  •  0^ 
A- 1  Oj&9*tf(r  *  •MiTlO' i  fl$X^II>'fUbC  ■  Jk'fl  I  Ik^H  t  tf> 

A*  *  •Hid A^  ■  f  aiJC*  •  X1lU>  *  •'•JC^t  *  ^.r A4k  t  ||CA 
•f  ft  I  maot4,n  I  ^^  t  Tihr  t  ■  tf-ft- 1  «i»^^  i  /^A&  ■  MM- 

|& » a^Mtii  I  fiK^HA » •«  «»'>1/»'1- » tfluh-l:  i  y/t*W+ 1 
•Arfi'l:  i  i>r t^  ■  O^XrA^  I  &•^  ■  InCtitn  *  XTf*  I  AM  I 

OA  t  h0^  I  hm  I  KKr^  I  •ii«m  ■  f*fr4  >  tfrHic « x 

5U^  *  A^^l^  >  AAdA  *  Hj^^thaf*  i  mffT*  ■  CiiL  *  ff/^ 

JK*  I  m^  *  0*Xii  *  M^flitf"^  •  tf-A-  ■  XK  *  fl-^At  ■  l-inf* 
^ILM  i  X.r  A^  *  hCA-f A  t  f  jUC- 1  tfAA  >  X^HLK-fUbC  *  A 

A  *  •xrxTHX^  I  ncfr*  j»^a  ■  iixioa  •  hck t-A |x 

A. "  tfi-A^A  *  OtfvfM  •  K.'itNi  I  AfOkW  ■  mT*  *  lU^ 

M^  I  tfiL^fh  I  «Mi<h}  t  tf^CI  I  «•A•^  *  A*T/^  ■  AilU:  • 
Of •n  *  X-n  *  mfi^$^  I  fih'tt  I  ai^f>  •  m^i^*  OXAi- 

cxf-* » •fltfi»^/»'*  ■  tfi-xno*  •  fltf^iLA  •  ♦**  •  -u: » 

"!^  •  /"ja  •  HJ&htfO  1  Alf-A- » A«X  •  •«01/*+ 1  A^/1"  • 
•mk  >  MA^Ar  •  mfmi*^  ■  il^m«^  *  0X74- 1  iriii  ■  tf- 

A*' I X7H  *  J&41A  *  x«  *  xxr '7 1  ainii  ■  •xym  I AA  ■  9 

CI  *  X«TA  *  J&4^flX  *  ♦A.A  I  OfilX*  HC^^  ■  X7II  *  J&QA* 

xt«xh  I  o^nx  I  ^ml  I  •xrje^AiF  *  j&aoa*  » XAOA.ir 


*  tf'A*  and  XX"  over  ecasnre. 


ft  •  ^4JI  *  h«»  ■  ^AMh  I  AA^J(-h  t  A'fkh^  ■  Ah-fl  >  •• 

Ajc  ■  •«^/ji  t  ^4A I  n^A-A^  I  (L4-  i  tocAizn  I  xrj&x 

IL  *  Mb  I  Mhao  1 9Ar  >  mhrXr^iJh  I  ffJ^  I  ♦A.A  •  ah 
ftl- 1  XXjm  IIA+ 1  C4ir  *  JU^  I  «*A4*  *  CXd  I  tf-A*«^  *  X 
'» I  I&4A  •  X4Hllkh  I  O^HlXi^JfA  •  aUt^tMttJiiUkC^ 
X-a I X^H ■  tf-A* * •OIlCA'fA > X.rA-A > ffA^* fiUC *  • 

^lAA  •  ^4iA  1 1  •'H:i"  ■  Atf-A*  *  0^4- ■  «m*«^  >  rKr 

I  mUUi  I  X^HXMiiC  I  r AA  ■  H-Mn^  a  ^Hi^^ 
liM>  Adm0*  I  tfAdA  *  rAA  1 0^iMh  •  mhrX:^/: 

M  *  AA*^  •  tf-A- *  AAfiXnTlli  >  AJ&llAfi  ■  rAA  >  tf- 
ailM  I  «Aj&4»A-«»  *  AAr  ■  r AA  •  90^  I  ticAtn  * 

•  xr j^t^  1  rof- ■  ^fl^  I  urn  * '>ait  •  •xrxrt^:  i  M 

•  AAf- » M^lHh » *A«» » Oflw-tir*^ « iiXfir«»-  •  • 

f •fiXi  •  5/«?^  •  «m:i»  •  AhJLA  *  «Uk  *  •fXlH- *  XA.A  * 

«•  >  X«llU»  •  iKUk-f  A  ■  ir»i>  >  N'Mid*  ■  aX7-l:X»  •  mttht 
•f  *  1fA>  ■  lU  ■  XA I  X«^  I  fli>  •  •AA.'OA*  o«"?C  *  liA' 

dti  ■  aofiviar^  *  mfMrs^t^ » Kruh « ax7i*  ■  -m^ji 

04** i*A4- •  nhMJP'^ » MMfH  •  X7H  i  J&QA  •  Xu-Oti 

*  r A-4:  *  xit  *  ^-tf-iiiii  *  <iiA.n  ■  •tf")^  ■  mis  ■  «*x 

^^IM  AX^Ukt » llCA<fA  *  HAOflt  i  AXA  *  Hit  i  ihT 
■  ttaM  abcda. 


u 


>•  I  Pi:  I  ll^  I  MAC  •  tf-A*  ■  ^£d  >  Ad  *  Tlh^  i  a<qA^  t 
^A*  *  n+  >  tf-A- 1  fi-fOk.  ■  AA.A*  #itAi  AXA  >i&in«Hi  ■  • 
IM  >  H^HrOTihCK/  •  fl't'OA^  >  h0»  *  HOHATt  *  ilXA.  * 

Mtf-Kii  •  K:a  *  h«Tu>  •  H/*';' I  tftf-A*  *  mit  *  frOn  >  il>& 
iHl  I  JwJLA  I  #itA  i  AXA I  Am«»4i  ■  •iLi^f  *  Mh*  ULA* 
4M I  i-OAl- 1  !hf^^  I  ru-a  i  IM:A  •  Xrkih  I AAS  *  mfS4i 
A  i  I  inii  I  'HlAi- 1  A^/«  I  /^PO-  *  AXflLM  >  hCA^A  " 
•^«*/*^  >  nf-Pfl^  1 0JMIA  i  All  ■  <DAX«»  I  KOtk 
tA^A^  *  MfhhA*  ■  rMH*  I  V*^1r  *  n^^ir  ■  «|&<k< 

JUIA  *  X^K-OiiU:  i  h-O  *  h^U  I  tf-A*  •  m-lMi  *  MaAI  * 
JUIA  ■  Hl&nnh  I  nitf-Mi  *  A«^  >  AX^ll»  I  A.r  A^  >  tiCA 
•f  A  >  •Iti&^lmtf- 1  ^OA I  h'Vi  t  mhfVi  «  cAfl  ■  M* 
lin  I  /"jsu- 1  AAA  I  hrVi  ■  Afl^  i  l^Ai  AflAiKI*}! 

^l  *  htf*??*  •  r^oc  I  ii/tf*r  c  •  AX^K-fliiu:  *  x^h  i  f  a 

fi  I  nctb  I  •J&00VA'  i  A(kt  I  tiCAiin  "  It'll'  *  tTfKA'  * 
X71I  •  l^l-flC  a  OX7M I  MAh  >  ^MM'  *  XmLK-OikC  • » 

f^H  >  j&AA*  i  HhC'f  *  mfi.nfne  >  ^A.A  ■  #Mt  >  •rv^a  ■  A 

XA  t  J&^-oiintf- 1  <DJ&>/>'X.  I  mhjikrcp  •  HX'iaA  i  rx«» 

« •  ATTM* «  XA  •  XrJM<:  •  ^"Imtf-  •  <DWA»'fc.  •  ♦Jt 
«•  I  Uti'  I  n^hi- 1  ^J^At  •  nfiOA  •  »<h7A  •  XAtf"  •  Jfdb> 
« i  A^A^y  •  Ar  ■  <h^A  I  XAP  *  HfXr^  ■  fit  *  HXTOA  *  MA 

^-nmff*  I  n4:hf'  a  •nA^O^  *  mOh^f:  *  A70^  I  AX«»  * 

A^htf A*  *  XA.A  *  fit  A  ■  flXA  *  n.hO'  I  AA.l^  *  A«"<lh  •  Atf- 


i»  ■  TJUii}  •  OXTf  1  IHrt- ■  AA«-n  *  V«7  •  Or^^k  I 

!IHI  I  MiH*  *  AA^-n  *  lUU^  *  AX«»  >  AjTA*  I  tA.A  I  «• 

L'OA  •  «»m}  *  ^f:^-«*  *  tf-Xii  *  b«»  ■  i&ViX  *  Nt-liVA  ■  r 

klH*  I  •flur  *  M-A*  •  flXyh  ■  ll>/*'h>  ■  jb^AMh  i  fftf* 
h  ■  ff  01h  ■  Ih^A-t/ *  AX«m  I  A/^h  I  AJUIA*  ■  AT^frQ  t 

NUt*-l&  I  «M^ JW-^IHI  *  ll&•^  i  llCAtn  *  flM;^  •  A^ 
kft*  >  «AM»  I A^  All  i  flMii  1 0lM^  ■  tfA.!*  *  xrajhu- • 
IM  *  lUU*  •  KA«»  t  UU  ■  "Vko*  ■ 'VflAi- 1  M^  ■  OXTi- • 

k>  ■  ACh  I  inef  *  ^«i  I  •vi'M- i  ^'flX  ■  Mttr  >  «TXiiA  i 
r  I  iM"ii  •  xm  ■  j&«A  I  KM  •  «JUk  ■  x^iLK'flAiC  I  r  A 

k  ■  tf-Ah^  •  •ihlHUt  *  ^'AA*  *  r  AA  ■  ^l^ll  •  •J&«A  > 

UlA  •  #M  •  »Xt^f  *  AXIHLXiUbC  •  tfMIA-i  ihlHUCli 
^  •  JC-A^  1 1  •*|||&  I  AAAAf  *  r AA I  frOA^  I  AHi  t  >&>^ 

k- >  AXAAAr  *  XAAIUl^  I XJUIA*  ■  XA«"  ■  AXIL  ■  tH» 
» ■  Af^lilA  ■  •JUUL  *  ll«m  I X*}*  >  ^-flA  t  »Xtf-'Hli  X^ 
LMlAi:  >  0«AA1l  t  X.r A^  I  llCA^^  A  ■  X^IU»  *  XA«»  *  X 
IMA  ■  A»  I  •OCn  I  ll-tl-b  I  HXJK^A?  *  iJt.«^  *  XTh  I  )• 
i  •  AA^  I  •OlLAt  I  •-A'l- >  t41 1  ^A.^  i  fflixa}  ■  MM^ 
L  •  •llCn  t  MAlCh  *  AJf >a)  a  •j&XlLl  t  X^m^l  ■  HAC 

I  •  •flcn  *  mnixb  I  iL?  I  ftjcAii  I  •7A^a<iib  I  o«AXriii 

PaiA*  ■  X^OLX)  *  X.f  A-A  i  IICA4A  •  HPii  ■  Ab  •  r  AA4f- 1 A 

BA^  ■  •xt'H  *  •Irac  ■  r AA I  ^1^  I  ^JMk  >  j&xuJt  *  • 

IAA%  I  •A9A«»  1 9Af*  ■  Xn*}  a  ff^dA  •  tf-A*  •  Xn?  a 
H-VUk^ •  Xlb » X^/M^  •  J5'rf4:  •  JULf-^  •  «^i 

'  Xand4^#- 


s6 


K>  •  *ftJn  *  ^fti-  *  OA-  >  KA«»  ■  JMk  •  ht^^  •  «*M>  •  f 

d.  >  ^i^Al  ■  tf-Xii  •  ninit  I  «i<Kl  Ad  I  •mil  *  Air  •  «^^ 
/»'#h.  •  ••X**^ « OlUki-h*^  •  -llkir*^  •  0j&ilA0-  •  +^i. 
itb«^  i  »>&fLA- 1  irtiii^HiMi'i'dJ.i^^Jn'mfi^A/^ 

«h*  I  nrffK^*^  •  MU I  ^Alh  ■  «lldfl  I XA I  i<A01h  * 
J&ilAI»-  •  NXfOA  ■  «||U  ■  XA  •  AO I  fOm^  •  XA.A  •  *M  • 
l&^'K*  ■  ^JUkXA*  *  HM  *  0j&Ain#*  I  «Xm  ■  iLlLI*  •  n 

ir-M^  •  tf-A-  •  nil*  • « A+n » +AXA-*^  •  •Wfl  •  ^cr^  • 

MH'  i  XAIi  ■  boa  •  J&AXAr«^i  JwJLA  •  MA  •  #•  Ai- •  £-^' 
C  •  X«"A  i  HXIOA I  JkJLA  •  «M  I  tf-At  *  A-M:  I  l&1Ui#*  • 

rx«»vi  I X*- 1  xr ♦A.A  •  x^-  •  v**>  •  /^i/^x-  •  ••x* 

/"X.  •  Xr-MA*  •  WA  •  Ciif  •  «»AX«»  •  l»*-«  AlM^'n' 

ooj&vi:ir«^  <  j&«Aih  I  oxcri*  <  0AAiia#*/7A  ■  x.^f: 

i>«- 1  Ar^  I  fina^  I  X#-A-t./  ■  •XIH  •  f  Xtf-i:  I  JKilAO'  ■ 

oo£S  •  flA«"  <  hrmji-Miu:  >  «juki<»  •  n^^r  i  xih  •  j&jl 

«-lh  i  Ar  i  AX^X-OtkC  i  XA«»  •  h«^  *  fiMp'hknjk 
>  >  0jt9*f)  *  «»'}]U^t  I HXIOA I  ttf-C  •  XA«»  I  ^^*l*  • 

'  ^  o.  e. 


40.  ^Hlli9i  IIXI+ 1 /»'C5+  •  IMI^ •  Uth^Cf^ •  H 

1 1  x^tUk-fuu:  i  x^HLX)  >  flini^u- 1  rtic  I  ^jc«»  •  0IIP  ■ 

AMX I X7H I  ^tC-fl  •  'IfUi*  I  KM-  *  -thM^  •  Xr4A>  0 
fifMA  ■  ¥410 1 0A^  i  ll«-Ai- 1  tf-A**^  ■  ^^47  ■  «"JLX>  • 
••ft+  •  CXA » A«»TP  •  Xl*  •  +1^ » ••»♦  i  Xl'Hri'itlC 
At/V^  *  fUUh)  *  h«»  <  off  I  fi^^lK'  I  Xlt  I UA04- 1 X 
Ah  •  fiML  •  ••fliP*^ » •l*!!*^  i  /^rt-W  i  •XX'H:*^ » 

tf-Ap  ■  tn-Vi  •  j&ii4-  i  oxii-  i  +^iiP'f«^  •  j^n  *  nhjhr 

C I  A^0- ■  «XAA  >  X./X«K- *  X7II  *  ^IHI  >  «»7iLA  I  ^^ 

A  •  fvri- 1  SI? « AXA I  nc^A  I  rxr»- 1  h«"  t /xrf>  >  X 

C  *  ^«^#*  I  J&«^«- ■  «^AM- 1  XA  I  «-Ai- *  fki- 1  llCA 
•tn  i  M«-^  1 0X7i- • /^C^  >  TT^^  t  XA  I  ^m^Mi  i 

ir^  ■  •xm  •  ♦Jt'«»  I  iwiiWi » A^-f^ » AX«» » +«■ 
Air«^  i  #*xii  I  ATr4^  >  «Ax«»  ■  X7oa-  >  ^«alf^^  ■  0 

AX«»  I  «m«^£]L  I  •htfvtff*  t  •ta«m  I  M'<MU^  I  AH  *  f^n 
^^  >  «ta'^  *  xih  I M-AO^ '  xiH  i  f  Xrc  i  h«»  I  ^A I 

XT JM^  •  ih+^  •  xw  •  jB^iA  •  h«m  ■  lufrFi  nxi+ »  X 

A I  mPlh  •  XA*ftir«*' I  «H^^  *  AflX  *  »«*A^  *  0A5L I 

O^lrt*  ■  «"ili^  •  HAfJI.  1 1<^  >  MAtf-A- 1  fUMr'dJUJi* 
X'H- 1  IIA^A- *  0*A+ ■  IWAp  *  men  •  Oj  *  ■'i-TQ^:  *  Aflr  > 
•Mh  •  m^Vt  I  X7f>i  4lUi«  X€:AA*«XX4-<f  ■  l&XlUt* 

x*M>  •  xx^  i  •XfAA  •  AiMi  ■  mcb  •  xrxii^  •  # 


a8 


m  I  Jtr^h-f:  •  ••A'H: « y^  <  A-^  >  0Xr JM^ll  *  Mil  *  X 

>  M  •  /MO* 


owV^^i-  ■  y/W  I  A*/  >  Htf-Xis  I  •0%A  •  TtfA*^  ■  AHIf Ar 
X^K-IMbC  I  AihA  «  hOrSti  *  mm-^Jtk  *  VMdd  •  tf-Ar  i  5A 

^fl  I  JM»*  1 0Xr  9C4^H  •  f  «MI » Atf-A-*^ » ••y W« 

•MB » )MU<. « rx«»n « fi't/^h' » xr^^w- » xiu^ » i 

^^+  *  XA^  •  h9*lir%f  •  >&Xi:  *  «Xli  *  HXb-«^  *  1 

X^ILX>" 

38.  ^XHIi  i  as  I  «Afl  I  J&^IC  •  JklA  I  «Mi  A/cr 
r  I  tf- A*  I  £fi  ■  0X«»  I  X.UAr  I  AA.A  *  #M  *  J&7/^Xi  *  'MA 
+  •  Oih+ 1  Xr^A.A  •  K^*  •  Xr V*!  •  •M  •  J61-«C  • 
KKh » ♦J^A » hfCrt^  I  tf-ilr«^  t  •X^«*/>%  I  ^A  t  bA 
X I  AbAX>  •  XA«"  I  U^iUir^  *  XA.A  **M*'  «AX«>  <  Jk 
A.A  I  *M  *  XA I  rX^^  I  nAM^^  i  UA«*  •  'MirAAit 

i&i/*'X>  •  hm'umj  I  xrxii  >  +A.A  *  AX^  *  hat i0AX«"i 

X.lf A- *  tA.A  I  Jb^/^X.  >  XrXi;  ■  ^#7  *  »7XiA  I  hCAt 
nt » itl/^X.  • 'I'OA'I' «  IK:a-^  » C*f  •  ^AX** » b*- » A 

nmm'f^  >  ooai-fc-f  «^  1  j^-oAih  *  fixrr«*  •  «Aaiiia«-n 

A » X^JIAP<- » j6'?IK.  I  X^-An./ ■ 

39-  t-XHIl  I  as  1  flXfi*  *  r4«h  *  ^^A*!!  •  0AX«»P  • 

Mtii  •  fi  I  Otf-A*  *  in  •  f-ni^n  •  A«»9Aa^  1 0Hiif  I  xa 

'  fl  o.  e.         '  oiXL  #M  > 


i^  i  /mpl  i  mUMn  >  NKfOA  i  j&r A.  >  mKkm^ti  I  A. 
i&ll A 1 0X11-  •  /^»«n  I XA I  i*A«1»-  •  f  UP?  *  «»ilAA+ 1 

40.  4-X41I  > 9 *  aX7'h I Z**!:^  t iHi^ •  HHif Cf^i  II 

)•  xiiUk-fMbC  i  x^uLX) '  nmUuM  mc  I  ^£-«"  >  «tfp  * 

AAflX  *  X7H I  /«cil  I  'l&tf- 1  Xli-  *  •hAih'H*  •  KrAA*  m 
PIMA  I  f:4iC  *  0A^  *  Htf-Ai'  i  tf-A-«^  <  ^^41  >  ^KJtA  ■ 
^A4*  >  CXA I  A«»TP  •  X7i-  •  ^fJip  I  tf-Ai'  >  Xl-fl/i-iliC 
At/f ^  *  nuA)  I  h«"  I  iMf  f  *  i&^^lK.  I  Xfi- 1  UA»4- 1 X 

Ah  •  f,iA  I  ••fliF*^ » p^p*^  •  /»'c^'« » •xxni:*^ » 

IT  *  JM0-  ■  0XAA  <  X./X«K>  *  XfH  •  J&iHl  1  ^'ilh  <  ^^ 

A  •  vjtri-  •  n? « AXA  •  flc^-A  ■  f  Xrt-  >  h«"  *  /xrf*  >  x 

C  f  ^«^«- 1  pm^m-  •  mfAfft  >  XA  •  #*Ai- 1  &i- >  llCA 
■tn  •  M^-^*  •  IIX1+  •  /^C9+  i  TT+I-  i  XAi  f^t^** 
ta^H  *  ••Xi*  >  tf-At  I  f*T«l^^  i  >UIX>  *  «rtf fh  <  XA«H: 

ir^  •  •xm  •♦«••••  J5A+* » Ai6»*^  •  AX«» » +«• 

AX^  I  '^^'iH  I  i-«»llf>  •  «»h«^  I  jB^<hfU&^  I  AH  I  J&<n 

^^  1 0ii«^  I  X7h  ■  fi^^np  I  xm  i  fhf'c  >  h^  I  ^A  * 

/mX  I  OAAi-  *  Wi  i  nXT-fcXtf*  •  mf^-it »  Xlli  ■  1UM<  ■ 
Xr  JM^  I  Ai-^  I XIH  •  JtH  A I  ll«"'ll  >  iuF¥~i  0X7+  >  X 
A I  «»Ufh  t  XATtlT^*  •  ^¥+&  >  AUX  I  tf^A^  I IDA5*  I 
a^h^  I  «»<li^  I H  A«T^  •  If*^  *  ffAtf-Ar  1  fl^h^  1  iLAiLA  • 
Kyt  •  IIX.UA>  1 0^*1-  ■  WIA'  I  IflCli  ■  fl£  >  Hi-rfl^  >  AOf  < 
•Mill  ■  0«»in  *  M+ 1  ^A  •  Xf  AA  <  •XX+'f  >  i&XlUb  * 

xiUk  I  xx^  *  tfXfAA  i  Airiii  I  rfldi « xrxh^  * 


2= 

OtXHIili  I  rUA-  <  OfiffAAil  I  K*nUt  *  \if A^  •  hClk'fA  > 
HPi:  >  Ah  1 1  ftUMh  <  oir  AA  i  ^^A  *  ^tlM  ■  A4<h^  t  • 
MM < J&ML% i mUMJi, * «A?A«» •  9Ar  i hfll >  lUH-» 
flXfi-  ■  XA I  •110-  i  KAttlT*^  ■  0b4a  I  f Ai-flt^  >  lltf* 
A-  *  fiMV  I  hmMUhC  <  K-fl  *  AX*ni.X  >  «^J^)  *  A.f 
A>A  I  llCA-f 'A  I  ttht*  *  XA  *  toOft  •  XAttir*^  i  h«"  *  J& 
ta/"^  I  Xlft  ■  AP«^  i  •/•OCU I  XAj&ft  I  AfKir«^  *  ^f  If 

0^  •  -iicyj « xxrc » MArai^»  i  /»•  a«ii  « n*  •  x^x<a 

<ibC  *  XTAm  ■  iPiUlA  I  ^#1'  I  ftAF  <  aX?i- 1 XA 1 0U 


0-  ■  hitmar^  ■  0XA.A  i^jtA  •  i&a  a  >  x^x-iMbC  •  h 

tf-A-  ■  ^X'lll  •  HXli- 1  ftf 4h  I  hnnCth  •  XA  •  «lNh » XA 

•ftir*^  •  XTJf A^  1 1  ••A+  •  •ocvi  I  ohrhjhre  •  •• 
A+ •  xxrc  •  x«n « tf-iir  I +^  I «!/»+ •  lir  AA » xr^A. 

xxrc  <  H«"f:4-«- 1  ii«A  •  tuir«^  •  «ium  1  '10O•^  1 

Vir  I  All^  *  AACf  "h  <  ^mjl^  I  Tt^  ■  U^JIA  I  ^l/Jk  I 
^Af**^  •  OX*ni.Xt  I  llCA-f  A I  HPii  I  Ah  i  riUMh  I  «r A  A I 
^^  ■  ^tdM  I  A'fbh^  I  •XIH  *  i&XlUt  *  •HA  A  *  •A^A 
•• « 5Ar  •  h'Vt  •  iurt-i  C^fl" « H/«»}tX- » i«A+»»^ 

r  1 0X«"  •  Xh  <  f«X  •  AQCh  •  O^JtA^  1 9  •  KrXr^C  *  <h 
•ir^  >  AXA I  IIA«- 1  fimm*  >  X^X-fUbC  >  XllUf  *  X.f 
A>A  ■  tlCA-f  A  *  ^9*d^  >  AilX  •  HQiht^h  i  X^^O-  *  «»+Xr 
C  •  X'}i- 1  tfAXAl  I  >&liA>  •  i-f^C  I  Aflr  >  IKK- •  AX'O  *  « 
>L.s«.  AVT^^h  I O^t  * XTi- <  A.t  I hllf 4- •  Atf-A- < IIK:|  A  •  « 
A0-A I  AXA  I  f  «h«^  I  irt-^JUk  I  Xr-M  i  ^JiAt  •  Arh  ■ 


'  hCA'f  o.*.         *  em.  4*} 


3» 

A »  fclHl » fiMLX  I  «IIA^  ■  «A9A«»  i  5Ar  ■  Jk«l7  > 
U  ■  J&>/^  >  Kc  •  ^«:^«- 1  flTF^  I  /lair^*  *  h^  I  ttour  t 

X'>i- 1  A-fbh^ « fioch  I  ^Ai-  *  •«Tr  >  «j&^ax«xr44 

X  •  XAh  I M I  i&||f:Ar  ( tni- 1  jUi  I  ^^A  •  TT^  t  X7H  * 
Xlh  I  Uir  I  J&r«X  I  tf-Ai*  I  Tr4^  ■  >&'}*VX  ■  tUtf*  <  HU 
Ar  •  /TT ♦  •  •J5*lin  i  Xlh  •  ••llA «  ^^S-fl  » Itfjh  »  Hf^ 
7 1 0X«"%  I  im  I  XJlfii-  ■  Afflfh  I  >&1W  >  miu  ■  HX'}ft 
^  *  ^Vlh  I  r/''^^  >  HXIOA  •  9Cf^  ■  ffX^A  I  hi  •  A  A. 
♦  *  AAAH I  ^4-?lC  *  •OX'Y'I^  I  An  ■  i-m;  •  HXj&ll A  • 

«x«»% » stm-fi  I  x-o  •  rx**!  •  •XT » nxn^ » f!^l 
f.  •  0X«»  I  xii  I  xiKfJC' I  toTii-  •  rx«^i  •  •rx«^l"» 

•/0«TH  I X7II  *  Ohm  I  d^» » 0^+ 1 TJB.  I HXTIIA  i  VCy 

*  •  xm » AiiA » h^n  •  iuf+7+^:^^  nxi*  I TT  ♦*  • 

^0  >  Tib  I  HUAr  I  MttJi-OAiJ:  •  X'VlUf  •  Htf-A-  *  ^X')1i  * 

amcta  I  A*fr  *  «»r jc*^  ■  «a<h£  *  0tf-A-  *  ii«-A'tf  «^  *  hi 

flCi»  i  AA4X I  amLXh  i  hChf  *  |  «»Xr4A  ■  U-f  4<hh  I  »fL 
«»Ch  •  IIXJ&«*«^ I f*AA •  Uf^9^ * liai/«*i  A^  •  X 

nir^  •  iiuii  *  ift^pt  1 0iHih  ■  hn-trad  *  p*?  *  mw 

At  •  MX'tlldl  1 0-A-H:  *  J&XlUb  *  (Ml  *  ll'^i- '  'K  •  «rA 

X  •  AAA4M  ^4Uk  t  «»7/ikh  I /^Ih?  I  Tf  •  m^t4A  *  hVI 
r  •  AJl^  >  AXA  i  UAF«^  •  ^m«"4i  i  ^flC  •  ^/^h+  ■  0^A 
r^- •  ^M* •  •^H « «Xf  AA I  At Jf^  I  ATh  •  <MP«^i 
A^A  *  mhfMI$^  •  a«OAA  *  t4>A  *  OrirXt  •  X1ILX»  • 


33 


tlCA-f  A  i  IDAA-Il  *  HPi:  ■  All  >  r A/WU- 1  A«<fi4-  <  tfhi'lf  i 
fiMi,  I  gMAA  i  T  AA  t  »»A  *  «»'}AA  *  Mh^  *  9Ar  i 
Km  •  SFFTofFF^TJTi  X^K'OiibC »  HA^Ar  •  HX 
rc  I  H'lO-K  >  lAXAll  >  0f  A-Mlt^ll  i  i.Y  i  '•lAAh  •  ^Jf. 
A I  mitfMt  I  ^flU  i  «T^<  0'1,ini0tA'A  i«MiCb*  0£Ar-> 
AdA  >  tf-A-  *  Mir  *  ^^^O  •  TflC  *  AdA  *  tf-A-  •  AlA^  •  m 
/^^rt  a  aiMMl  I  nA;i*J&  ■  mhhML  >  flflflt  <  mh^t  i 
null)  I  ^OC  >  ^Af*  I  A^#*A  I  iDAAii&tft  I  MfS.i/^  i  xrk 
tf*  <  flKt*}  *  tfflA'IMii-  >  StDAJth  1 4:4kc  *  hh^  >  Ah  i  J&K 
•1:  *  A«<ht  ■  mih'i.'U  *  r AA  i  ^^A  *  ^'tiM  *  i&MUt  *  'HA 
A » fl»A9A^  •  9Ar  » K**!  •  Mr^ » M*^ »  •7^1*  •  Mf* 

c^fA  <  iii:A*ai  I  n^^n  •  ♦ci*  •  bin  i  «»7ia  <  x-aA  *  r 

AA  I  H>&)IA'  i  KAtkT  >  «X1H  i  /^f^Ti  *  afl«»4-A-ir«^  *  >& 
t«-«^ » XIB  •  SMr^lt « J&flA  •  ♦Jt'«"  »  iXT  •  HATH  • 
lUk-^  I  mir  I  Xini.X-IMbC  <  X^Xr  *  Htf-Ar  *  l-X')!!  •  HX 

1+ 1  mchi  A«T|r*  «r£-^*0a<iM:>«tf'A>*ii«-A'fc'M^i 

tfXl'h  I  lacb  I  AA^X  *  OXCX/h  1 0OXr4A.h  ■  aXIOC 

A<ii«-f  >  o-in  I  MXi  *  ^rj^t  >  Af-ftn  *  hT^*Y!k*rwf 

+ 1  AdA  •  tf-At  >  tfX.'hUf  r  <  X?li  I  HlLXli  •  t<-^  ■  M  t  S 
II  <  0Allh  I  XIILXt  i  X.rA^  I  hCA-f  A  ■  1^9^  *  ••Ai'i  5 
Ar  I  idXI»  •  h^  •  jMi-ll'^AtfBiXAihflW'^JWJ'^A^* 
Pii  i  X?h  I  ••Xi:  <  ^X.X  >  XfUUI  1 4-«-AM  *  9'M'  ■  NX 
•?>&  1 0<i"7^A  •  H^^r  I AI14-  ■  iDflX'Y'Mi  >  XA.«*?h  ■  X 
^Xr  *  ifU  •  tf-A-  *  H-f  A<hh  I  ai|l«»ch  i  «"f  ir  i  r AA  • 

HXj&«"«-t  I  ai/«- 1  frflX  *  xniAJkir«^  *  iiuh  *  h+a 

li*  i  •Tf  I  «rAX  •  AAMh  I  IfXr^Jf^  >  *mh  ■  /^Ih^i  •? 
f  *  ««OAA  I  A4^r  ■  AA^ *  AXA I  ^m«Hk  i  pii  i  ^OC* 


33 


4Jk  I  flr Jtrh+ 1  X^lU) '  liClk'f  A  <  r  AA  *  ^JtM  *  0»tdM » 
h«"  >  J^thl  I  Atf-Ar^  I AXA  i  J&m«Hi  i  Pii  •  ai^fl'l'  i  nvi 

•^  •  Aii^^r « A*Air«^  •  w^ift  •  ♦jwi  » -OAA  •  h«» » fl 

tf^C  i  X9*klf «» I  tf-A*  I  h\tf^  I  «"1AA  <  aii*  A^  *  A^JSUI  • 
^n4M  i  NlU^diiAtf- 1  i-AiOl  i  AXIlUt  *  KxMt  >  llCA-f 
A  ■  INI'I*  I  Ah  •  f^tUUh  I  ^r  AA 1 1  ^JiA  i  ^7AA  *  A«<h^  ifoi.  aa  k 
•XIH I  mdafi>  ( hf*^JC'«»  1 5Ar  •  fihlLk.  >  «IIA A  *  •A 
»g'All  ■  »#'AJC « UKf^UiT  •  A^A«»  •  9Ar « K**!  • 

•Km  t  ji<yt  •  bin'*  ••A+ » nt  •  r^^r  a  •  mm  •  f'M 

AA*  t  ma^dA  I  ^4Jk  >  •OnfiKA«Ttir«i>'  •  A^J^Al*  •  /^A 
&  I  tfjUIA  I  IIJ&m«^  <  K17 1  0Xm  •  5^  •  K«TJ&  *  M* 

ll^  I  OH  •  TJ^  I  iB^«^«»1f  ■  ofi^'i'ha  1 4JM<ll  *  «X^ 
A  •  A-0*J&  I  tf-Xi*  I  Vf4n^^  *  ^4v*  •  d^  i  ••Ai- <  Xroai  < 
X7II I  ^Urc  I  »h0^  I  >&ti5«-  ■  Tf  •  ^0  •  CXA*  •  «-Xii  < 
Ufmr*  I MH I  ISdiA  i  lunrtb  •  AA^  >  h-a  •  oioiaX:  • 

«^liLA « ^J|Jk  1 0aOfi  A«»  I  t£-A^  >  /*'AA  >  K7H  *  J^talh  • 
«QMn  *  XA  >  r AMr«»  I  bfru-i  «Xf*JM^  i  A-flA- 1 TT 
4^  >  lUIrl*  I  J&TOC  *  A.^  1  bll?^  •  AA4IX 1 0X«»  I  Kb  I  bU 
1  *  ^A«»  ■  Kr^^i*  I  AAA*}  I  iH-tlUI  •  b«m<  ftft-t*^ 
•UK  •  ^JfrA  i  IMK I  flA47 1  hJMjn  <  OKfi-  ■  ?aj&  •  llCA 
•tn  •  J&»*f>  •  KIlUk-IMbC  I  K^ILKr  <  Htf-ft-i  ^K11I<K 

'  tlMM.  an  ma.        *  em.  7. 


34 


t^^  I  Atf-A*  I HC I  •ai'fr  *  0AA I  ddi-  *  tf-A- 1  Afi^Vi  • 
H/l^^^:'}  ■  «nflC  I  ^Hhi-  ■  flini.Kh  I  Tlh  •  AUA^  I  All 
+««fl  I  A-«^  I  ^J|A  I  ^JdM  *  flA«^  I  »fl^>&A- 1 AK1IIA 
t  •  A.f  A<A  •  llCA'f  ft  I  HPi:  •  Ah  *  9'MUh  ■  «r AA  *  ^^A  ■ 
^'i4M  •  MUh^  I  oiKIll  i  fiiM^  1 0IIAA  *  «A5A«"  ■  9 
Ar « K*»l  •  mHA »  ••ft+ » TH.  •  /^ AA  « luF+"«  fflX » 

^fUi  I  HiiA>  *  t^oii^^  I  Hj&^-tax  ■  Oil  *  hrmjaubj:  *  M 
nM  I  mtur  *  ^Ktii  *  Kr  Ah  *  ^^Ai  *  i]L0-d « ?o.r  •  ft«» 
h  I  tfuntf-A- 1  ^^A  >  •^JiJk  I  ^'}Aft  •  tfuntf-A*  ■  ftrh  1 1 

ftXAh  I  iDVA+flf^^h  I  h«»  I  ^i.'h  I  ^0 1  inii  *  f«K  I  «• 

AdA  •  tf-Ar  I  nflC  *  HAj&'ir}  >  0^OC  I  A'M:j11+ I  tf-A- •  0* 

f ^4- 1  oiKrAit  *  tfJkxri;  ■  nsioAitii  i  noit  *  Ah  i  rmu 

0*  *  «rft  A  i  ^^A  •  «»7^  A  >  AiMi^  >  mMM  •  I^Mtl  •  »U 
MX  *  0A9A0"  ■  ?Ar  i  h«l7  >  luR^i  ¥€!h  ■  ^J|A  •  Ht 
'Oh-t'  •  AAAI  <  AXA  •  J^«"4i  *  h«^  i  AKbHr^  >  ^«-/*^  i 
iwA.A  >  *Ul  >  «i&n A I  MUjkiUlU:  I  f*ftA  ■  tf- All«^  «  »h 
A  >  f^9't^  I  ailHl  ■  J&OA-  •  r  AA  *  «OAAh  ■  0Mt.ft  *  * 
M  i  J&n A I  KAdAr  i  KAQO.Ii«^  a  «hA  *  J&t«*«^  <  jUIA'  * 
')fl  *  X^K-fklbC  >  hr  AW  >  «JwM '  ^M I  l&fiA  ■  »htf- 
•f  <  AX^K-IUbC  a  •X'^f'ls  I  PSUt  *  did  *  «»}t'J^>^ 
AF  a  iDXm  I  VY.Jh  I A.^  I  bUV^  I  IIA-is  *  AOaiirli  ■  ^ 
••T « ♦**  •  AAAI I  ♦«9+  •  tl!!*  I  OjtJt*  •  ^*CT  » lUlf 

•h  >  0 1  i&^jrr  I  itf\  >  r JtrJhi- 1  «a7^  I  ^^A I  ffjuiA  I 

h«iiii  I  ciid  I  «-Mi  1 0JtrJ^  a  tijh  i  TCJtft  *  ffiv/b  ■ 


^i. 


37 


Ah  ■  'H-K«^  ■  0f  Ktf^h  I  Otf-A*  i  HlOCli  I  r  AM  i  O^li 
je^h  i|i4L«»li  *  tfAlUii  A.rA'A'tiCA'f  A<X^lU>  "  Xtii 

•MU  •  IIA)#4l  I  A.f  A^  I  liCA-f  A  *  XIHAt  >  HPii  i  Ah  i  T 
4C1I  •  HI-  ■  OAAl  I II0IHIM I  AiL«-A  •  «Alld£"}%  <  ICU- 

QKIlUKt  •  mmj(:^\  i  A.f A-A  i  liCA-fA  •  0i&1ihl  •  f«Ai-  • 

m^nttt  1  ii^^r  1  Aii^  *  AHi'tfifai  aHi«^iA<«jn4* 

♦M  ■  «^^  >  "M^J^  •  ^A«*»  I  ^flC  i  0A«^*  AX^lU»* 
mmfiM  I  A.r A4k  <  hCA-f  A  ■  Wlii  ■  Ah  ■  rhfyfh  *  mrh 
A  ■  ^4ik  •  «^iLA  I  A-n<h»  I  rnhVU » J^MUt  >  0HA  A  *  0 
A4A«»  1 5Ar  ■  hll  ■  074.1  • /" AA I  ••Ai*  I  111.  >  »k 

a  ■  JL7  >  S^JfJk  I  «0/Jk  *  0ll/&^5i<'fl  •  iUIA  >  K11  ■  AX 

«• « 4^LA  •  «*Xi>  i  M/mr^  I  >& VfX  <  XT  10  •  XA.A  *  **• 
A  •  HAM  •  tfAt^Xtfix  I  XTJ^t^  ■  A'flA- • '»*+i- «  «Xr 


4. 


3« 


h  I  tfAtaCA-f  A  >  a^^A  I  ^JdM  ■  nyj&*Kt  *  aA«"  *  njuh  i 

AX^^)  •  ««"£^t  ■  A^A-A  >  lie  A-f A  •  HPi:  •  Ah « rMW 
0*  <  0rA  A  i  ^HM  >  o"?^  •  A'Aih^  *  ath'i.V  *  J&XHL^  ■  «»ll  A 
^ » «A9A«" » ^Ar « K^ll  ■  oTN^itf-Ai'i^^Ki/^AAi 

^  •  ^^A  •  AdA  I  tf-A*  t  Ufi^^iJ  I  ^OC  •  «A4-||A4- 1  Av^ 

•li  >  /«-/^X  1 0JUIA  >  XII «  AX«"P  I  -OXA.*  Xf*^>HJ& 
^tifi  I  mh^t  I  xr'M  *  nil  A- 1  bin  «  «X«"%  *  •flXA.^  I 

XT'in  i  TXn» » X1+ » AHA** » Jt-IIA  •  i^lC  •  h«^  • 

•  ■  bdift  0X7+  <  XTflC  <  XX:  >  AdA  i  1X>A  •  tiClxtn  > 
XltLX-IMbC  >  Htf-Ar  >  ^X'lll  *  X-O  t  AX^ULX  *  ««"X^I  * 
X.f  A>A  *  liCA4^  I  Ah  I X I  tdiii  ■  X^'OCth  i  JhA  *  liCA 

•tfi  I  XcXAi:ir«^  I  »Ah  I  hndi-  >  tiLi-  •  a-o  *  mi"?  ■ 
ex.  *  xr£-A«-  >  "TkAch  I  ochihjir«^i  «to.^mi«X 
jfrx « A-«^ » xn  jh  I  •Ar/'*^ » jui-f«^  •  ufl«^ « /xr 

+«-  •  h9A  i  AM^%  *  AAxf  ?%  >  mtn*  1 4ir  *  Aii^*  a 

ACr+  •  ^Aji^  I  "Tk^J^  •  «0^  I  t^A  *  ^nt'^  I  OhCA 
•fA  «  XA«"  >  Ah  I  imdit  <  g»J6A » gXtH  I  J&Xltl  I  «IIA 
A  *  »A?A«»  1 9Ar  >  Xll  ■  ¥aSrt  flA47i  AXA  ■  lKffl«» 

*  I  ^«-/^X  *  X.M  *  #M  >  h«m  1 0-A+  i  Xh-i;+  ■  XT £■ 
^d  •  XAt^A^*  i  qart;-M-  *  XA.A  ■  *M^  *  +40^+  ■  m 
\f*Vt «  X7H I  UAr  •  A.+  *  bllf  +  >  J^J^A  I X7II  •  jBHIA  i 
X'lHLX'IMiiC  •  r  AA  *  tf-Atl«^  *  XA  •  i&t«-«^  I  jUIAr  I  r  A 
A  •  «^^h  ■  mKKH '  «MA  ■  fiOA  *  X  AdA*  i  XAaiUK^  « 
XA  *  HA*- 1  AfIA- 1  •0}  •  'HI  •  X^ILX-OikC  •  XrAW  >  mK 


37 


Ah  I  'H'fc'O  ■  iDf  Klf-Mi  I  Otf-A*  <  HlOCli  i  rUM  *  fl^h 
^H- * Mlf-A* * Ot'-lb+h I KA0» •  Mir  •  H+yT-A •  9A«".i  h 
A^h  i{i4L«h  *  •AJUii  A.rA'A'llCA'f  Ai^llU)  "  hh> 

X  ■  llC^^Ha  *  «?Xrc  •  h««  I  Mi- 1  Oihir^li  •  K«n  I K 
^MA  •  MiLitf-h  I  A.r A-A I  tiCA-f  A  *  MtUA  ■  HPii  i  Ah  >  T 
*Ca  t  Hi*  I  OAAl  t  il0iHlh>  I AA9-A  •  nhadf^t  *  Kih 
*  ■  m^fiih0»  1 1-f:^A->4-^>*i  ^J|^hi«OAAi^&u-> 
QKIlUKt  i  •^£^>  *  A.f A4k  i  taCA-f  A  •  mfittt  *  f«Ai- 1 
^A^  •  •^d'hfl  I  ^if^  I  «OiLA  ■  AXA  •  Jbt/^K.  •  Xf*kiM 
•iifK*  I  M^r  I AA^  *  Atfttf-Ufl  *  fkH  •  0f^A  ■  ffXrV^  I 
A-^  *  M-^i^  <  n^di-O  •  ffllh^  *  a^*nt  *  hC?«^  I A 
^4ik  *  «^iLA  i  •Mij;  •  M*^  *  ^flC  ■  OA«^i  AX*nut> 
0«"A^I  ■  A.f  A4k  i  hCA-f  A  «  Wit  I  Ah  ■  riUUh  *  «r  A 
A>^JM*  «OiLA  i  tHUh^ » gXfM » fihlUL  *  »HA/Ll  i  0 
A4A«" » 5Af»  •  X**"*  ■  ^HA  I  /*'AA  *  ••A+  •  IJU  >  «X 
rv  I  ^IIX  •  XT ^JlJk  *  0A47 1  tf-Ai*  *  f:X'«^  >  •X7«UC? 
th  >  X7II I  ^-«A  *  AA|£  I  XiHIh  •  ^Hlh-t' *  ^X:/^  <  mnd-t 
a  •  IL?  *  S^Jfik  ■  «i>7iLA  *  •H)&^?+'fl  •  IMA  I XII  ■  AX 

«•  >  4^LA  •  ••Xis  i  tf^inr ^  ■  >& VfX  •  Xr-M  I  JkA.A  ■  #* 
A  >  flA4>  ■  •A44X«^  •  XrJ^t^  *  A-fiA- 1  TTti-  «  tfXf* 


n. 


38 


A  *  ^^•a  i  ^£-«"  * /••^HP  *  AAj&fllT  >  Mil  *  JK-OA*  I  &«• 
a  •  Kfli^Hh  I  Aj&^n?  I  «tf-A- 1  «"AMii:li  •  Xfr/t  *  |  fltf-iir  i 
niWh  •  •tf'ilr  •  <n/+h » •tf-ilr  •  /^C5+h  •  «Kni » t 

AVnUtiiUhJ:  a  ^711 1  AilA  >  KKf*?  *  nSMttJKlUkC  *  fc 
•0 1  HAdA  I  If-A*  *  Htf-Ar  ■  J&XtH  >  «a£«»A^  >  MOJM  >  A. 
rA*A  •  toCA-f  A 1 0O^^A  i  «»?iLA  i  mttt^'^K  i/^P*ma 
^f^tl^  >  T-ilK  >  KAi:  I  ^7+  •  AdA  i  Yt-lt  I  IktiliCAtn" 
»hrii  *  i&llA  >  /"AA  >  All  >  0>&nA  >  ha"1l  >  Mm  Af 

A+ > /^AA  •  •KKr?  I  •oh  >  KfhiM  AX*1HLX)  *  A.f  M  •  ll 
CA-f  A  *  •fl£0AX:h  i  A.f  A^  i  liCA'f  A  ■  K*ni.M  *  ««»A^ 
Xt  *  »n^^  t  «OAA  i  0fl^*VJk  *  /*'P  I  0^£-At  *  Jbh 
•I:  <  Xli-  •  AdA  *  If-A*  >  H<hf  C^^  >  Ai- 1  kCAiin  «  «/^A 
A I  J&A Jh AF  >  X7II I  J&^A*  I  tKrn*  •  0/^ AA  •  J&OA  >  Mk 
«^  >  hhr^  •  KKr?  >  «AX«"P  I  KIlA  i  AA^  >  f-^IC* 
tDAMi*  I  ihnA  •  HX  AP I  ^A  <  «X«"  •  Kb  ilOUT  •  mlkm  i 
Kli  >  JCtf-JK  <  ^A  •  UMi-  >  nSM^  I  aif}  ■  aiX^iMiion 
•h  I  HKAP  •  ^A  •  «X«"  I  Ml  I  Uf'}ti  £*«•/& «  fc'flif*X«» 

1 1  idx«»  « Hxn* » •x«» « xiii  X'lwjtinxr^'*'  i« 

U- 1  f-X«"^  i  X7H  i^^A  •  AA£XAntir«^  >  »Xf*JM^  * 

+xr^ « yj6«K+  •  jmia"*  xthi:  •  x*  •  h«m  •  xniUf  * 

X^IL  >  tf-A- 1  XO-tf- 1  AX^HLX)  *  0«»X^)  *  X.f  A^  •  llCAf 
A  >  HAh  I  Xt<hii  ■  X7«Ci:h  >  «XX«Tth  >  XCXA-fcl  ir«^  > 
0Ah  I  Xir^Sf.  *  *ij¥  I  A<fl  ■  mi^p  t  ex.  *  XrA^J&>  ^^f* 

Ah  •  Aiah  *  XXJl  •  HX./A'I-CX.  i  aAAMT*^  •  XIILXi  A^ 


39 


Ktnf^  *  AXA*  I  ll«»  I  J&Ctall-  >  ^J&Ah  I  •MtTTd  >  yj&*T? 

l>K*  I  flS^Ah  •  HPii  I  Ah  I  A-fkht  I  •Xt'U  *  f*AA  ■  ^J|. 
A  *  «^/Jk  *  %\»X  I  «llA/:b  *  'A^A**  (  9Af*  >  Kn7  • 

0  >  r^OA  *  fflX  >  AP  >  •xnjtihU'  *  mm^^^WKt*  mm- 

Ai-* tf-Ari Z^;*!!* iMV  i  h«m  i  4^flA  •  ^Ohi- 1  ^J|^ i 
44IX  *  ^  *  tf-A- *  a^^^?  i  IOC  *  «A^A-i- 1  yj&T?^  I 
aitt4 » fli»»y^ » 11^  tXli-tA^A  I  »A- 1  JH-'hCA-t/l  I 


t  i  441%^  *  K-fl  i  IU;«AJMl  *  A.rA4k  I  taCA-f  A  >  /^C#-  *  V 

\.r0A- 1  Irtirt- >  AXA  > +«»^ill- *  ^mUl  *  'M  I  Km  • 
HI^MW  t  Ah  I  IOC  *  OlITA^  *  WA  *  ll««  *  V^tr  *  A 
A^  >  ^1l4- *  XA  >  MLKh  I  nA  i  ^llAA- >  «^Abik  I  ;iif 
^  >  AhX  *  AMklf «^  •  a£«A£-ll  I  VPii  *  Ah  i  f'AikO* « • 
rAA  I  ^Mi » ^lAA » frO<h» » gXtll '  ^Xm'gllAA ' 

h^a  t  MB  1 0A#-  *  ;^Al•i•  I  #-Ai-  *  MI^A  *  IWn«H^  >  A. 
♦  >  iNf?^ « Mil  * /MC  >  MLtf- *  ^  *  il/<nf*<f  *  ffh^^  I 

juiA  *  luiif*th  I  Xiiw  ■  aA«»  *  h-a  I  •«A£- 1  •'•1/ik  * 

^JMki  «JUlA*iljWn^^tKn'}  a  0h^ii*  Xf*JM^  *  hr 


KAff-«k^^  *  afUrt4^^  •  Xffl  >  IIA«- 1  |i4LA  i  M4^  *  t 


40 

«x«»%  <  *&.n  <  iiKT«*t  a  K'ni.K'a«kc  *  iiA^Ar  *  nuir  * 

^MH  *  K-fl  >  AX«nU  *  •«"A^t  *  A.rA*A  >  hCA-f A  ■  W 
n^  1 0AA-M  i  HILKh  I  KlilC*!-  <  •HH.Kh  •  KX«V+  i  XI 

«^  *  AACr^  *  ^mMr  *  jKXlLl  ■  *>  *  hdH^^  *  «OAd  * 
^J|A  *  f  Hit  I  OKii^  *  J&tlVA*'^  *  IMIX*  *  tf-Ai-  *  HflA^ 
jK « «01/^^ll  a  ll«»  >  ^4<A  *  mU&^iibAtfH  I  i-A^tl  >  OX 
*llUt  *  ««"A^t  *  X.f  A*A  <  hCA-f  A  *  HPii  *  Ah  i  f*AMh  * 
•TAA  *  ^4^  I  «^^  *  A-flrfi^  *  tHIC'gXfM  I  ^XIU* 
soL  30*.  0IIA A  *  'A^Atf"  >  ^Af*  I  Xni  a  o^^Wh*  /"AA  *  0X  | 
m « ^h^  •  Xr^JlJh  •  nAA1«*'A*»f:Jt«^»*#-A+» 
XllA-'Xu*  I X"}!!  i  4-4IA  *  AAj^  >  ^Xi-  *  ^Xr4^  *  mndi' 

fl  i  xp  *  ^^  >  «o^  *  •iiM^'Hi  *  jKOA  >  xni  ■  «AX 

«•  i  t A^  *  ^Mt  *  V/flir^  I  xr-ifl  <  MLA I  fM  «  ^Vl 

X  *  nA4t  I  •M^X'x  I  Xf*jM^  I  AiiA-  *  'rr*t  ■  «xr 

•H I  hAfl  I  oa^A-  >  A-CAC^  *  ^«X+  *  VM"  *  UitTflC*  A.t  > 
llUf ^  I AXA  >  fli/^h^  I  ^tm-  ( «ArX«*^  *  A-tf-Zl  a  X 
ItLXiMbC  I  X«nUr  >  Iftf-A-  >  ^X'tH  I  hOrO-  *  AXmXt  * 
««aA-^t  I  A.r A*A  *  hCAM  a  A4^  t  XIUl  *  HA^Ai-CX.  * 
0-A+  *  f:^  I  Ufi^  I  niis  I  HPii  >  tnxh  I  liofi-  *  «taji-  > 
•X-lTAh « amLMl  *  XA- 1  h«a  I  ^Ihl  I  AXA  i  Xr^-A'Hi* 
fi^r^iOk'  i  AiL**A  1 0Aat^^  *  ffAtf-A-  *  I^C  *  ffAtf-Ar  * 

Ainr  *  •i>*<ic  I  tf>A- 1  iiiK^^^'}  >  flic  *  fiiXi- *  ini>h  t 

*  om.  J^. 


43 


juicb  *  Inn  •  f:^^- *  XA*  *  KAliA  >  •J&l  *  «flAA  *  «i;n 

mKJI^UXt  *  A4A I  A^A * «miA •  ^Mf*  •  mKU^f!^*Jh 

r  AT » •x.rrn  •  xrt » MifrA*  ■  *AAniAM*« 

A^  *  A^«K>  *  IXTOA * m  *  4^4  >  «tf-A- 1 H/UIAO*' flK 

41.  tXVV •  9£ I  OXll**  h«»  I  K^^^"^  *  JB4IA0-I 
•\,r>l^*XrA«X*  lUklt^«»*i4A  "  IIK'>flA  *  HAIUkri 
flllL  t  j&dAlh  •  Hi:  a  AMll«mA  *  A.A4-<fcAfl  *  ll«^  a  ffX 
«»d ■  «MH- *  A1A4- * «X«^  *  V^l!  >  llAj&liA-  *  imi 

f*  ■  tt^-OM'  *  0fr^  a  m\0»Afi  *  aiUh«aC  >  0X«»%P  *  lUrti 

>  ■  rr^  I  AJki*  >  AA-f  t  xxmr  *  xr£^^  *  AimfAoL  I 

M^  *  »«••  *  M*  *  44Ul  *  ar94^  *  M  >  KCK/u*  >  XTA* 
't^S  I  ^AiL  a  flX'HAl^  *  IMtr  *  0Ci  *  A.Ai£^  *  •nCik  > 

jttiic  I  X'>ii » /hrc « x*n  a 

4a.  ^HH  •  91  •  0X1+ » h«a  •  -^Pl^*  V*V^ «  ^ 
]l«»J|.  *  AKiLA  i  «M  I  fftf-A*  •  AA£Xr5.^<K^  *  rAA  i  *» 

nx*>+»  ft*-f>  •  iw» » fAP-jt^ » XA«a » A.*  •  w:^  • 

AX^  •  A«jt«a-  •  Mrm-n » T* » fi^^nnt « XA«»  •  +11I1 

l?«^a  

43.  *xini » gc  •  axu- •  xii  •  niRWi- » iMt » nAr » r 


4a 


«^<:  *  iu&«-Aiii  *  xr^A-M- •  Hi- 1  tocAtn  *  xrt  *  M 

QChi  qch  I  «t£'A  i  t  A-A  *  Alie>  *  AKA  >  XT^-A-Hi  ■  ^ 
i/^h^  I  A'HIi:^  >  IIA.^^A'}  *  AAA^  *  mh^MM-*  M^t  * 
f*au:^  ( af:cy^h  *  «lH-M/^t  *  «A«»AiLCi-  *  MA  •  X 
h^fUHUh  t  Hfltf-A- 1  taO-C  *  Arh  *  A9A«"  *  ^Af*  *  Xn 

t  ■  «^iHiiXf*/^;'iM«aAiirHi*/^;'iMAiicA'fA*« 

Hj&^-nin  I  jKflA  <  Xf}  »  «1*IH1  •  K^  *  tfflA<irHi*ll 
I  AllCA-f  A  >  •JB4IA  *  H/S^-nin  i  hflt  >  ffXt?  ■  0J^ 


^4: 1  tl«*1l  I  ^-KA,  *  XILIl  *  XIO.^11  >  ^0  >  CXA^  t  m\-4t 
A  >  Xndlll  *  X'M.X  I  XA«*  *  tiiLAh*^  *  AX^flCiih « «AX 
Xntli  *  liShtnt  a  Mir  i  M^^  *  AACr-h  *  ^mJk^  *  M 

;>  ( ii^JiJk  *  «o/ik  *  /^;>V'  >  •li«^  <  AtoCA-f A  •  iaxaIi  * 

XIrth  •  •Ihl  •  nr^ » ^^Ik  •  0«»A»i*li » rniAn/^-i  r/^ 

aU  *  J&CbO-  *  IOC  a  tthmOii  *  X.rA^  I  toCA-f  A  *  Wii  * 

Ah  I  miuh  1 0f*AA  *  t4<ik  *  ^tiM  ■  A-flWi^  •  rnKXn  1 
^Xltt « gllA/A » gA^^ « ^Ar » hflt  ■  HMA^TTx 


40.  TOniTg^  nxit  •  **  •  ii«»*1*** » /■tifc' •  f:* 

/+  *  t^n  >  XhA  *  mo-  *  mfiKO*  I  tf-A-«^  >  X-AX  *  AXA. 

A  *«M  i  ••-Xii  * /•ox  *  xiH  *  juidi  *  tfj^rr  •  avx-a 

X  * XIH > ^-flA  •  tXtH-h  t  XltLXiMbC  *  «9tC-fl  ■  Ah* 
*Hn  I  «A  I  Hffll'Aht  I A+A-A  >  h/^tatt  >  fffl^Ah  1  Xl 

bl sob.  nil  I  Af*J^c  I  wmjtiO'  1 9^i\^dfi *  A]{r;>ai  AAi** M 

X  *  «Atf-A-  *  XIAA  ■  autMlMn  <  XHLXiblbC  >  fltf-Ar  1 II 

hcniMx  *  Atf-A-  *  9fd^  >  mnUku*  ■ «« *  a«AX-h « x.r 

'  om.  ^XHII 1 9  * 


43 


M  >  llCftM  *  X*1lUt  *  VlHx*  Ah  t  rftM»»frfl«h»« 
AA  *  ^JM  *  «^^  *  A?A«*  1 9  Af*  *  Km  ■  iiKTF«2/^ 

finch  *  inn  *  ^^+  *  XAr  i  xaiia  *  mfit  *  0fiAA  *  men 

0IUMC1II' >  A^A  *  A^A  1 0II11A I  *Mf*  •  •A.||«»A  f  ih 

dlf^  *  AJ'-flh- ■  HMOA  *  m  *  4:4  >  tftf-A- *  HIUIAIM  OK 
b-^t  *  XIUjk'ILhi:  ( J&«Alh  t  IIArli  *  IHIA4- 1  KKlH^i 

41.  ^XVH 1 9£  *  0X1+  *  h^  <  X.«H:+«-  <  AilAtf-  ■ 

•A.nn  *Xf*Aiixi  oxjrv  *44.h »  ixiaa  *  hikjia'* 

OXIL  •  jUlAlh  *  Qt  "  AHh^HA  *  Kfi^dM  >  |l«^  ■  ffX 
«»A * A«H- *  AfA^ * 0X«»11  *  ll^AC  *  NXj^bA*  i  im* 
«^M  *  M!«»  *  Afia*!- 1 M^- 1  XA«»  *  ^ilC  *  Xlh  *  fJU 
f*  *  A^^+  •  mnfi  •  «X«»AP  I  MUh«»C  *  «X«"1^P  >  OMi 

)  ■  fnffA  *  Aaii-  *  AA-f  t  xxmr  *  hrxnc  >  ktm^iun.  • 

M:^  *  XC  *  Xli  *  fA.Ii  I  iir94^  *  XA I  XCX/IM  XT £> 

^iiic»  X1B » fXrc » x*n  ■ 

]l«*^  *  AKiLA  *  MA  I  mft/t  *  AAfiXr5.^«?+  *  f*AA  1  f 
«+*  I V^^  *  M*«»rm*  * 'M I  VA.A  1  <fitA  *  •^ncf*  * 
0X1+  *  JC«*f1  *  h^  I  rA»-JU^  I  XA«"  *  A.+  *  1111?^  * 
AX^  I  dtmp^  *  AJS-0-n  *  f*  *  f^UV  >  XA«»  ■  +l(ll 

et 


43.  +xini>9e«oxi+*%ii*iii&5Uk-iiH:*]iArif* 
x«"^  •  onjn  •  ^i+o-  •  +i-ix«^  •  hrvPT » xr*j5r«»t 

J&«MK<  •  n+!t  *  XfmiC  *  «j&+<iiM-*Xll1!ir«^i«it]lA 

» * 'M  •  xiHLX'ibiu:  ■  pxri^n^jf*  •  jMi^  •  #- A+ •  i«i: 


<fct^  I  or  *  -M  *  tfA- 1  ^A  *  4-f*UC^i  'H0-Xi>>^A  *  XfH. 
K-fUbC  >  ll/llld  *  K:4i<  ■  «/f:'r>' *  ihl!^:  I 'M  *  HI*  I  lie 

+^fli*- « xr/^mx  •  XT**** » f^r^^  •  •x.ri'H « 

45.  ^XHii  1 9e  I  nxi+  •  ii«» » jtAA-  •  +5*0  •  xr/^ 
\rK9d  I  fliaaiii  *  nA.*tf-A-  >  aas£*  lutrt^  >  •xj&^o* 

<!!••  1 0X.«^%  *  HXlflA  I  rXtf^l  <  Xr/^mX  ■  mKfi 
rJ¥  *  Xrktf*  ( mhjn^  *  0Xj&^llf:%  •  XA«»  *  /^Pv- 1 

0*Xii  *  AllCA-f  A  a  mH-tr^  *  f*X«"0 « MIAO-  •  XTktf- « 
mKfSJt  *  S^Off'P  *  Ip^  a  XA«»  *  I  A.«k:4*0- *  i^h5 

••  •  •x.n+t » XT*** » XA«»  •  +n<sii+  •  »** »  oa*^  » 

AXIlLXt  *  X.rA'A  >  bCA-f  A  ■  h«»  1  ^«»m«*  >  XTUh  * 
XA«»  *  A«^  >  AhCA-f  A  *  0*Xii  a  •naiii  <  f-^tlh  *  Xlh  • 

n-i*fli9f«  *  h«»  I  xj&^ii?0*  I  •x^Aiii'Mi  *  xriHk« 

•111  li«»  *  X.^1i*1  >  li«"  I  Xll*  I  AA.I1  <  UhifAli  *  tftf^lti* 
5ir  >  AhCA-f  A I  liO-^  *  noil  *  •h^fflih  1  •h>ll  •  TWf't* 
hrhkCir  *  ■!>»•  a  0^h0-7 1  h«»  I  haocrb  •  AhCA-f  A  >  A 
X«»  •  ffJ^  1 7Ai:^  *  hn^PO'  *  •AX4*  <  MaHUnn  I  Xf* 

jtf d  I  ^ama  •  if^k  *  ox^'Mi  *  w-p  *  i^^f  mh  a 

46.  tXHll  >  91  *  0X1+  •  V*?+  •  •♦A*^!^' » ^fs* 
*  M'l^OX*  *  tf-A- *  M+ 1 -to  *  XJLA  •  «M  ■ 'M  « IIA- • 


45 

— UJU  ■         ■  I.       ! 

A*  t  Mi- *  AX^  *  A.tlA  Jk^  I  jlf  I  /**;!  •  9^0  *  ^/''fl 

f*A4ix  I  a^Mm- 1  A^^si-  *  iMh  *  ^Ai-  <  mc  I  vj^ia 

C  *  Atf-Ar  ■  iV^  ■  M  <  flHI  >  9AP  >  A044I  •  ll^ll^  >  «Afl 

^  •  viLA»«tA«xm » f  n*-fc.  •  AX-a/i-  •  hcA-t/v^ » 
iMt  •  •A^^  •  iT'oci*  •  ••rt^'O « «rr « n+xrcf-  •  •• 

A^A  ■  •t^A•^  I  f^«Kl  •  •rX^Tl' » i-V^Ji^ »  »•! 

j^«r«»  I  •j&KA*  *  -to  I  MiLK'OdbC  ■  0xni  *  fi^«^ 

a  ■  0A>  ■  /•lUM'  *  Ai^i.  •  ur  I  U^Ar  *  AAS  *  «-Ai'*«"lni^ 

nic)' «  */xrc  i  ni-i  iiAo-  *  0^<ii^>  tf-A-mAr?* 

XA«»  t  XIMjl'fklbC  t  Ib^lC  I  lUU.  *  Vj&nuc  *  •0*Xii  > 
W^fHi  1 0-A+  *  Iki-  *  raUxtfi  *  tff ^Af:  *  X^kif'  1  tf* 
A- 1  Xbf  >  AM^  1 0)&)-:Mt^ « A/^lt  I  XtH.X'lUiiC  *  90. 

r  *  THi  •  AX«»  *  K^i,  *  -M  *  tf A*  I  «»ii7  >  4-riN:^  •  «a 

jf4^  *  AW&liA  *  XTIUI  *  •AX«"  i  llAr  *  ll^nuc  *  XJ&J(^ 
C  *  XTfti- *  hCAtn  *  •«*Ii7 « "to  t  tf A- «  ^hruci*  <  AH 
y  t  A«M-f1l%  I  fi^rmw  *  ^A  •  VI&^IC  1  Pi:  *  110-Xii* 
4Sqai  •  AAK I  HJ&Ar/  *  ffi-ATA  I  VX.aiAJ&h  I  Olff  *  0^^ 

•■ai  *  OtfMNih  •  «OAA  •  ^j|^  •  xr^o  I  Hj^nuc  *  «h«» 

H  •  ¥tm^  •  YA'K^h  •  riM**  OX^i'i  H^Ar»  tf^M.* 


46 


•JOB 


h  a  •nXf'Mi I f «T7 1  tf-A- *  A4X * <h«^ * -Ifl * Iki'lllC 

IHin  *  «^M- 1  «"lil  I -M  >  j&iMCt  t  IH:  I  «OAA  I  ^i|A  ■ 

•AK«*  t  M  *  dA+  *  HKAO  i  4^UC  1^  *  rilA-  >  tf-Ar  i  AA£i 

0-A'^  >  tL-P  I  •i&'}frx  <  '•i/ik  ■  ^^  *  •n-<Mi  I  hr'n* 

l&liA  ( KA^  1  v**ifi  >  0*Xis  ■  ffAX^  *  IIA0-I1 1 0H+  *  Ik 
^b  I  lUV.  ( OCA^  a  •A'fkh  >  AKIHji'fUlbC  *  ffAX^  *  Oh 
0-h  I  tf-AI*  >  hMi  *  «"ir}  I  *AK«a  >  fUCrfi-Ml  *  i&K'l:  >  d5 
^  *  Mi.  *  OA'flh  I  'M I  hrULhiUb^  >  XA«a  *  O^X't  >  A5^  * 
KA<:^  I  AA.f  A-A  >  liCA-f  A  *  m*i0^  i  ^0  *  A0 1  «•  At  A  a 

mttMl'V  •  t^a^  I  Aik^^  *  jUklTH  *  b«a  *  flf 0-  *  ^Hitt  ■ 
V^^CO- 1  aeA5^  I  Kf*4A  I  /*';'U'  I  AhCA-f  A  *  fflUa-  *  li 
QrC  a  •J&0'0-|^  I  tt'n  I  Htf-X-I:  •  Jif*4A  *  fllA  i  VlUf*  *  h 
A«a  I  tf-Xii  I TAI!  *  hCA-f  A  *  •0*Xi>  >  ^A^  i  U»ifL  ■  X 
rmf^  a  «l|Afl  I  HA.  *  A}  A5^  <  XA^  •  A/^X't:  *  A5t  *  A 
^Mr  *  XIILXI I  llCA-f  A  *  fl^fl  *  6$  i  a^At A  *  W  *  •I'taf: 
A^  I M^  I  aWFt  <  ]tr Aaa+  *  * J&ftAf^  *  fU&Xi:  *  A^^  *  Mr 
±  t  JtnAt  I  «M'«"AA>  >  fl^A  I  llllAr  *  X1II.X>  *  hCA<fA  * 
•^Af  *  t^A- 1 5Aaa  I  X'Aa»+  a  •'Ih-A  i  YlChtfiX  *  ^Ifl 
f*  I  Mrt  1 90.r  a  •flBA^  I  jtl^  >  llA^  >  «IUH-  *  ^A 
A I A-AA^  I  baa  I  ^flf.  I  A-Aifc  *  TAA  ■  IfA  >  ftX:^  *  X 
7V  *  J^Ai-AHi.  *  AVXj&^Aik*-  ■  X^ILX-fl<kC  <  A/#-  a  |li* 
Vhiraa- 1  h^JiJOjIh  *  »d.i» '  A*«^  * « A^  *  1l0*Xii  *  ^A>  a 
b^  I  f-aco  I  ft-aa.  I  hAaa  i  n/^X*!:  *  A9t  I  +£W  I  IfUh  • 

bcA-fA  I  •••aui  I M"  I  «fP^  a  ffXrH  I +^  *  M 1  ^  ■ 

ncy  *  Acb  I  x-flx.!**  •  •nxrmi  i  M+t  *  xm  *  4-mc* 

♦^•1+  •  bAX-f- » 4A+  •  Xr  AA 1 1^-IX. » M.  •  HXIOA  •  ;^ 
AC«  ( /^plh  •  #-A-i- 1  f*Ah«b  I  «aalAt  >  AAit  *  -Mfik 
b  I  xr AbUb  I  •+ Atflb  I  XXJl  *  OfTJ^  *  SA.  *  #Xa»A  * « 


^47 

f*>f  *  i-ZAT  *  Xf*ky  I  flfUhiil-h  •  0IUL*  •*fQX>  •-A'h  i 
TAiHHl  a  flIUHiM  i  XA«"  i  hA-C  *  M+  «  •A.^^lHUb  ■ 

i-mf^  >  KS-V*^  >  ^^  *  i-<lidP  *  KA«"  *  Tjuh?  *  X«^ 

x-ii  I  Kr^  *  A«"iiLA  I  ^4^  ■  •fAHi'qaifrr  *T9*t4*i 

ArX«K7  *  out  *  A9^  >  Kih-**hYh  I  ^]IA»  n  XA«»t 
XAt  I  ^fflitf^  *  tA#-A^  *h«»ll  I  «»IK<>  <  !!«••  aiH:i  A9 
^  *  tf-Ar  I  «T4S^  I  ^]LA»  >  AX^lUkiMbC  <  hflMIt  i  tfi* 

«i*  *  A^/^ « «"AXli4' *  X"}!!  t  ^^^f  I  fliKt:  I A^  *  r A 
A I  t«A  *«£-^  I  fiMi^hy  I  AXIfl.K'OilbC  ■  •AXI'Ml  i 
^VH^ ■  AXA I  rXrt- 1  jtxril*  i  Hi-i  A^i-i AAA^ a  Af* 
^  *  X*}!!  *  ^•O  *  X^ll»'%  *  All  I  h«»1l  I  ^fk  t  Vim  M I 
•^  *  «»TAt  i  Ml.^  *  XIV  *  AflA  I  if  I  «»C?1!  *  tfaJC 
'1^/'^  *  I  fh*  * '^i' * +flAiM  «j&A1f*  *  Xm  I  ^«A 

itf"  I  XA«»  t  A.'hXrf**  ax^>  A9^*)&«»jirx« 

•XH*  1^«i- 1  Mir  *  i^tAh  I  Mi.  i  hno- 

Xi:  ( A^  t  iftfi*  I  Mir  I  hif A-F  i  ^A-A  < : 
"nLM  >  KtMi  I  liCA-f  A  a  mait  t  wfi^vr^ 

■tmifaar  I  •OCn  f  9Af*  a  «A4-l^i) 
e  i  AA4- a  rH*  I  tf-Ar  I  Xfll  *  tf-Al 
4TIK>  *  •XIH  *  ^•AiL*-  *  •^ILllf'  t  nOAf ■fch'"  a  i-«atf 

«i  *  rH- i  TOO  i  TX-A  t  liCAt;^}  *  Xm  I  ^t £>•••  i  rfiUl  * 

*  1  o.  e.        *  om.  }• 


48 


•hA-iUMf  <  •A.^^'hl-A*  I  Xm  *  llCA<f  Ay  *  HA/.  *  ^lUl 
f*  a  •HAA I KU^  >  tl^  I  -td^m  <  ¥]tr^b  *  XA«"  *  Iflis  i 

ex.  >  AK«"  I  flyA«rr^  *  i-Hi^  <  kii  i  aa«x  <  Qaiti»  w& 

^mr  <  CXr  I  tftf-A*!- 1  ML  I  ^jKA  t  ilXA.  *  H^AT  *  Mfl.  * 
XA«»  t  i-^^fl  I  xti- 1 9'tiaA  I  ffXIi- 1  K^Xih^  *  0H4 

•i-  >  ^A  •  XA«"  I  fJCJbf:  I  «I&'1-^^  *  fVn*}  <  A^Aii-  *  X^ 

fAA  *  ^^  >  lltf-Xii  a  HIIA- 1  tf-Ai- 1  •AXA.  *  H^Af  •  ■)& 

0*  I  *n>U  I  ll*-Xii  I  VLhJ¥%0»  t  fl^&  t  m«»iiiS  I  Pis  •  HA 
14 1  iMAh  *  il'l-fli'fbh  >  0X1111  •  h«»  I  ^^MX 1 1>^  >  #-A 
+ 1  rC4^+  •  -^i*  •  0^'7H^ » •♦ilX « Xf  +  •  Xlh » ^X 

n  <  xii-  *  •a>  I  yA«T?i- 1  xit  I  ^ju  *  AdM  *  ii«iin>  •  no 

>  I OXA- 1  Any  •  1JM'>  *  XrXA  *  j^^JI.  I  ti:A-i<»  a  •HI 
+  •  AX«"  •  +«»IIC||«^  •  flXb-^  •  •flyjR'K*  »  Cl-W" » 

^^">l^  •  Xl*^*  •  •/ttf-flh^'  I  Aj&oii- » iiA^Af*  ■  irtis  • 
••Xis  •  P*C^  •  A4Mi^  •  ll«»  I M* wo- » Ois » Xl^^  1 
XA I  •flli'^  *  AA I  AX«"  I  A«7Mi«^  *  9^*^Bn^*  tf-A*  •  m 
tf-A- 1  Hf^^  I  ^T'UCi-  *  <h1*C^^  t  Xj&llAXP  *  «X.«^ 
t  *  XrXlTAcn  "  XAr  I  XA^lis  >  4Ar7  1  XA  «  Om^\t  * 
•X«7A)-  <  4-r UC-t  *  A9CS^  •  0X«"  *  AX-A  *  A«X  *  •\tL 

ir«^  I  h«*ii  f  finvcp*^ » •Ani.  •  XA* » Xf:Atr»  •  «x 

XA  *  QAiis  t  /^fitf**  I  oaiiz-f  I  j&TAf*  *  H^^l^  *  mVM  *  ilr 

«••  >  tfa^^ff  I  AAii«^  I  «x«»P  *  x^«)  I  HXaijun  ( 4-np 

Ci- 1  ^h/*"^  I  A-«^  I  XHLX-AikC  *  AXA  1  J^fJk^^  •  X 
in  *  J&dbXrf:  I  ^A-Ai* « fki-  *  toCAt/f  *  ••Ai-  •  SAl » 0 


ytA  *  •MAA  *  HMOA I  t£Y*C'h  >  •OKA.  *  ffHbtf*  i  <li^ 
0  *  f*AA  i  A«K  t  flXffl  A  >  ^ffljh^  ■  dXT  >  1f-A-  >  Kf^  ■ 

•n/^ii  •  a"IAA^ » AAI*  •  •xrjM<s » ^irrh »  h^^J  • 

•SAAl* » Mil  •  IIA- » r AA « A^»C^^" » W^r « tf-A- » /^ 
CM*  I  %!  *  fl^X:mr«^  *  'M  *  UliP*  MHji'fUlbCilk'fli 

nr»i*  I  Mh  I  Krt  *  A.M  *  oh  *  M  *  'Tf'*  *  JiXri:  *  xp* 
'^  •  M^  ■  kap  •  Kfh  I  hf^iA  >  i^riK-  >  ^Kr^:  ■  0«o 
3bA«»  *  mUku*  *  ^Kis  *  vhmjtviUhC  >  iip^  I  ahcA-f  A  < 

i^-Oa  a  ffMi-t  >  llVYXh  I  ffVliil  •  llAXb  I  nil}  a  0K 

«•  I  M>  >  ^A I  TfHl  •  ffXtfa  I  Xh  >  KXfir  *  •K^  I  Kill  4: 
^3k  *  Htfal^  a  ffX^a  •  M*  ■  K^Xrl*  >  ^A  >  KKT 1 1:  *  Hr 
w;  ■  «K«»  I  Kb  I  Mii.  *  «K^  *  Kb  *  ^A1/^^>  flihl  a  K 

!!«•  t  «»&%  i  wkmUi'aAj:  *  -iika.  *  o^'iuir  ■  Mv  *  j^ta 

C  *  t-Kf*^  *  Kt^Olt  I  ^0  *  ihlHI  <  XA^JbA  a  «K<1||.K 

•fUi:  I  f'A'ir'  *  K+vig  •  aiK.+'uu^  i  Vk '  najao'  > ) 

fl^  *  Km  •  «K.inC  *  KJA*  i  h>3i7  >  mhTS^AO- 1  aiH 
fl  •  K-W  •  r AA « KJIhAPl » jM-^+A  •  flAf  »  K*l»  »  •• 
11A  *  laKI  a  ffdiC^  I  «OlA  *  KKjei  *  U^+  <  OKI 
•h  *  HK>hA  •  AA^  I  A«atK  ■  K.+^Of  1  ^tt  >  i.tihlt  ■  « 
^  ■  iiMk  a  0K.A^-J^  *  ll«ain^  *  t-Kf*^  >  10.1?  *  K 
SMrAi^e  *  A^^  I  «^**,  >  K^m.K'fkkC  1  KIH  ■  |ir 

>  tnj^  a  •X'>ll  I  SA.<^  *  hOR^  i  Ojir/^  a  0^|  1  K 
•  0A«-  *  n^-Ai-  *  KA^-JkA  <  ^^1  *  KA  •  K.Al^>  A 


fiiuaur«a- 1  «aaitii '  &a/a  *  nm'M:*^ 


so 

foL  3««.  c  I  Kill » ^if»r^ « hPiyt  •  fm'bli »  mKr  I  ••:H » n 

IL? « flilli*  •  A-^l-*- » h^f:^'t  •  A.«»y  jtr97 » Mil » 

C 1  dXrK-t « K1+ « *+*• » AhJMT  •  Xft«» » W*  tf-«r«^i 
^A.^*}  I  Xrt^AA  I  Hf^f*  >  0AII  <  ATA  1  AA.U-  >  XULK 
•lUkC  •  flh«»  *  JUk  I  fl0-At '  <k1  *  flllAX  I  AAliK^-C'li; 
0^  >  All  <  ailHI  1 0fltiV¥C « liAX  I  mKfhri-  *  XA^  •  1 

II I  i<Kr4:  *  0«oh^  1 7(M?  "  Aj^rv  >  nil « Ajta-J^'flx 

ti*  I  Xliroix  a  diK^MZ  *  llCA-f  A  >  AKjbU-J^  <  flll^  ■  ^^ 

Atrn  *  MiL^  >  0\,Kr><  >  Pii « 0a^c  *  hmwi  ■  hcv  >  fc 
c«  <  rr:c  >  0A.XA-  *  MH I  ^n^Ji. « •A.'Mm.  >  a«»  •  x? 

hj^-t^^  I X7II  >  AdH^l  I  j&^»  I  orfilhAI  *  Mil  f  M 

^n. » ©r*"^"> » XIII » f'^i^h'  1  fl»Ain+ » xiH » jM*^ 

+^4-  *  ocHI-Mt  >  X.XbA-0^  >  mK:>i£y  *  XIH  1  ^I'OC  I  i- 

hrd  *  otf^ih^  *  Xa  I  QAit'f  «^ « •U'i  >  1^11  <  H^iLir^  * 
flb«"  *  fliM  <  (^^i(i  *  Xti  <  AM  Aiix  *  ^j&A  >  XA  >  nmU^v*  I 

^L^A-  >  tfti*  I  Xlll  I  m  *  b«"  >  Kfi^df'  1 1  XAi  >/*'Xi*]l 
;>i*  I  llb«"1l  *  ^fl  I  XA  *  Ki/^h'  <  %Pi-  •  Xlb  1 X-OA  *  0 
lli<XrC  I  XAo"  >  XAH  I A41X  >  HXri  I  flbCA-f  A  *  ffA^.  * 
AX^XiUbC  *  UKi/^h  >  KP  <  '•I^A  I  ^4<A  a  XA«»  ■  X 
lb  I  HX'I^A  I  XfMIII-l  <  XTAh^  I  HXb-^  I  Xr All  *  »h 
n  *  flX^lUh-fUbC  >  Xil  *  •flhCA'f  A  *  0 A4<  *  %P  *  ^Xii  ■ 
Kr-^a  I  KTUhfMhC  I  X«"  *  Xf*>  *  nX^ILX-lkkC*  «1IU.* 


•  ■  rAA  ■  A«K  •  MXIOA I  ^aA^  a  4Jt.^  *  tf-A*  >  Xritt  > 

n/^h » n-iAft^"  1 AA*  •  tfxr JM^ » l-i-ih  •  h"^^  • 

II9AA^  ■  MH  t  O0r  •  rAA  >  d%VCf^  >  •fJL^  >  tf-A*  *  /*" 

c^i*  1 9CI  >  atx:<%ir«^  •  '10  *  iik.)P*  x^m.K'ikkc  *  x-n  * 
iiir»4- ■  Mil  I  x^  ■  X.M  I  flb  ■  M  >  Tf^t  I  xxrir  *  xp  • 

>/^X  I  KThmMlikC  a  ll«7U'  •  Xlll  *  mUM^it  *  A  A« 
+ 1  hJdjA  a  XAP  I  Mh  >  Xf*XA  *  |&l«f- 1  i<Xf*^  i  •<>»'} 
ll^  ■  XJA-h^ff- 1  X«ayj&r?l  I  nil)  I  llX.hiLA-  *  <U^Ki*  a 

Xft^  *  iihlXu'  t  m-Mi » uMnjti'aM:  >  il?^  >  nticA-f A  ■ 

t^iHI  a  mhti-t  >  inrrXli  >  tfVlisl  t  hAXb  *  Hbl  a  0X 
^  ■  Xb  •  ^A I  TlHl  ■  ffX^  *  Xb  I  XXf*f?  >  «X«a  >  Xbi  f: 

tai  I  ii«ai^  a  «x«»  I  Xb  t  x^jtr  •  ^A  ■  xxr  |  ir  >  ur 

in;  ■  «x«a  >  Xb  t  Mid  *  ffXtf*  *  Xb  *  ^A^/"^*  OAil  a  X 
(!«•  f  «^A.%  t  NX^tUiiMbC  *  •OXA.  *  fl^'fUt:  <  Xlll  i  f^m 

c  ■  +Xf*4:  *  x.i'^flr  I  ^0  *  aiiHi  *  xa^j^a  a  •xiu.x 
hsjc  *  •TA'if'  *  x.i-?ar  <  •x.-miu^  *  ^a  <  mixii-  >  t 

0^  >  Xmi «X.inc  *  X^A*  *  h>l?  *  athrXr^iM'  I  An 

A  t  Xlll  ■  r AA I  X^O-APl  *  /^^i<A  1 0dif  »  htf  >  «• 
11A  *  mxi  a  matcfi  •  «a71A  I  XXjei  >  ll^i*  <  AXl 
•h  I  flX.XbA  •  AA^  I  A^tX>  X.'Hflr  ■  ^*  i^Jdth  >  0 
•Ift  •  llAai  a  0X.4^ibA  •  ll«afllVll  >  i-hrd  >  10.(?  *  X. 

/Ai-Atir  *  A^^  *  «h:+A  >  X^lUi'fldu:  I  XIH  *  Sir 
•»• » *IU*  a  0X111  •  «A.*  •  htWl* » atStT-/^  a  0^2 1  X 
tn  ■  0A0-  ■  am^i"  *  XA^-JwA  >  ^Jl^kli  xa  •  x.Ai^>  a 


OTA  *  IHugur«a-  ■  mtUhet¥  '  IkA/A  •  a#^'fcf«^  •  0 


5« 


iHf  *  ^A-h>  *  MW'APA  *  mcfi  i  fl^tlC  ■  tiy-  ■  mhAf 

%  i  ^je-h>  I MH  i  j&ACu  >  0^  I  A.i-tf  f r- 1 M  i  •{••lie  * 

oA.^IJkA  *  fliM  <  hda  *  HJ^tl  >  K9*K/.  >  fcf ilft^  *  m 

Kfitn'^-h'  *  o"*}  A-;H-  ■  M  ■  nilK^iUk-fkhi:  <  md  I  mirK 

rt  *  J^liK-  >  «h^dM^  I  |&A^>- 1  MtlAlb  ■  KAP  «  M* 

OHAir^lia*- 1  ||JB4'^UU&  i  5.a  *  X'Wf-  <  AKo"  <  HU&  *  0*X 

foi.  sab.  i:  a  «AX^!t  *  IH^  *  ^'>1iC  *  ^Kk^X  *  ll'NH'0  *  Arfi  *  | 

•fllh^  I  U'O^  I  A.9*7i- 1  J&ln-I  >  HAj&^fco"'}  •  Mil  *  iJtf 

c  •  x»^i6«wi-  •  OTiu » ^-xrc* » WM « i6<ywk »  *^a» 

X9*AdA-  •  *V%.  *  Mil  >  lih}  t  AA.I  ■  CA.}  •  «<^«*A  •  X^ 
50.  I-XHTI  •  S »  XlhAtL » Th/^  •  Kfi^^t » Xihlli  X 

A I  Xr;^;h'l^l^  i  tt^wn-t  1  «X.<i"AXti'h  >  XA  i  fi^hMt  ■ 

A*i:  I  XAo"  I  Xo"  <  X.UA0-  *  XA  <  fi^'iH-  *  fltl*  X«»-7it « 
«"W>1' » »AXfl»1t  i  X.tf  A0*  •  fl»W»1* » X,++»^f» » «0 
I/*-* » AIT-/** «  0)wA.ft  •  *M^ » Xj&^n»  I  ^  •  V# 
9^  1 0+40*A^:t' » Wo » 5.tt » AlHl « XA  •  Xr;^A*If  •►  • 
XAo"  I  X9*0*  Air-f^*  <  l&liaK?  >  4i<i"i-  *  T^Uw  a  «Xj&flA-  * 
X7li  <  MLA I  *M^  <  0+40*ft^  I  Xr^hlHl  ■  X«*^n: «  « 
hlSi  <  taCAiin  *  A0-Xi:  <  X9*'ia>)  >  mJhffCfh  >  0X«"  *  X 
l>  >  KKii '  *M  "  oQ^^lt  >  nhi  I  Xli  I  hr-^SLi  >  XA  i  XT 
')fl  >  X^HLX-OikC  >  Uf^fi  I  dhXi:  f  XP  1  0XA''»i-  >  Xlll  ■ 


*  MS.  prefixes  by  error  0+40*A4*  * 


_^^^^^_^ 55 

'  I  rihc  <  flX*n  *  fl*T^fl^  *  MA  <  j&Tfu:  *  onxifiA  *  ;h 

•  I  mUMIA  ■  a^7^ft  *  tf  nit '  0Ct  *  «i'K<^  *  Q4>^  *  HM  * 
1.4-ArM*  i  oAX<'»  ■  flX^i*  *  QdJC  I  JUL  *  tf-O^  >  KAP  <  H 
A^-'f  a  tfAtf-A*  i  Uf^K^ '  •\QJn^  •  0A<»  <  MtlJhi  *  i* 

1^-  •  flthTU* » fif^ » •d'7«"  «  AXfl"0- « ^AA  »  flHXi:  i  C 

^hf*  I  K9*'qi  *  ^A>  a  tfAj&inc  *  a'MiAt^^  <  hxioa  *  A 

A  >  ttvA-A  ■  M^  «  «Ka" A I  X'4h4>  I  »4.*f^  *  J&^flC  *  *)& 
l«^  I  K«»P  i  ll.»  *  J&4*t>J&  <  oX<i"A  *  Aj^t>J&  >  iU&M 
; «  «K«iBd  I  Kap  *  tuT  *  «Aj&^4>tj&  I  fltao"  i  TlHiha*'  i 

lA  I  f^  I  AH:  >  jK-9 1  Aj&^nc  <  9*AAit|0"<  •  0K«"A  <  Aj& 
>£*  <  J&^flC  ■  ll«»1l  I  vfOL  <  ft^- 1  AllCA-f  ft  <  0*Xi:  i « 
•54lh  I  Xf*hA  *  h0ail  f  0lf-A- *  Klh  f  >0J&  ■  HfUkTI  I II 
^^A*  I  J&Tac  I  ')at|0"<  i  i^fAP  <  Mb  *  A.4»  a  otf-A-  * 
t'»h  I  ^tn  ■  lirtl^A-  ■  H90-JMIMIA I  HfcAUr^  I  HM^ 

•  i  ♦jcrno- » iirh  i  A>fu^  I  xftfl"  i  k«^+ » A^ » hiwt 

1^-  i  «K«"A  I  KA-fltltf^  >  itU^  >  tflh  >  Al^  <  ath*i^t  <  1 
IM*  I  inch  <  *Wh  I  IHl  *  nh<iB  I  ^KHII  a  ah'hh  <  f ;h 
1 1  «J&Tt  I  Oh<ia%  1  UHth  ■  «oa%  >  ll«t.i<-h  I  *fi'njh  •  t 
LKll  I IHI I  AMn  *  ««C4>  *  tfA-flA  <  0tf-A-  >  l*tJilli  t^ 
to*  t  H^tAll  *  IHI<  nil<i"i^X41l<X^A  a  liriia»%i  A. 
AtJ « haa  I  <ia jlA1»^  » XA«"  « Kaa^*  >  f^HOhao. ,  fldv.f  i 
r>fl1-  •  •ft'^aa-ft  a  0M^0a*d » tU^ » <:ih9  >  «»9Cfl  •  •*, 
-XAfl  I ll«a *  ^fiAfn  a  M *  fltloa'  fcHII  >  A^ll> i  fltf-ft 
^  ■  ffTKA  •  tfOtf-fti- *  fc^/i*  *  llCftirf VtlK^  * +4*-A4- * 


54 

fl  I  fc-n  I  fiQA-  •  KTvn » xft<»» « ihrtn » h^ajH-* 

ho"  I  iUiS  *  KTttJttiUU:  I  flAdA  i  ftA-^  ■  Kill  i  fi£X:h» 
M  >  A^^+  >  'H-V^'}  *  MH  >  9^A  «  «f  «C'a  i  Ut-t  *  A 
KA I  h^m  I  Mll.K-fkh4:  >  MAA  *  r>lA0^  I  XAo"  *  AVr%. 

f>lA  a  A.AA  >  0KPPA  >  O'llkt  >  +)O.r-0^  *  Kill  ■  A.5^»  < 
CXA«^ » r  AA I  JbffCft  i  »Mlifl>* »  HlUilf •►  •  ^ao  a 
MH  *  0»«:+C^»  *  MtUh-IMbC  i  Ka»-1i:  a  m^^S  *  KlM* 
i  I  ♦JS'flo  I M+ 1  aa-A  I  d»M+ 1  fcm » '^Cfr  •  d»Kf»JM 
^11  ■  5.n^  a  oiKrJ^t&y  *  KA  i  KAirC  >  0f^^  i  tfJuh-fci 
•flf^AJ&A  *  tf^ih*!:  <  fl^Cr-A  a  diKiaxj^  ■  AMlU>  i  i-Mf ^  a 

ojkAAim  *  Mi*  *  xrK'iPY^.y  *  «<h9%  I  ofl'iaM  ■  fcf 

tQ  >  HtUlin  f  ^oa  a  Mh Atb  >  a-llkhoa- 1 X""^ « •flhA.  > 

ifAo  t  oth^i,  *  •nXA.^  >  o^lilh  I  Hh^n  t  lui  f  f^lh'tt  ■  C 

hAa^  *  lioa  f  aAdAiiraa- 1  j&/*'iinc  i  MlUttiUhC  »  XA«a  < 
j&O,  1 AA^  ■  -tfl  t  floy.  I  KkJCC  *  HMOAi  -Ml  ^<li.^i«f9 

u  >  tfirroH  *  HjK^A*  *  hr^M  a  tfQihi:  *  •h'l+a*  I  hrh 

r  >  «;ht^  *  m^dn.  1 9^  I  A.^AiK<  a  «flMi<d  *  <hrc/ 
+ » ©HUl*  •  fllio" « /"C^* » «»11A » h«»U" » in<.i  If-A-i 
ft>L  33*.  ^9Cf  >  llj&tfaX'X  *  'latiaa-  *  Aj&inc  <  HKIflA  i  |  hJh±  i  A 
A^  a  ohflo  I  Ml  t  AV*f  1 0Xaa <  XV^ I ■YAA^l  a  0h^A* 
>mr  <  <h4l!  *  )flJ&  *  OCXisIa  tftf-A-  >  >IU&  >  liJ&MMI « Oaa 

tf-A-  i  UfiHtn  I  n<'a'}^  <  »IU&  I  O-Mi  I  AhtfaO  I  IdU  i  X«l 
H.^'fUbC  I  AdMl- 1  han  ■  )IU&  t  OfXi:  I  Xr^dH*  ■  Xftta  • 
|^9«^  >  tf'A-  *  A4t!  •  itU^  a  0X00 1  Kb  t  tOJ&  ■  «tf-A- 1 

iOJE.  I  llJ&iifCA  I  afAll  *  a^alAA  •  mhJMM  •  X9*ky  a  «X 


55 


VC  •  oKfitaC  I  hm  <  <h4f>  i  tOJ&  >  ^-Ki:  •  tftf-A- 1  M. 

^  I  rihc  *  nik«n  I  iKT^iu « A«x  <  j&mc  *  tfHXTOA  I A 

•fUbC  *  0A- *  tf^kil- ■  Mko"  I  h^U- *  t jir^  <  tlU^  >  "Ml 
K.^'ArAf*  *  «AX<i»  i  fIXli- « QdA"  I  JUL  ■  04^  i  KAfi  >  H 

j»h^  ( hria  I  ^A-  a  tfAj&ioc  1  a-M>ii«»-  >  iixioa  *  a 

tia*- *  Kaap  i  tut  *  J&^^l^  >  0X«"A  I  AJ&^I^J&  1  \JK4A 
<hA  I » i  Arl:  I  ]{*<•'}  I  Aj&inc  *  r AMH"- a  «K«"A  i  AJ& 

^^JC*  <  ^inc  I  ta^n  1 0>/aL  I A^-  *  AtoCA-fA  *  af-ffP  <  at 

J^^A- ■  J&71IC  < -M.liaa' I  J&JUiF  I  Mil  ■  A.4»  a  0tf-A- 1 

Kill  i  *^'n.  I  Hrh^A*  1 1190-JC'iiMiA  I  iiKAiir^  ■  iiKm 

*  I  ♦JtrtO- i  tflh  i  AMU* « KAfl" » Kaa^*  •  A^  •  hOVt 

ll«a*  i  «K«aA  *  KA'Aliaa- i  »0J&  *  0lh  I  Al^  ■  «X«at  I  i 

•aA^  I  inch  •  *viiO'  ■  iHi  i  flho"  I  ^xmi  a  oIito.  i  f  ;h 

a  I  «J&1t  •  wKf^t  i  llfflX  i  aMo^H:  <  h-t+li  1 4>^<liU- 1  i 

n)ih  *  IHI  I  AMfl  1 00C+ 1  tfA-flA  <  tftf-A*  1  VtKlli  +^ 
"to-  •  H^tAll  <  Mil  ahaai^MlIf  X^HLKaiirtl«a<%<K. 

JtM » hfl" « a^flA^n  I  KA«" » Kaa^* » /&*•■*••  •  flA*<» 
AllH-  *  mm^*!!  a  oiK'H'^-A  I  ft.^-  *  ^fh^  >  o^CA  <  «K. 

^]IA»  •  baa  *  «a|lAT1  a  M  >  Oll«a  *  MM  i  K^HLX  *  O^-A 
•^  •  ffTKA  *  «i0-A+ ■  K-or i- *  llCAtfVtlK^  *  t A^-A^  I 


56 


fx:  >  AX^fc-fkhi:  >  K«VA> « ^A-Ai-  *  Iki-  i  tlCAi^  *  »!• 
<i"AA  I  tthtut  I  •>^A.  I  IIAJ&WHI  >  MA4  «  KAiif*'h  ■  mhv 

i  0 A%;^'» A  >  J&IIK.  I  Mt  I  Qilit^tf^  1 0K0" A I  jl'ft+ 1 

fl^  a  0K0BA I  <i»h1  *  hMt  *  0"niVll  I  J&4^  >  ^A*^  I  Ha 
fc^  a  hAA  I  f^t^  1 01 1  «a>*A4l^  f  Mi- 1  Q^h-fc^^l « firttt 

^  1 0«i»nA^H  *  0«"9AlKt  *  Ml*  *  Qih'fc'fl  >  P-VU-  a  X 
«»A  i  h9*nJhm'C^ » fc^flH « «Xa"% « h^ » fl»lf h.  •  ••X. 
Ji  i  V*1  •  |6  A+1- » AX^a  •  Mai » r+ » atha^t » fl"9  A-O  > 

^•OM  *  atfiiun  >  AA<i"lif  1  a  o+AoHA^lt  *  flmUkir^  * 

""hi  I  J&lfK-  a  0X<iaA  >  hAh  >  tA.A  <  oalfX  *  hmHi*^ 
^  I  |&^0||<PF  >  0'AI'  >  HA"!:  *  t^V^Oh  I  ^hl  a  0K^A  * 
>l  AX  <  HM  >  0X<ia%  I  h  AK^  <  oaJCh-  >  a^CA.i-  >  9Ar  ■  0 
AKoalC  *  A«fc  >  •OikC  >  0Ah0"%  <  XrO<h0-f:^  *  tt^m- 1  h 
li-  >  4>A.A  >  Am  >  tmc  >  1%  i  HflMi-  *  MHjtvQdyC  a 
0X0"  I  Mt  >  K1H I  ;^Ar^  t  athaot,  i  XIH  i  ;I-HHI  *  AJ^A• 
A-  •  Alff  •  0A,1^JM « o"AKIl^ta  •  haa  •  +fcini «  A-« 
oaIiS'1'  >  M » inc » iW*0 » XA«»" « h^Oh » M'0h*P< 
0X0"A  I  fcAP  *  flahl  I  0aip4'&  >  fc^0- 1 0X^  I  Ml  *  ^9* 
d^  >  +1*t.Ji  « J61Jt1 1  A-+  i  flaw  a  0Xa0A  •  0^lM* » M 


S7 

A I  "f-ViAh  •  KTHC  ■  iltH- «  K^  <  M;^tl•^  *  Mi- ■  ^jl 

%  I  wf^  •  0X«^  *  uhr-odu:  *  0X00%  1  HxrnaiOHc^  1 

«»X'h>  I  ««*lil  ■  KA0«^  » Mi*  I  tAeft  I  f^tti  *  IfIC  I  Hr 
I AXA  >  ta^H  I  atf-A*  *  Ailh  I  athtf^t «  4-HIC  «  tf A*h  i 
fti- 1  rA-C  I  !!«•  I AMX I  \J&to<'>  I MS-AP  *  A1X- >  M I 
AX^lUk-IUii:  •  «AX<i"P  I  Mh  *  Hfcihildl  *  h^^  <  J&li/*' 
^  I  A-«^  I MilK-IMwC I AXA I  f.f.^T^ a  MM*  f^ft^ • 
^A-IH-  •  Hi- 1  tlCJH:^  *  tf-Ai*  *  H<h'>  <  o<i"CA  *  0A.^^ 
OX  ■  init  •  »C  I  flX'»+ « Mft^  I  H0tf  P«^  I  h^Hjk'fUii.C  I 
A«^lH-  ■  flho"  *  ^<^J|.  1 0nii<i»  I  ffSiCX'  >  fcr  4A 1 1X>M'  I 
AAA  ( iiiA^  t  o/'»tA^A>  I  OK'li*  i  tio^^Mr  >  >tu:  >  «^d 

♦jurt-  •  TA»  •  -irflu*^  •  0^»0-fii«^ » hr'tOii  •  iw-ah 

fdi^  •  Xr^M » hfl»  I  *1IK.  I  tf-A- « mK^frh « 0A. 
r^-ht  *  flh^  *  MM  *  X^lUCl  *  A.rA-A  >  liCA'f  A  *  flho"  1 
/^CW  •  II0II I  -Wi^at^  ■  0+fc^<. » hfl»  >  llAr5 « K9*'iai 
>  1 0-K'l:  I  AT/ 1 K***)!!  *  llCA-fA « 0-M:  i  Ar?  >  h^'Ul  i 
VfOtiMua  I K-O « HA-ii  I  A«<h4-  *  KAll  *  A^Ao"  *  9A9*  i 

53.  *Kini  1  Se  »  OK^t  •  •*<»+ » fcA.A  •  WA* «  0/^ 
CW- « tHMT  •  •H:+fl»' » AJtA.A  »#M+  »l&i»'f  o^  •  flli«" » 


58 


^  a  tfjtAAA  I  lir^fl.  *  Xrklf 0^  1 1IUA0- 1  X9*0*A>b^a»- 1 

ha»  I  J&lh1ll«^  >  A.+  >  AAo"  i  J&OiA'  *  ilh^  i  X0  <  J&AJUI- 
•^  I  fl»|MlA-«^  •  hda » ATfJ**- » J&llAF  «  "toH"  •  MtC » 
Ak«" » hCrfi « tf-A-  •  i»^f » «»n+  •  t^-l*  •  Xr-^ll*  KTlUi 
•fkhi:  1 094>a  I  ]{*£■+  >  9*AA  I  AilX  I  «llUA  I  tf*^i  A«&i 

K0 1  h«vo- 1  fifc*n  a  whh  t  nikje- AP  >  tDMmh'Mtj:  *  h 

•fl  >  0||CA'f  A  >  0A4<  *  0<i"'>AA  >  ^^ « oa^AA  <  ]r£^  <  A 
^^A^A  I  in^^lt  I  Atf-A-  a  0jMKA*0^  >  hAfl «  0/^AA « 
%VL  *  0|&aA  I  J&5UP  I  Airii:  i  tthfn  *  0lU:^A  I  mi:  > 
•tflo^"  a  hrhd. » 1+ » 0C* »MW»»  tf-A-i  WCa  0AXa"i 
J&IU*  I  e+ 1 XU I A0 1  f'fAP  *  l^«:<h.t|  M^fSlftf^itf-A" 
•^ » 0AX0" » WK« » h«70-  •  fli*Af X^  i  |6h-'J » hcyT » 0 
J&'I'VYK  *  £1fU&  *  KrM.A  *  ♦JtA^  I '}1U&^  1 0CMLA  * « 
jt4^  I  h AKI  I  r  A A.0-  a  0hA  >  i-Cf  *  KKH  *  ^M^  *  K*}!!  > 
frA-^- » /5+0'«^  a  0+40'A'hA » AAA « r/^ V*  •  J&KAf^ » 
flX7'0-  *  0^#V^  >  MH I  j&A0<^  *  0'»1A  I  ^^  a  00- 
K^tfo. ,  Af  A^  f  AAA  >  CXA-  i  AllJ&i>*f 9*  a  0|&'}fK- 1  ikA.A  1 

4M^  *  n<i"?-oc^  1 0JU1A-  *  f'f'M*'  1 0Aaiy  i  fhf^p » 
0AXO"  *  ^Lxo^  I  XTno  i  Kr0'}iA  >  rfcr'T  *  hJLA  i  ♦jt 

A  >  Hihi-a"  *  tf-A  >  Oti*  >  tiCAtn  a  05^A  >  XPlM  AX^ 
M  <  X.r A*A  >  llCA-f  A  *  mV^i.  •  X^lUk-fkhi:  1 0A*^^  ■  «• 


59 


AA  •  ^7^h  a  0^a  ■  ^L]l<i»  *  K^H  *  5^A  ■  IMIA-  *  ttUr 
^*  ■  JhlHl » Yid  ■  €:/^Aa  O^a  i  ^Lfto"  *  Km i J&'^UC i O 
^yVC  I  J&ACI  I  OHM-  >  <i"l|7  ■  AihA  >  Oj&JC^ih  *  tfj^A* 
Aj&fcf*  1 0A.«^%  I  HKlflA  >  rXoBniHf  *«tl^lM^n  > 
/A«"  I  KKit  1 4M I  tf-A-  *  M-i*  <  HJ&JlA-'J&'niCiaXli-i 
f^Ohn  » II+CA  » JMIA-*^  •  v« «  +Kr+  i  aOf^-Kh 

Wi  *  ■iair«^  I  O-ll^  a  atKS^K-a  *  s  >  >iak  a  o\j&>x-c  > 

Mirt-  a  0^aa- 1  ^4*;^  i  hAM  >  -M  i  K'Y+H  >  l-Qd^  a 

ll«a  I  m&f h<  I  oA.a^%  >  Ohoa  i  \i/C^  i  M+H  >  flXlL  > 

f^yn  i  ^J|.A  a  oAjuih-  *  o-M-  *  h':¥K  >  rhrv^ » o 

ir«^  t  hr4A  I  *JiA'i  ■  AM:^0^  <  mMCTi  i  'M  i  K^Kil 

A  i  hS*r  >  Iff  <  Xr^lWI  I  tiCAiin  *  mKtOlt  *  0^.0" 
>-t  ■  nr  ■  li^  I  Kf-h*^^  I  ^A  >  0h«ia  I  A.jUki-9 1  r/^fli. 

«:  a  0Aj&fcf*  >  0A.«iaV*1^  ■  MKIflA  i  fbtn^^t  >  0A.«ia1r'1^  i 

a^rt  I  dAr>  ■  hj^ir  *  w  a  0x7^'}%  1  hiht  •  d+Q  1  h 
«•  ■  KJ^i'^A-  *  0-A'A-ti'}  I  iir  *  0iir  a  0h<H>  t  Kfi^ 

tlO>  *  0Aj&i JtrC  *  <a>f  dA.lf  ^  *  0A^'OC  ■  £  I  AdA  I  £  i  A 
IlK *#'iH- •  Afh 1 0Aj&4i9* 1 0K.<a>1r'% *  UhJM  *  £-A0  * 


6a 


f:^ » hStHii » tf*!/"*  ■  0AX<»  •  "mflH^  I  0111+ « AT. 
r '  *  MLft  *  f  M  *  hat'  *  +A.d  >  AA<*'r9*  •  0li^il  I  mi:! 

/"C^^  1 0-M:  t  flM+  *  HA^fco"'}  i  0AX0"  i  A.4A«»  i  m 

56.  thnm  I  Si » nx'M'  i  jiv^a  •  0fl»9iHi » oKna 

fc-lMwC  ■  mil  I  ^'flC « AAo"  I  o-h-P  I  fl^dlh « AAilX  *  wK 
h  I  HA1'»7 1 0'M'AP  I M  *  ho"  I  /Al-^hlh  i  A«»AMri*  > 
K^lUk'fUbC  >  AflM'h  i  <i"5A«  >  ^.THIC 1  Ml  1  AAA  *  «• 
^ft-il  I M » AXfl" » Ml*  I  aA;l^+  1 IMM-  •  »•;^  •  hT-OB" 
1 1 9iii»;H- 1 0AK0" » •»**!«• » -illl^ » fl"1»*A  «  0104:^* 
2tT'0  *  0AK«"  *  A.^lllh  I  AAA.y  1  ^mVi"  *  0AX«"  <  llllA 
^  >  v>^  *  AilK  •  &;!■ » Mf^Mr  <  ho"  1  f^^  »  0AK«»  *  K 
^:+^1*  •  tf-A- » iMVf » AXA-  •  llfl»  •  f^1'«0'k+iXll»+»' 
fr  •  0'A+  •  /^CW* » tf-^A-il  •  0AK0" » M I'flXA.y « !«• 
i-  ■  t^m  •  «■>¥ AA  *  0A.M  •  •flH*^ » Aj&X'iBTr  <  mK^of 
r  •  0-A+ 1  /^C9+ » OB^A-O » M » l">nc » •OII^»«^*A» 

^CC  *  CX4 1  atdl/^^  *  4^tli, '  0fl^A!t  *  \J&1C<- « MX 

>IV^A  >  Ml0*  *  KA<'»  <  iMi:  *  ^ilC  •  KTdJ'f.  *  Ail  *  0* 
hi:  *  QAi-ti:  I  mi?  I  MM^iMbC  *  matMH- » tlCA<f  A  • 
A.rA*A  a  KA0»  *  <i"'»/Jk  t  ^^A  >  AKo"  1  ^H^  ■  OAAA  1  A 
•fix  I  KA^  I  0'Ki:  t  J&^IHI  1  XP  1  0A0-A  *  XAo"  «  ^A 
i-CA.  •  flu?  I  Mfli:  I  0A*  *  M/A'htrA.  «  Atf-A-  •  AHh  a  0 
AKo"  I  •h]l0-9  t  fllf}*!:  t  ^ilC  »  bo"  •  Avf^  >  iwA.A  « 

'  AAfr. 


6t 


/^P  *  tlCft-fA  a  «AdA  I KA  i  d^»  i  K^jlo" « tlCft-f ft  «  0 
AX<i»  I /A0"  t  MH I  j&jui.  *  J^A  *  <^«'}  >  fc£"n- 1  f:^A 

ir»+  *  hM  I  K9*ll  I  ^Q^lh  >  JUIA  <  ^f}  I  Mroh  i  AAA 
^  «  flrl^T  •  AXfl"  •  +c:^ » S^'i*lt » tAflHAl"  •  » V#V 

fir  f  Ijf  t  m^mjhi'  *  AdA  >  0'A'Jli  fcfn*«>^4Hkt  AXA** 

MtUk-fUbC  a  0Xetb  * /JHIl  *  AXA  *  M«^  I /^J^U- 1 A 
hCA-f  A  *  9fJP  I  tolh^:  a  of^Mrt^  t  0a«A9  *  ^A^  *  H 
/*'P  *  M I  «0^4t!  *  ^Mt  *  AKA  *  f-Pfl4Xi9^  1  AlJCih  a 

■^♦y^- » nXT'h  I  cAKhi- » ^/"rtUC  •  ♦^A  a 

54.  tWnn  i  as  I  0X'>+ » "!.••+  »  *litHkt  •  d»  VK 
+  •  flK'>+  i  •>*♦ » V«K1- » •flM+ » V*V«1-  •  MA*  • 
mn^^  I  ^«f  f>*  I  ofcTriAnuAf!*  a  0M+ 1  hX.h  *  * 
M I  'V  *  tAsA  i  ahnnc  i  Ml  I  AdA  1  CMk*  *  «4>40'A*  1 
'MM » !&♦•■*•• » ©VW"* « tf-A-^  a  0XA.I OHV^  a  hA 
A  *  ^#?i-  *  athHU:  >  Ml  *  AAAtiro^  a  0+40-A*  >  0tf- 

•>^:+  •  ^*Wrt  •  oKfT'lAfli.At!^* » MM-  a  oK^Jlr 

55-  +M1I  •  Sfi  •  nM+ 1  Ml  i  It+fcaa*-  a  Uf^thf^l  • 

iHic  1 90^  I  Mk«»  *  i-fc«at  >  flK^iUi'OiibC  *  whn  >  n^ 


*  K — ^  o.  e. 


6a 


9*'  *  KKJi  I  #M  I  tuo- 1  +A.A  I  hfM'tr'  a  0h<i»ll  I  llli:  > 
56.  ^Mll  <  fi  >  flM*  >  W1A »  •fl^^ft'il » •A^l'fl 

K^Hjl-IUihC  *  tfOX'li' I  oB^frfl  <  A^-flC  *  Ml  >  AdA  >  «" 
^ft-O » M  i  AXfl"  •  bH-  i  OA;^t»+  » «!•+ »  r;^ »  K^-OH* 

XT'tf  *  0AX«»  I  A.^hlh  I  AdA.y « rhVi-  *  0AAo"  >  hUA 
4-  *  v ^  I  AHh  *  Ik;!-  >  ttdJ^M'  >  li<iB  I  f^^  I  0AK0»  >  K 
^:+^1* » tf"A- » w^f » AXA-  •  hfl» » WL*»flHK+«Xll>1*i»' 
?r » ••»+  •  /^C^+ » fl-^ft-il  •  0AX<|» » » » ■OKA.y  «  «!• 
+  •  ^^m  •  <»1»dA  i  whJM  •  -011^  i  Aj6Xfl»W » ©A.I'iMf 

TOA*  OA^iy* > Xlr^  •  nK'»+  •  djl0* t  Af^A  1  A.^ffo^* 
JIV^A  I  MlOH  I MI0D I  mi:  I  ^-flC  I  KTd^fL  t  Ail  >  0- 
Ki:  ■  Oihti'  *  OfL?  >  K^HLK-fkhi:  *  0fltf-ai'  <  hCA-f  ft  * 
A.f  A-A  «  KA<»  *  o^liLA  *  ^^ft  *  AKii"  1  ^JU:  ■  OAdA  1  A 
•OX  I  Xfto"  ■  lO-Ms  I  S^dYftt  <  IIP  >  «^L0*A  I  Xfto"  <  ^A 
i-CX.  I  anp  I  Hni:  •  UAr  1  H^A'hCX.  >  Atf-A-  >  IMh  »  0 


63 


«M  *  ii«-  •  tun  *  hm- 1  v*"*  •  nn<- 1  xi^  I  Adik 

57-  i-Kumn*  UK"**  •  nt^v^oh  I  ^0>r9» i  wt.ft i 

«M  I  Jto^r  *  Xr^  I  e]wA.A  <  #M^  >  K0*  <  Kri  a  0A 

fiv^C  I  •-K'K  I  «ll*%1*%  a  0AK0"  i  ti»  i  OhMi  i  K^90 
Ha  AHh  I  hr-UI  i  Qihirii  *  AM.A  >  «M  ■  KabA  i  Aj&ll  A  < 

Ob  Aje*  a  «AXtf»  *  M  ■  h^H  I  J&>*YK  i  <iaQ;hi<  *  h9*2wA.  A  > 
fiUrt*  •  'flli-^  I  tfJ&HAf*  ■  A-is  >  mil  I  atfS.Xt'i  i  n^MlH 


58.  ¥KirH  ( as  I  hA.A  •  4M I  jUICh  ■  tfAjUlOi- *  Ad 
Arfl*  i  ffJUICh  >  tVlS-t  *  AA.O-  ■  mp-tr  *  A41K  >  «^AC 
f  •  t^Iin  I  of^Of  *  h0'tirXf  *  vK^'in  >  M.A  •  <^itA  • 

i^irrx  ■  I  xr'io  1  +40*^^  1  xaa  ■  ^aa*^  1  M.A  *  ♦M  t 

^/^C  •  tf-Af « /T^  •  MC**  •  |i/^%  «  MMflA  1  M.A  • 
♦M  >  KAaa  I  Q;h't:i:  i  KM'tM^  a  tA.A  *  jUICIl  I  nf^n 

49i  <  tffl^ii'h  I  fii>nh  <  K9*'ia  I  M.A  i  *w  >  tfhT'in  1  h 

IKTU-  >  4>A.A  I  dfj&tfam.  1  AHhTU- 1  +A.A  *  J&0Y9*  «  0A.J& 
/>*%  •  0^4^  *  Mil  *  AXA I  MA*  a  Ahoa  t  !!>•  I  MhAt  >  a 

Wi*  *  ta^n  I  tf^k  a  \f4i  I  Ajuich  >  0  A.r  tf-fi  I  fi^hi- 1 

«^VrX  i  O^hi- 1  K9*-tfl  t  hAfk  f  «jtA'  >  KoH  I  Kr4>A.A  a 
nhjff*^  *  oA.^^Cil  >  ikJLA  i  <f JtA  I  Mh  f  4*^0 1 0X0"  1 
M>  >  tA.A  I  O'Mt  I  Q;h'l:ii  1  f-tn^at  >  AJhlM  t  Mi*  hoaili 

Of  ^  I  M I  tioa  t  AKIl  I  hllV^  a 


'  om.  4M  ■  *  om.  «f  jtA  * 


Htft  >  HMflAH  >  hfiih  i  ^«^^  *  fcAP  >  HJ&TO^  a  liXIfl 
A  >  +AXti  *  At40-ft^  I  athh^r*  *  MA^  i  hH*»  *  I&JIA 

!•  •  AXfl"  i  A,tf A- « ♦A.A » A1¥+  •  V*1 '  AJ^hflH*  •  Ah 

^  i  MA^  a  0^A/^fi«n  1 0ik.A;h1MI  >  KAo" «  AKM  *  ^ 

loL  35*.  6o.  ^Mrn  I  S  *  flX'>+  i  + 1  ^^/l* »  09/»'^1-  a  0tf' 
A*  I  +4'V+  ■  00/^^i-  >  ^•Oh<  *  AikilLA  >  *Mi  >  0At40- 
A^  >  0A^^<K^  *  AA.A.'fo^  1 0tf-A-  *  Mh  *  KA^i-  i  f-a 
h- « AA.A.^  *  KA  >  i-Cf  I  /**»•!» « 0A  jlf ^A  >  0A0"5AQ7  > 
0AhA  I  tnSLrt  I  fiUA'  i  KAo"  *  4><r^^  >  AhUf^  >  0-Ki:  > 
0AAdli«a<  a 

<» ?^  I  AhUf  ^  *  ahhrei-  *  2bA.A  *  *M  *  K0*  >  tA.A  I  f 
0-11  >  AhA.A  I  *M  I  g)K:A  *  atfOH  >  AtA.A  i  CIK^A  >  atfO 
•fl  >  A^r^7 1  lll^A  a  mhndViA  >  hti^L*  >  Vf*}  *  0Afc 
vriAflUk  1 0A<iaHr^'>  1 0A^^1!^  i  MAi*  >  SM^  a 

nMh  t  pf i&  1 0/*'«a^  >  n^A-oa  *  x^K-nabC  <  ss  >  j&^n 

C  >  n/^dii  1 0Mi  t  fl0<Ai'  i  O.'h  *  liCAtn  >  H  J&^lflC  >  t\ 

^C*  •  M » HJ&^7nC » l-'/^C^I*  I  iM?|&1- » 0lfHIC^ » I&1 
IK- « q-t  a 

*  om.  1*. 


65 


6a.  ^XHH I  SI  I  OX*** » Hj&/.t A- 1  J&4+*  i  f/»'m.<:  • 

^^•^  t  ox*>+ 1  Xjt  I  t-ac  i  Mi-Xivih » h«»  •  )&*<»• »  ffljt 
4>X-«^  I  msatrih  i  ^A  t  xm.K'flilbC  ■  0j&tl-)-  >  A9*9  *  A 

•►  •  iiX'M- « »^air«^  •  •i*H«^ » A*nx«^  •  njtw  •  ax 

•M^  I  WiM^ » AX^II> » h«i»  I  Af9 1  j&h-f »  A-*  »  flX 
•>+ » 9^a<.  ■  •AX«"  I  hi » A-* « A>»9  «  0»»9j8, 1  J&^0h 
f:f*  ■  ffAXtf^d  I  X.M  *  A-l:  I  M"i  *  MfJt » ha*  1  f^dh?"  * 
A-i> « A'A*  t  h0"  I  j&th*}  I  iirii  >  X^X-  >  A^9  >  oAXo"  > 

•Xtf**!*  *  ff/Xrf-  i  h«*  I  j&lh'}  I  a^J'f.i  X^Xo^  *  ho"  I 
Kf^KCi-  *  AdA  I  ^A 1  X^HLX-aWbC  a  0AX0"P  1  £  *  HO  *  •fl 

XA.^  I  x<v  I  -flXA.^  *  WH:  I  -aXA  >  0yxr{-  *  ho*  *  Xjsji 

XJBJI9*<V  I  XA  I  yacAO- 1  nAil  a  0AX«»  *  XflUl*  *  9*X<i" 
1 1  •XXtf*^  *  h«»  I  jbtLfOH  I  ta^  I  XiD-  *  Xtf"-!:  I  SM!9h 
0^*  I  Oihl  I  tfAX^  >  X^Al-fApo^  >  flihf  >  Aa>-Xi:  >  Tfl 
C 1 0AJ&X«  >  X""^  I  fUtin  I  Aj&AlUr  *  O'Ma  1  X^HLXtf^  > 
AX<MC^  *  X9*Qii'  >  llCAl:n  *  XAo"  *  ^Af-o^  1  AX^t  ■ 
•AX«"P  I  'flXA.  •  HP  I  m  *  Ad/WU- 1 0rXf*C  •  ho"  I  f>tl, 

mh  I  Xjuix  I  Q>i- 1  )icA-l:^'>  >  h<i"  1  f.iif9  *  9*/^ai.^  *  X 

Ata  I  i&WAi  1 0AX«"  *  *ca  t  olUfrfi  t  Aa^V^  *  ^-flXf*  >  fi- 
^«"m<i»-  *  tH»>  I  tfAXfl"  •  b)  t  oi-Xi:  I  -OXA.!  MIUlA^i  X 


59-  ^Mrtt  I  SB  *  •ad^Tll  t  /^t-fi  *  +4«-ft^  i  nv* 

Mbn  •  HXIOAII I  hAK « ^0^^  *  KAP  •  Hj&l-n^  ■  HX'ia 

A I  •I'AXIi  I  h*ilahi^  I  mhhfr*  i  MA^  t  KA«*  i  j&HA 
r>  I  AX«*  I  lk.tf  A- 1 1  A.A  I  htV*  i  ^<f 7  >  kJ&hoHr  I AK 

tou  35«-  6o.  tMH  •  g «  nXli*  •  ♦  I  ^J*^  •  •9/»'^1-  ■  tftf- 
A*  I  t^'V'l-  *  •O/^^l-  *  y-OK-  *  AJwJLA  *  *Ui  *  •A+40- 
A^  I  ah^fJK^  I  AA.A.-f  0^  >  tftf-A-  *  Mb  *  KA^i*  >  fH 
h-  *  AA.A.^  *  XA I  •Kf  I  /^(L*!}  I  mhMtA  *  •A«*9AQ7  * 
mhhh  •  fllX.^  *  i&tIA- 1  XA«"  •  4>^r  ^^  I  Ahllf ^  •  0-Xii  i 
•AA^h^*  > 

«f ^  t  AbU?^  •  Qhkre-t  *  h.JLA  I  fM  I  K0- 1  tA.A  «  f 
tf-fl  t  AMLA  *  *M  >  Sb^  i  oriMI  I  AtA.A  >  CMVk  i  «f 0 

-n  >  A^rf*}  I  ib«A  •  0AaM'>A  •  h0»'i4,*  *  v*^  *  ^ak 

fTlAiiUI  1 0A«"H9*^'}  1 0A^<K^  *  MM'  *  StafVV  > 
•MMb  I  i»»VJ&  I  mi^o»^  •  a^A-«"  •  X^K-QiM:  •  Sfi » J61fl 
C*  fl/^C^i*  •  •Kbi  n9^i<  I  Q.i'  I  bCAi:r>  *  HJ&^flC  *  4-K 

IK»  i  q-i;  ■ 

'  om.  ^. 


65 


6a.  tXHUiSli  0X1+ » IM^A- •  W+« •  r /"iiU « 

i&K'i:  *  A^AXiri- 1  K^iUb'iUii:  *  yrx* h^  I  xr-w  i  v« 

4^^- 1  OXIi*  *  Kf^  *  lilC  *  M'Hl*^  *  ta«"  *  jMi^- 1  mfi 

«wr^  •  XA 1  *rirM»«^ « •/whM"p«»- » TH* » lutw  I 

IIX'H' » nai?*^  a 

^^  •  iix'>+ » nair«^ » •i*Hfl^  i  AMxo^ » mtw  •  ax 

■Mu:  I  ^^'^'^  I  Ax^ii>  *  ta«»  I  AT 9  *  j&ti*?  *  ft-'*' *  nx 
i-i-  •  9*^<K<  ■  •AX«"  I  III  I  A-ii  I  ixr^  I  au»vjt  I  f^mh 

9P  •  ffAX^^d  I  X.M  I  Art  •  Hr^  t  J&AAA*  i  &«•  ■  J&^Af- 1 
Ari>  I  Jt A*  I  ta«"  *  j&to*'}  t  Ari>  i  Xmjh-  *  AT?  >  ffAX^w  * 
M  t  Ari>  I  A9*9 1  l&l'fflMV*  i  •AX«"  *  M  *  OfXI:  *  tUd  * 

•X«"'l*  I « A9*f-  *  ll«*  *  i&ll*'} '  tUJ^f>  *  hmLh'**-  *  ho"  < 
X.AJn:f  *  AdA  I  ^A I  X^K'OfibC  •  ffAXtf^P  I  £ « HP  I  •fl 
XA.^  *  X«- •  •IIXA.^  I  HOi:  * 'OXA I  tffXrf- « h«"  t  XJ&M 
f*0<  I  ffAiJ^h  I  tfAXtf*  I  ft)* « nKf9-Aa-  *  ^Xrf-  *  h0"i 
Kfiur^* I KA * faHkfl- *  nihn a  tfAXtf* I X^lU^>  9°X<w 

0^-  ■  llihl  I  mhk^  *  X^A'M'dPtf^  *  fUhl  I  Adi-Xi:  ■  7*0 

C  •  mhfiM:»  X«H-  *  IWhl  i  hf^M^  ■  ff-Xi:  *  X^H.^"^  < 
AK^HCl*  I  XrOii-  *  iiCMin  *  XA«»  •  ^Af-o^  i  AX>a>  > 
•AX«»P  I  'flXA.  *  HP  *  PVi  *  ^^^U^'  *  •rX9*C  I  h«"  *  )B>^/. 
•A  i  XJUIX I  &•!•  •  InCMin  *  !!«•  *  i^f  9  *  9^i^m.d  >  X 

All  •  ^utrai  1 0AX«*  *  ♦cn  I  •fUf  <h  I  Afl"^  t  ^iixf*  >  j& 

^0»mm'  I  tH3Q»  i  •AX«*  *  bl  I  ••Xl:  I  -flXA.*  H^OAA* 


66 


+>^  ■  JUIX  i  J&'tJC^  *  M+^0^  *  9*7Qir  I  •K«*  t  All  •  fM 
A*  >  •AX«*P  t  HIXA.  *  lh«- 1  •OXA.^  *  •'•ItrK'  *  K9*llAX  • 
ih'H'fl  I  AX«"  *  iLt Jf.  I  JUIK<  >  ^ftt  >  ai<n  >  Ai£-h  ■  It8 

■  •!  1 74if;a«<  I  •K«*  I  Kb  I  JkiffJi,  a  0AX«*  i  bt  ■  •fOA.  * 
KoH  I  -flXA.^  I  KrAHh  •  •1'0'k^  I  h»-  *  ^MrJhr^  *  K 

hA.H  *  AX«a  •  ti)^  ■  •l-maa.'h  •  hm-  *  «*^«li.i-  •  -to  i  n 

••  •  ^AM-  •  X** » ll**lllC  a  lam » t^JM  •  •X«»  •  Xb  • 
IrhfJ!:  t  X«-  *  HJ&ffJtC^  >  •TXtaA  ■  A<IX  •  Xlhf  •  mKM  *  X 
••  i  ^Mr9f:f'i  a  Xtf*  •  MltflaAA-  •  AlO*  •  XTXAr » m 

<•  *  0€:?1- 1  «»ipr*n  *  «X«"  *  Xb  t  KS^ml^'P^  *  AX 

«ap*  •OXA.  *  X9*«h^  I  ffAXtf*  >  iLtJ^i  JUIX  •  mfhlTC  *  m 
AX«*  >  PX  •  ff-Ai- 1  All)  •  Aj&^JM  t  uj&j^  1  •^X^AI- 1 « 
feL  ssb.  XAi-VA^  I  ffii-^A-^  >  •XOA  *  |  •j&'>OC  *  flA.4C^  i  tfAX**  * 
i»M  i  H'>i- 1  ^«^  I  J&^ta€:p  t  ffXtf*  I  Xb  >  fAfS:  >  tfX 
«aO  I  •flXA.  i  HXat-Afl  I  •flXA.'h  >  «ayj&r7i-  ■  •j&TOC  *  Xlh 
r  t  ^fpth  *  X0*  *  Ifo^'h  I  X«-  •  i-X^T^  I  •«"AliC  I  flA5 

^  *  nxA-hXtir-  *  tfoxvxi  •  aajH-  •  x^i  •  m^a*  *  fi^ 


67 


» 1 4CXik  I  Mm  *  ii«- 1 T^  I  m^*}  I K*- 1 -1^ Af^  I  X0>  I 

rc)- i  •«.*  AKAA-f  I X^  I  iin/^  I  Of  f:  ■  X^  >  VTA 

A^*  •  lAr9 1  Kid-  I  Vl^  *  A«X  •  ta«"  ■  ^th?  >  AMrf^  •  4* 
XT C^  >  X^  I  ONCKr  *  K«- 1  fUlAr^  i  X«-  i  IH-AIM 
4- *  lA^X^C « XJ&*niC  >  XA^  I  ITHi  *  tf-A*  i  0A*  *  0*10 1 

*  If  Xr<- ■  OXIi- 1  iliJK*^  ■  fflH- 1  •XJ&4-«Ik:^ 

I  tf'Ai'  I  ai«n  I  XAh  I  t*it^«^*9f»i,'nr«*'*^'i 

•h  •  flQl?'^  I  AX«»UM».  I  UXlt  *  iw  >  xrkir«^  I  •  AX 


^.  TxinMSir*  X«"0 i  A^irt- i AilXA. •  lX^Xr7 « A 
X«>*5M4-« CX4 1  A-i>  *  AOavtli  I  J&^|«lK:r  >  «AX 
«•  *  )/^X4-  •  IiaX  *  \^r^Vi  >  »X«"a  I  •llXA.*ill>l*h«ni 
«iAX^  i  9X  i  •■Ai*  *  ihlt  i  »a  ■  A^4- 1  X<i»-  •  X^-l-  *  J& 
4-44^  *  •JB^-I^/"  I  Xrky  »  XA«"  •  hCA^rV « •  ff-XI:  • 

«^0-Aaiiuk«i  ■  ota«*iXm  I  ax«»  ■  fistt^  *  mfixA 

AX^  *  144- ■  X^9H.i*  i  f  0Ska  ■  OAI  a  •AX«> «  X.TIU:  • 

ta^ih  I  M5Ut  >  «AX«»p  •  •fiXA.  ■  xru  *  »ra^  i  xik* 
X«- *  irxr^  i  oxtaa-^  *  AX^l  *  •Hj&roci  tanira^  * 

Al&^jn I «|^«^T I ffXtf" *  Xh  *  fiAfJt  a  •ll^A^JCi 


'  A  ae. 


68 


X«*yj&r  ?*}  >  atiCA-f  ft  •  fiXtt  1 9'M'  I  -hM^  t  KA I  J&<M| 

^  I  aiMf  )B> » C5«»+  ■  •AX«)»  i  hi  I  -OXA.  •  MP  •  l»1ft  •  •O 
iL4%  •  •  tf-^  *  •'>Xr<h  t  Jb^mh^P  a  KA«"  t  mil  I  nuC  I 

^•09*^  ■  mh^he  ■  •K«"o  t  ainac  i  mj&'^uc  •  AHh » o 

v^jK  *  f'Wi  >  XT'*  I  O^A* « ••l^  *  fl/>';>il-  ■  mhJUlOC  • 

^ira  •  ••X+  •  jtM » ••roc*^  •  Atf-A-fl^  •  XT'tii  •  mm. 
9*-M  *  hnajti'Oih.c  > 

66.  tKH-u  I  s»  i  ox'ii'  i  AAce  I  ahAA.in  >  ina^^  > 

A9*1'aC  >  mSiTti^  I  KA-HSilh « A(ki*  *  hCAi:/?  *  «A4f*U 

ci- 1  KrAb  >  x^K-n<ibC  •  •4*9*uci*  •  «»'>/ik  •  ^^  • 

Mt  •  :Ivi:a  » 0»Vii**^  I  A^yi- 1  ai^«»}trK  •  9A^  i  90 
•W 1 9Ar » M+  •  +^0«^  •  OillM  •  IHIC  •  •lUll^  t 


«9 


fffifCf- *  H^l  >  Mk^  *  OMi*  I ATO^  I  Mil, «  WVLh-a 
mM'^'tmittif  «Af*)K■«tf•A-l■#-A•fe:^  a  AA^^i 

«A«^A^ «  A9«hJ&i«A«Ct  •  •AtariHrt-  *  •Ajlim i 

mhJk/Mr  a «K«ai ^AflK> •  nyi*  ■  m-Mr »  rMttr 

«••  a  «ir>i- 1  i^ft- 1 1d^  I  Otf-Ar  i  AA;H*  I  •iJLf  *  liu:  > 
M/J.'KnjirOSJ:»\adA^  I  MM-  a  0A«ay  i  itta-t* 

m*MtmhMf*MnHt  >  MUH-  *  mtUh  a  0CXf^  *  mh 
•00- 1  ta«a  I -Mlll^  *  A4<littf' *  •i-lA^  •  ^iK*  *  J&X'I:  * « 
^A/ 1  AdVi- a  0 j&lL  I KA^  I  XllUh'lUbCi  XT tf-A"  I  "HI 

4>  I  hckfo-  *  h«a  *  rum  >  ta«»  •  '};h»t  •  ffKic  *  A7a<f  ■ « 

'lOA  ■  MKTtf-A*  ■  f:T4:^  i  Amj;  *  •/A.f  *  M^  *  OiHb  * 
AAi*  *  MA^  a  0dA/ ■  ATO-I- *  ♦A-A'h  I  •fhCIri- «  0IHIC 

KIILX'lUkC  *  AAA4- *  MA^  *  K'H*  •  ^K-l:  *  A'llH' I  •^•ll 
4 1  XA«a  I  at  I KA^  *  XTtf-A*  I  <Mf*  a  mA^  I  ^f  OC  * 
XllUHUhC  *  tfCXf^  *  ll«»  *  AX^KiUbC « ^A-AI:  *  ^A^ 
J& ■  ffHl4- 1  A^f:4-  a  ATlh I tffcXr f- * IKI^  *  AA^fl^* ta 
«•*  lk.liH- •  hriO  I AUX '  H4>I^«H- ■ -Hhu;  I  A7IM- *  Ih 

h*  *  MKI^  I  tftUSli  1 0+9*C^  •  Ad^i**  AAilXtffAXlA 
4  a  tfAXrfM  *  OKI'I- ■  •HA^  I  AikM^f*  *  •r*lfK- *  h«"  I 
f^k^C  *  iMa  >  0'X'li  *  HU  *  OliL'q^  *  tf-A-  >  •OfXi:  *  j& 

IL I  AM>  I  AURY  I  XA«a  *  4-Xrc)T  ■  ofXi:  i -tlkr  >  0^ 
IkiHa*  I  «A4-#-A£lK^  >  ll«*  >  ^*Xr<- >  ll^  I M  *  OfXi:  1 
IXMtMi^  a  XA«a  I  AAi- 1 KAJ^  I  AAi- 1  ^Vf  JkU- *  AX 

"MLM I  x.ff A4k  i  hCAM  *  jKXt  i  tftArr^ '  XA4t  I  Aia 
•^  ■  0iin  t  i-ATf  •  A?fl^4*  a  0iHijn  *  b^  *  tin 


7« 


^T^^  I  mc^n.  I  xr^A-<%u-  *  flX'>•^  I  Hrnf- 1  ^a^  *  K 

j&tf-A-  *  •A.llUA'  I  f-ChX'  •  HX'TIU  >  JChA-l-  ■  •flXtt  ■  AC 
to  *  Mh  I MH  >  f  Kl^f  I  XAo"  i  A>  *  ffUa)  t  A^«^  i  ^a. 

•f  I  "km  I M^  *  HT  a  mfn^mt  *  Mir  *  x'>h  •  xao*  i  a 

fMi  I A9^  I  j&ll'>0-  >  rX-Ki*  I  dA^  *  AlfLC  •  IdA-l- 1 1 

lac" 

69.  t-XHii  I  sii  I  •x«»  I  A.^toA*  *  ^«hf- 1  -tfl  *  ikt  I  to 

CAi:n  *  OX'li-  >  hifiA-n  *  X'H'  t  X.A.A  >  I  ^M  *  IOC  *  X 
A*-!-  *  flQ>^ta  I  h0"  I  Xj&^o^  I  K'HICi*  I  X^KiMbC  >  0- 
Ai-  i  f^fL/L  *  ^A.?*}  >  XAo"  *  Mi  *  <»I|7  *  nptfCi^  *  AA<1 
X I XA  t  A«X  I  J&tJCA  I  Atf'b'}  ■  0AX«*  ■  lllfl'^  >  J^XtH*  > 
«*l|7  *  7^i&  *  \rvt  I  XAo"  I  XCb-Af  ■  flho"  I  •OXA.  *  7ft. 

;h  I  j&tA-A  I  AQ>•^  *  tocAi:n  ■  0h«Tu-  >  ^^irf-A  I  nctf-A*}  > 

•AX«*  *  X.^toA- 1  ^js-flh^  t  aOiB^'Irtoo^  *  fl(k^  >  X0-  * 

a(k•^  *  hcA-fcy*}  *  iuirc  •  ss  *  O'ta  *  v a-  >  aajh'ti:  i  • 

^'Hl'Q  1 0"Xr<li/.  >  0j&](A.  *  AX«»  I  tf  Affii  1 8«e  I  jB,ftAfL  *  X 
A«*  *  X1ll»  t  j&Q.  I  -to  I  0A«- 1  8«C  ■  inhX)  I  flArr  > 
UP*  *  tf A-to*  *  X)  >  aTXhAtiro^  a  •Aj&AAf  •  ^^f^'Ti  1 
rAA  *  7X<A  I  toCAi:^*}  >  flSOi^  1  XAo"  *  X.Ci:A  >  foth^  * 
n^aU  *  tfjUk-H-  *  ^^"l  a  mKf'iiM.  I  AXIi>  t  X^lLX-n 
<kC  *  TAA  •  AA^  a  mhJMLt  *  o")- 1  nfj^C  *  A-aCV?  * 
fAA » JtAflal*  •  fl»Afl"yjtr« » r  AA  •  W-^  •  a»iM^ 
1 1  •oayj&r?^  i  AX<w  *  >flf-  *  9*AA  *  hTHkCfr  *  fi^4Mnt  • 

iDj&f  X.  i  hrdi- 1  tocA-tn  ■ 

70.  ^XHH  i  ^  t  ox*** » •Mflll?*^ » AXA » ffl^ » J&1-1 
nc » ng  A?^- » flaaiifl-C  i  mttMr^  i  flX'H'  j  II-W/^X  « X 

'  tf'A'  added  above  by  corrector.  *  Iff  o.  e. 


73 


AAA  >  <>•*&  *  sidM"  a  mfi.'^M'  •  h^fl  >  fli'fui'^i- 1 9dA^  a 

^••l' « flK9*4A  •  'MIhC«»*  a  atfOOr « XriW-fl*- »  AMf 
1 » AXA  i  1M» «  QbH  •  Wflfl*" » A+TlhCoa- « mtfTf » l-IIA  • 

A,n  I  AX«a  *  •OdA  I  tf-A*  i  9A9*  >  •tffb  i  AMn  *  KAO  •  II 
J&nt^/^*  a  XA«B  I X7H I  tf A-  >  a AJ&oiii  I  ftAA.tf-  •  9*Xit  > 
AX^X'OWi.C  •  ati-'im^  *  )7<.  i  h«a  1 9'Mt  *  M  >  MA.tf- 1 
Afl  I  tfAK  *  X9*9A9*  I KAPI:  >  9^^it » XAo"  •  KAO  >  Mf 
A^  •  (Hfku-  >  XA«"  I  «X:^  >  X^K-fMbC  i  •ICXrt  *  K«^ 
d  a  «f  tf.  I  •OXA.  I  'X^'V'fK'  a  •? tf>  i  •flXA.  *  MiMf  jB>t|'K.i 
»9^af>  a  ffAXoa  *  t-ftf  Aliaa- 1  09^9"  1 0fl^L^  i  X^K 
•lUbC  I  •OAfh  t  XA«a  *  «"¥^9«  *  ^JlAf^  *  AAA*  XAt^A** 
kr^nii  1 9A>»  •  ahttt^A  I  tAfli^H* » fl»  V*^1' » XA « 
QMlOti  *  llCA-f  A  •  «a«^0-  >  ^1n->-  >  '>4i<hl  i  airf-A*  i  IJtt.  i 
K'}^aa-%  I  •QA^'>%  *  hd"  I  ^UA*  *  0^flf>  *  HJUL  i  «"Jtr 
di9  *  K^  •  m0»'it9'  I  Xj&A-hfi  i  tfiKI  I  ho"  I  Xj&Alif>  * 
•Xj&CAtf- 1  Tflfl  a  •Xj&liA- 1  M^tdf  >  flC^A  i  XA«"  >  X 
•a^* » ••JJ'im » XT;*"** » X^K-flflbC »  h^lL  »  tf-A- » 
•ruA-  i  ffA^  t  X'7lU>  *  X.rA«A  >  llCA-f  A  *  ♦A^-A^  •  • 
^<K^  I  tf^Mi*  *  Qii-  *  llCA-l:/?  >  •H7i<  •  ITHI A  *  M*  • 
HThAXaa- 1  A:*-?  i  mftt  i  XA«a  *  MllA  I  lo^n  I  HiLAI 
4: 1  hrMLhaJM:  •  A^/^ihi*  *  A<IX  *  KA  i  ho*  •  AJ&A-M^* 
AAbC  a  •Xj&fkA*  t  «an<h«^  ■  h«a  i  XJ&A-M^  *  •i&l  >  XA  * 

'  000.  X^  •  •  •  XA.  homest 


i 


74 


J&fkA* •  AJ&A-M^  t «j&) I  AltfiC  >  0|hM  >  J&Oi I  AhC  i  fa 
t^A  *  «-Ai-  •  M;J^  I  yh  I A-IIKA.  >  •HTi'  i  UlU  •  Kb  •  A 
hllf ^  •  AQal•l^f«^  I M I  Atf-A-  *  ihtitt  •  hCAty?  >  XA  >  ^ 
ArCi  I  fllktf^  >  AXIlU)  >  KfA-h  *  llCA-f  A  I  H>1^  I  nX'H: 

•+^A»  •  •♦r^flu » MKf^' » A<»^ » jth**!  I  Kb>.  i  A 
KA I  f fllft- 1 A^^  I  mf^i  1 0AXA  •  MKAr  *  atfthaH.  •  -1 
a  *  0A*  *  Ai'fi  a 

71.  i-XHn  *  es  *  flKii"  •  KA » jtwiJ*.  •  nM+  •  yja^T 

OMi*  t  i-HiK;  I  ^A I  X^M  a  •; A9*{.  i  h<ia  i  «a'>/.A  i 

fiij¥f: » •z^;' » Wih^ » •J6>fr » Xfl'h'*  •  fl»-A+  •  a^hl  a 

•jtl^HM* » -taoae » "iiY"*^ » ha* » j&d+ih »  a«»»  •  ttch 

♦ft » •Aj&bihAf* » CJt'M***- « •U'lIF*^ « tf-A-  «  H/l^* 
jf.  I  mdXa^  I  ^KHH  >  MH.K'lUbC  >  hmOA  a  0M'}'!'  •  Irf- 
A-  •  Ifcimil*^  •  ^Ord « iDj&*r »  tf-A*  •  AA£S  •  tt/^C^t  * 
K'H*  I  -tm-vn^ » A-*  a  mKf^fMh  i  1-XHH  •  Hi>»Clh  •  A* 
•fi  a  K|i  I  HilM  t  mil  I  ^XHH I M  >  nKmLhihhJ:  *  hra  • 
Kftoa 1 0<Xii I  j&Oi I lllljl|0^ I  A9*9 ttljr  >  Ar"i >  0III1. 
ff  >  A9*9 1  AT/*  •  MdAmX  a  •HtiJtioa- 1  ^flP  *  A.1-  >  90 
f  1 0HA.i*  i  far  •  Kflr- « AH^t^lt  a  Kb  *  XA  *  KAP0^  >  t 
f:ft  ■  KA I  duae«^  *  9+0*  *  ^KHII  *  Ht^'Ufl  >  A-a^  •  a"9A 

A<n  >  K0*^^  a  IDA4I V^  *  I  m(n^  *  0dA;l*^  •  aif.^^ 
9' *  AHiMCf  *  A-0^ •  n-ad  I  Oho"  I  i->1^ia^^<l, a  0j&a.i 
^KHM 1 0000^  *  mh^M-  a  •aK'»i'  I  H!hCX  I  J&Oi  i  £AjB> 
to*  •  A-t » /"•eft » ^^Ajbth  1  AAAiV » •^A1+  •  ffl-^^t  •  0 

'  CXr  o.  e. 


75 


4ft  W » Am*  •  li«»  •  mhj^^  ■  •J&ILf*<>  •  "l«»;l'+  • 
•Aj& JLTf- « '•1l/A:H*  i  XA I  taiLA-0^  *  ^M  *  tf-A-  •  A 
A  *  S I  aO/^C^i:  *  0lk.4-<li^  t  ACXAIl«^  i  flfUMr^o^  I 
A.«H- 1  UKi-m-VH  *  Alio^  *  «ilk.4-^jl^  *  lii-^Uir » ll 

1^  i  /"Aon  *  \dM  •  •OKI-MI  I  :^r^^f>  I  AMlUk'fkk 
C  a  h<i"  I  >l**  I  *&  I  •i»1l/l « n*/*' » XA »  ••AtT  I  AlHI 
)^  t  NXinA  t  i^fi.tKmUi'lUkC a  tfXA*  t  «^  1 0X4^* 
mmtX  i  •MDAfli  *  nu  1 0A9*X'  t  Xft«*  i  hrMP  t  AX11I> 

•oabC  I  x.rA^  I  iicft-f  A  i  hKhh  *  &«•  •  fi-xtt  *  ta^^  1 0X 

IMtiP  I  AAA  >  '•TiLft  >  ^HJt  >  tf^Oj^  I  ft1/-f  *  tftfrn 
f  *  mKS'UCih  I  tMku< a  HX^ih  > Iro^ *  AXA *  J&liK-tin 
•h  i  9*^Q<:  a  •Xft^'f  I  Hj^riK-  •  AdA  ■  tHM?  *  tf^-fUI'l'  t 
fl^h^  I  XAh  I  Afl  I  j&XaK* « HXr^(Lir0^  1  AA.ir0a*  1  MX. 
f-f.M*t^  I  Hj&JlA'  I IHU:  t  J&HiAfr  >  ai-0<:>tllA^>X'}1** 
J^Xt  i  X9*4A  •  11U&  •  A.^  *  bllf  ^  <  X.rA-A  •  llCft  I  -f  ft!  • 
P  *  XA  I  f>iJtif.9 1  AH*}*!:  I  h«»  I  inp*)k  a  ffXlf^  *  h«a  i 

iroet^  1 1A1)  •  H'}•^  *  •X9*j&xii  >  mnMi  •  toa  i  <ia-4  • 

■Ml^  *  X^X'Odi.C  >  H-tVie  *  X^X-fUibC  i  Tft  >  fl-llf  a  ta 
oa  t  nM-'^nC  I  £  I  «aftA  •  hAh-  *  HJ&Oi  •  Xl>Xik«0hi^X 

441 1  xrirf-A-  >  u+vne  >  xiii>-n<ibC  •  ik  •  fl-ix-  *  atxv* 

C  >  •«"71lC  1 0a^Xj&  I  •oaAXIri*  I  tfAf^A  >  mii  >  «iar 

dA  >  hxhh  I  a^JiA  I  ail  I  iDiMC^  1  ai:  *  /^c^t  *  •Hh«a  ■ 

/ilUi'  i  MK^ « nx'>+  •  •x«a+ » ho»l- » •llj&h»^  I  oxi 

•I- 1  hil?^  I  mUfBitah^«»'  1  AAif «-r}  *  mdAoi  >  tf-A*  *  AA 

SS  *  aHI&IUiF  *  0MCitA  t  A^aAXhii  *  •All tXMH*  t  A^  • 


76 


A.01l^U  i  1IU  *  <h1  >  •HKHHtf^  i  AbU?^  •  Aj&llA-  ■  /Wf 
«n  >  t^P-f  *  M  *  Irf-A- 1  AA££  I  A0"AXIli-  >  \nxJvfLAUC.  > 
X?^  I  toll/.  >  r944|  I  •li.^d»dA  I  "hrXH  a  0^0  I  J&^9 
^  I S I  •J&0AK  I  KrAMll:  >  Mi-  >  i-0)liL  >  J&\V'>'»P  '  n 
f>^  a  di^LXrf^A  I  Kmr4>)  i  H<:hp  i  AAA  A  •  ot-Xi:  <  Afl  >  «fi 
Af  I  fbcn  *  a^ffbir  *  O^L^Jf.  >  HMflA  >  PUfh  *  )IU&  a  0 
A.4>  •  bUf  ^  >  4^ik.A  •  hlTKh  *  ^^^0'  *  nihrfP  <  ^m.hi'  ■ 
0«»C7«»  I  XAll  I A9A9*  a  0ll.^Cir  t  )0J&  >  llX'l'h  >  ^9 

majS.  I  T«C  •  H+^tf-*  •  H^hp  I  liP-Ufi  •  tT-/^  I  0li.> 

'M^r  I  i-fl^A-f  I  flMi- 1  AAoi:  i  mad  *  0<:Ar-  >  it^d  >  K 


7a.  ^XHH  >  M I  0M+ 1  /••C9+ 1  tiOil* » AA.lia^ « ^ 
fc/»<.  •  flHv^Ai » Ahfl^  I  idMI**^  « +Xf»<.  I  hAfl  >  haa 

P I XA I  doaj&firoa-  •  ik.JLA  *  *M't  a  0AbAM  >  A*^f^V 
«^ » ♦A0'ft+ » •AaM'}  •  AoaWlTfla- 1  ^fff i- 1  lllUk-^ » 

<q>  I  iLKiroa- 1  Af> ,  •n-MiM  i  Kap  i  h^^^j^  •  orM  > 
XX.I  >  rnhj^dlra  i  O-IOit  i  Hi&/.^A-  >  Mnnt  >  flhn"  •  buv 
* » KAuri-  •  A.f-c-n^r  a  xit  •  ^^|<:  •  xa*  •  >^«  •  o* 
A'«"  •  K^X-fMo:  a  mm  *  Kb  t  aAii  I  nn.hih  *  /*'C9^  > 

X9*KhA*  I  Atf-A*  >  9A9*  I  aShr  I  KA  >  iM^di  i  Xf*-)!!  > 
X^Hji'flAi:  i  «aC(h.  I  Atf-A*  1 9*^0C  >  XA.A '  fi^Ai-  ■  ^A 

91*  •  '•AXIl'h » AHJ^oajtrX »  AilX  •  h«ia  I  f'tiAT'  i  l-ttd » 
••AXhl*  •  ^Ord  a  •X.iiaV^-aH  •  A^y#?1*  *ydCrh  •  t^ca 
)  *  mhjrr*  •  •X.rtflh  t  XoH/ME.;  *  htthh  >  0X.A9a. 

i&>  •+A.ft1L I  Xj&tr  *  «•>%  t  Xft«»i  X.li)i  A-A0t  A"|:i 


77 


hh  >  M  *  ta«»  I  KM^iWh  ■  TK-A?  i  flA'f:^^  *  r'>i- 1 X*} 

•W1»- » IIXWir<»* » <»»/»'7C+  ■  ®AX«»  » h«»TlA  I 
Ml  t  A>  *  Uf^^a-i  t  KA I  i&^^^lP  •  AAA.A  *  «M  *  Irf- 
A*  1 9Ar  *  •  A)l  >  I  MttMUkC  i  A.t  >  hUf  ^  i  A.r A-A I  h 
CA-fA  •  hrmM  a  •i-0')&«a- 1  K9*'t0 1 0^di  >  «a¥4>il  t  M 
Ujti-aSJ:  >  A.t  I  hllf ^  <  0hU?^  *  aUkVV'fi  a  aii-iMp/* 

tlth  I  hCA-f  A  a  m-Ohi  I  •%9*>  I  A>  i  ♦iW9*'><nAy  i  •/«« 

•ay  •  amdJin  1  rhMr«^ » h«"  >  '}/.'>f>a^  *  aa££  *  am-a* 

•♦VI » ♦A.A  •  A.* » hlWl* » HflK«n » TA*  i  ••X* « M 
HAI  ■  lk.rA*A  >  llCA-f  A  a  H^^oaAm  *  ACXA*  i  ttnd  *  h^  * 

hn  I HV  *  •A.t  I  hil?^  I  h^  I  OX'YtM  I  htfail  I  Add 
1 1  *i»/^9di' » <»»'»^A1»+  •  AX^K-flflbC  •  X-fl » Xr**'^* » 
M^A^  *  •KHII>  I  "iiac  >  hfu-  >  00A0*  I  bAM  >  rAA> 
I  <  XA I  th9^  *  Pi:  a  Otliihii  >  Xb  i  Alrf-A-o^  >  XA  •  fXf* 

>.  •  0+ « ufiV'fii^  •  j&th*.  I  hovl*  •  0X.^ha-  i/^df'  •  "ti 

tm-t  I  buH-  *  h^n  a  ath9*f^d  >  d(r7'|:A  •  k^ditt  *  flho"  * 
/"«+  •  ♦Hia'J  I  ♦jS.A  •  HX70A  •  f.r  a  fl»«%f » •  XA.A  •  ♦ 
M+ » •♦Afl»'A+  >  fl»  V#S'+ » ©-V-A+a^  >  i*  >  0X7*kir 
a^  I  XAiii.4<?A  >  ♦^'^  >  ilnd^  •  HX^0  I  hrii  i  flKf^ 
CI:  I  AX^X-OHbC  a  XA  *  KCKf  >  ''•AXIl'f  >  AXIH.K'AA. 
C I  ttffinVii  >  0^4^  >  AX.r A«A  >  liCA-f  A  >  MnjM  <  »«• 
m^  *  XAh  >  oafllO  I  m:A  *  tthythih  a  0lD7f:y>  <  flXdQ*}  I 
X^tf-A* « XW** » m*^tifi  I  X*7ll.X « nX^Jt  •  Afl^ « •♦+ 
AF  a  •aAil:  i  Hhtfail  *  I  •OXA.  *  n^mM  1 9^0^  i  X^XI  > 


78 


KlXh  •  KAo"  I  lia"1f  I  f.M^  *  AAri  ■  KflLM  >  hCA-f A  > 

0»7 1  h^«- 1  OKA  I  r<hJ&A-  >  h0»  I  £;hA0 1  hT0»+  >  0gll. 
/r  1  A«-A-Ay  I  j^ihia  I  K«^1i:  i  H'^'OA  >  "OtA  •  hA<">  >  1 
H I  tl«i»  I  Ml  I  AA.O'  *  Hti>  >  ^US- 1  lllll})^  >  "W^-f'  I  Xa  > 
hf*'M  >  h^X-fkkC  1  »/^h  I  Xiao  1 0»Ah  I  fjfj¥  i  id/«« 

n  *  o^iL  «  XlliAlk  I  ti«»  >  AAM  I  a»«h?V  >  hJMijr'^  i 
•f  A  «  •l*h«n>  *  A.+ 1  hW^  I  Hh^tUiildi.C  I  0ll'hA0  I  H 

'  tfl^f^0 1  *  H  added  above  by  corrector. 


bCAM  i  KW  *  »Mf^  ■  Kft«»  ■  ^m  *  a>-:>  *  AiA.^  ■  0h 

pnnn « tfhr Wkf  I? » ••»+ » fcxri? » x-n  •  h«»  •  »■:*  • 

a.*  •  Mtf-A- *  ^MV  ■  Mt  I Y^  1 M^  I  a)^A•  ■  AAf  I  « 
fVdUn  *  tUfr  •  KA«»  1 M*  I  It^lM  1  (Ki^tMkJt* 
Mi- 1  X^lk  *  rntUr  I  ^Mll  I  «»AKhh  t  -u  *  «"^Hk*  /. 

rit/L^h  I  rjruh  ■  xaAt  t  <D\,h<iai  i  xru  *  «-iiA  t  mn 

•yi"  ■  lk.^^A.  *  K1*lAll  *  OXIi-  *  Af"ll  I  H-hATf  *  AdM  * 
A^fk  I  li-l  I  A)  I  «A.^JMt  1  Hilt  I  tCtM  1 1»lA  ■  a^JC 
Ita  *  ^n^A-tf*  I  liCA-f A  ■  atfiiKh  ■  llPi>  ■  Ah  ■  rtauh  ■ « 

f"AA  *  ^4A I  i^tdM  «  Aibh^  I  iDXIfH  *  fiMX  i  AHA  A  * 

Mhi^  •  9Ar  •  fcm  ■ 

Mr^  I  nX'li- 1 4^1  *  •WO  •  VA-hflt^  •  AH  •  1*-A»  • 
fMra  I  K^XiMwC  I  X-fl  *  AK*THA  1 0a"£^t  <  KfM  > 
ItCA-f  A  «  flK'H*  I  ft^  I  X^«  I  ho"  I  tf-A*  I  lit  I  iDtf-A-  > 
iMV«"  I  /AAA  I  Knr^  I  tfOAA  ■  M  •  A^ii;  I  iM&oi'hi 
tW^  I  HAtf-A*  •  iL^'A  *  /*'A«n  1 011  •  X'WLX'fUa:  1  XT 


8o 


Ah » iD9A+fl*^%  >  hfi-fi  •  h:5'fl»' » Aj&iDi*  >  A-a^  •  XT- « 
0ndA  >  )^«  *  4*^0  <  Irf-A*  I  )l«  >  a\Hir  i  Ai«f 00  >  h9»AAAi 
If 0^ » MA*  •  *«»•»  •  ^ChaV  I  "lUAh  I  Mn.h  »  jTT^ 
"laA  *  \tM  a  ^  >  ;h  I  X^ik  I  t'YyA}  a  av^fD-A  >  K^A  >  0 

«"^afA  I  /^;^  •  <h4>jt.y » M+ » Atf-A-  •  M/^;>  •  idAXA  « hf 
■ta  I  a"9f:A'h  *  CthAT  I  l&X.^  I  Xf  I  dll  I  Alf-A- <  >f:A  >  f* 

h  *  A0»h  *  0AXA  t  "hAt  >  WWi  >  X"}!!  1  )l«  1  ^4!Ah  *  4: 
iU^  I  ^fr^i- 1  Xl-  a  fljiDAft'tl  *  Hfli>  ( Ah  1  fhlUf'  >  0 
r AA I  ^^M 1  «"'»/.A  <  frfkh^  1  tfX'^lf  I  J^MISl  *  0H  A  A ' 
•A^ga  i  ^Hr  *  hfVi  a 

lUIr^  *  flXli*  •  XAi J&>*V^ *  «hda •  9A+fl*** » MH-A- » 
f^M%  ■  X^KAilwC  1 X-O  *  AX^K  *  «aa£-:^>  <  X.f  A-A  * 
toCA^FA  *  flX'»t  •  XA  *  rV^ii.  ■  X^^  •  maXI-M  I XA I UA 

0«  I  j&'»*9Jf.  I  x«"%  *  aoAc  *  «X0a%  *  nXfiAi  >  0x0"%  ■  a 

♦VI*  •  «X«a% »  fl'P'rt*  •  OHM  »  flaflil » l^-MK- 1  haa  •  tf- 
A*  ■  /•OltrA  ■  0-Ai- 1  oaCA  <  «"je^'»  t  HtfA-  *  ^Xlll  >  X^H. 
XikkC *  Xr Am  a  W*\*  XAf  I X^ILX-lkkC I  Xf  Atl> > 
lll^A•  I  ^X't'H  1  "lAXAh  1 0f  Atat^^h  I  AXA  •  t1^  *  X^ 
« ■  0AXA%  I  XA  I IIA0- 1  f.'inti,  *  MXX:  •  hCtd  *  'ittd  * 

r  AMr«a- 1  hie»  1  «♦£•  1  ^nhV  1  ^chnv  >  lYUAh  1  x^x  a 

fTJ^i  "^OA •  tf-A* a  j&Ta^ X-lltX •  -M/A* a X-lUf iho"* » 
OHA'I'  >  naofrn  I  oaCA  ( hOhl,  t  AAilXaa*  <  af:/*'<h  i  00 
A  AT  >  Vkn  t  J&^A/^Hh  *  aifM-i^th-  a  nfi0AXrh  <  HP 
ii  >  Ah  ■  r  A^U-  *  0r  AA  I  ♦^A  *  «a7iLA  >  M<h^  '  '■^'^'^ 
H  *  ^XlLi  1 011  AA  *  0A'}A«a  <  ^Af  >  hfll  a 


8i 


tlCft-f  A  «  ox*** » HV*?*  •  hfl» » 1f91»  •  W.»- »  ••»+  » •! 

trt  a  ^1^1  ]l  I  K7IOMA.C  ■  Jhf  Ab»  *  lltf-A*  *  ^MrU  *  1 
AXAh  *  0f  Al-nt^^ll  I  HVntll  *  4A'  *  •■A'h  *  "W  *  JK^/. 
♦Jt  •  ••hi  I  JiA'H:/*'^!  •  in  •  Ar 'JtC  •  •X«» » l-A*!/  • 
h'fUf ai  *  AHCX  *  «A«74^C  I  tfOCb  *  9«-ll  ■  ^^"^  »  HKT 

■M  t  t<.»h  ■  ym-t  t  j&ctaa»  ■  •yu  Ah  ■  X^Jh  ■  f.i\t  ta 

Ai  1f-A>  a  ^T^H  X^X  I  i*"fyA) ■  OMir  * M^  *  <h1MI 
h  I  mtthJi-  *  )^A*«^  *  XA  *  j&AJL«*ll  *  'TflC  *  r AM  *  lib 

p>  I  nhr-Mih  ■  njAAA-h  >  iipii  ■  Ah  ■  rA/wu-  ■  ^taa  > 

^^A  *  n^dJn  *  AilA^  *  «X1t1i  *  fiiMX  1  tfllAiJt  *  «A^ 
A«"»  •  "JAf*  •  Xl**  ■ 

JuR^TflM+T^AMrJtci  •Wfl » 9A+fl*^ » IW"A» » 
^XfH  ■  X^X-IUbC  ■  Xil  t  AX^II>  *  »ii»f:^i  *  X.f  A-A  * 

hCA-f  A  a  ax'»i*  I  v^  *  ^xrc  *  ho"  i  «^y  t  Ay*A'C  *  /au 
¥  >  mf/^rc  *  /•futrih  *  amcx  ■  gATX^sc  *  wuhh^^p*!^ 

Kt  t X'ULX'flikC * Xf*AW a  j&r^t  jiAf  ■  OXIi- ■  «:&* 
f*£-C  a  X^lUi'fltkC  I  Xf*AM  *  Htf-ft*  *  ^XlH  *  "lAXAh  i 

0f Ai*at^<}h  ■  «Ay  •  XAo4>  •  »h/^rc  ■  X'lutrai  ■  aiic 

Mn,h  »  ^  I  ^  t  -iflA » i*-A» » jTrSTT  x^x »  inVAJ  « 


nxii*  I  > VI I  JhU'Oh  >  tfOXIi- 1  W*A- 1  «^  ■  XA  *  ^JUa**  foL  38b. 
0-  >  4*^  *  «(K>h  I  A0»h  a  a£0AX:ll  ■  HPia  1  All  >  f*Aik 
0- 1 0^AA  1 4*^A  I  ti^4M  ■  Ail<h^  *  &tKVn  t  j&Xlil  1 011 
MX '  gA^A^  t  ^y  I  hit  n 

'  Xd***>^  over  erasure. 


89 


A-ft  *  llCA-fA  a  0X1+  *  "7/+ 1  h9^n  I  h<M>  I  /dir?  i  XAh  t 
i^iUJC^-^  I  KA+f/^ih  I  lil  1  Ay*JtC  >  f'tlKSti  I AHCX 1 0 
A*TX<SC  ■  Him^  1  fJ»  I  j&X.'h  ■  X^K'fkkC  >  hrWk  a 
FiT^  H Af  *  0X1+  *  f /+  *  X¥ A*?  a  X^X'OdbC  i  H1f-Ar  • 
+Xt1l  *  lAXAll  >  0f  A+Ot^lh  I  HX'PA'?  *  •?/+  >  Men  • 
XAh  t  «»A/.C<f«^  I  XA+f/**;!!  *  in  ■  AfXrC  <  0XC4>  <  + 

Aiy  1  X'lnii  t  xtiA  *  iDOCb  >  x«-^  •  9av+  >  nHiLXh  <  i 

<■+ » ym-t » J&ChOt I "lUAh •  X1II.X «  ^t^i  lOA I If-A 
h  a  ^0  *  AiH  t  X^X  *  ir'Hihl  •  0X1+  i  M^  t  Ih-u-ah  I 
00X1+ 1  tf-ft*«^  t  XA I  )&]L<D*|^  I  ^^1  <D|K-h  I  Aooti  « 

0£«AJtll  1 110+ 1  Ah  I  ritlMh  1 09*AA  1  ^J¥.A  ■  «^/Jk  i  A'O 
A+ 1  tfX'tili  1  fiidH  I  «IIAi4L  *  aAM""  I  ?Ay*  *  X«11  a 
Mrt  •  0X1+  •  Th/^  I  tfh^O  •  9A+0+^  •  Mtf-A- « |1X 
'til  I  MttjMJhJC  I X-O  *  AX*TlU  *  maos^^i  *  X.f  A^> « li 
CA-f  A  *  0X1+  *  «H:+6  i  X^X-IUbC  *  Th/**)  <  X^A**ti 

«•  •  fli'ii/"*  I  HXiOA  I  Sbnr  •  OAAr  I  ©nitfr*  •  *+<i  i 


mf-Ar  I  J&XIH  I  X^H^'flili.C  I  Xr  AM  *  ^  *  ^  *  X A»  •  |  OX 
1+ 1  Th/^  ■  X^X-fUbC » Xy*Am » Btf-A- » +X'i'H  •  1AX 
Ah  *  0f  A+0t^9h  I  ATH>*  *  4*1: 1  rJtc  *  «•«+&  >  XlltX 

•lUbC  •  n-/»^  •  x^  A*  •  •0*^9  •  A-* » inp»  •  X'icc  •  »e* 

XA40 1  HtfOlA  t  X^4:+ 1  «+f1C  1 0-A+  ■  AO-  *  0X1+  * 

»frA+»  &+ 1  hCAlr/ih  I  ¥fl»t  t  j&cho  i  •yu  Ah  >  xiiLX  « 

JSOTT*  10A  •  tf- At  I  ^  t  ;h  I  X^X  » +iyA-  a  tfp  I MX1 
OA I  Aili++ * IKM^ I  AO^  1 110X1+  ■  y^«K+  i  aHA+* 
/^t  1  «»Ati+h  ■  OS«A£-h  I H0+ 1  Ah  I  f*A^U-  >  a»f*AA  i 
^4-A  ■  «i>1iLA  *  Ail«h+ 1  «X'lll  *  J&XHSl  '  «IIA A  >  <dA1 
A«»  •  9Ar  •  XII  ■ 


83 


>  •  A.f  M I  llCA<f  ft  I  aXIt  I XA I  /aoHh.  I  a«a^  >  «-fti<  • 
4*JtA^  I  h^-t  *  Mi*  *  AdA  i  I^A•  •  0>t  *  llCfti:^  «  «"/^ 
!•*+  •  «r/+ « 0/"^+  •  «Ml-«'h  •  +TlhC  I  AXA%  I  -11* 

^  I  «AXA%  I  t/Siii  <  HtfhK  I  mwfff:  •  mhhht  *  hAO«^  ■ 
9f^4,^ft-  >  f  110-  >  XAP«^  <  tfJ^iMh  *  'MDhV  t  nr^- 1  nuf 

AP«^  I  Aio.^  I  tf*f ^  t  HAif-A-  *  n-a/i  I  a^h^  I  /^A<q>  *  p 

is  >  MOJU'IUM:  •  Kf*AM  «  F7*  X A»  I  Oh-Yt  I KA I  / 
flOHh.  I  «»QX  ■  K^XilikC  t  rn-Hr  <  ^X'tH  *  IftKAll  ■  « 
Vfti*nt^'}h  1 1  Ohti'  I XA I  /a«-2h>  I  «»Q^  t  A^Xrft^  i  K<h 

i:  I  X'»i-  *  AdA  >  )^A•  ■  o>i-  *  tocft-i:^ « AiHi^  I  nrh  I  «• 

HtfhX  I  tfHiyA-  ■  0AKAZ I  XAP«^  i  Ufi4,¥ft.  ■  fUlh  < '!'« 
h9 1  iUl#«^  *  h«»  *  «^h*  I  AK&A  ■  mvltkoo  I  XfUj&^  t 

«^  I  <}Aa  I  a^h^  I  uff-f  *  iiarxrc  >  nMmft  •  mwi-t'  * 

0<">fti;  I  itf^'t  *  HA^Af  *  flhCft'f  ft  «  n£«AXrh  <  HOia  i 

Ah  I  rhiM- 1 0f*AA  1 4>J|.ft  I  «»1^  t  M^t  *  mWnA  * 

^Mit « CWAiA '  gA'^Afl" » ^Ay  I  h  a 

\.rA*A  i  iicA-f  A I  HflX'ii*  i  x^iic-tu-  ■  ix<d  t  ncittn  • 


84 


%X  I  Htf-Ar  ■  ^Klll  >  h'fl  I  AK'TH.X  *  0<">A^3l>  '  ^f  A-A  > 
llCA-f  A  a  "lAXAh  1  mVh^M^'ih  *  X*9-flC'l:h  1 7K.A  >  llCA 
-Wl » -MyA » tf"A»  •  +i^  •  «!/•+  •  fcCA* » Kf^klf  fl^  •  Ai 
111  <  0^Mlllh  <  tfX'A'+ll  I  tf/^C^i'h  I  ■t.f"  I  OHAi*  >  hM 
(oL  9Q*.  a.lf  «^  *  Vfiht  I JK I  Chat  1  •YUAh  I  K^K  a  ^  >  -^  >  70 A 


<•»•  I  Alii* » AACf  i*  •  :>iiiA^  •  *niJ.  •  flol^A « ♦^A 
dUf'^  ■  OK^M  *  0«»A^t  I  KfM  I  hCA-f  A  a  Hfli: 
All  1  fhlMh  1 07'AA  ■  ^4A  *  «»'}iLA  *  Ailih^  ■  ohri^'U 
fihSLl  1  OH  AAt '  iPA^Afl"  I  ^mr  •  All « 

JUrt" » OK*** » AA  •  *?••• »  •Wn » S'A+fl*** » Hlf-A- 

toCA-f  A  »  X^X  *  ihf'n  *  ;iij&0t  >  «••;^7  •  <Di<A4.  >  H 

0*fXd4:  *  AfS^Vi  *  nthll  t  IhfMi- 1  A^lir^i  A-flXiX^h 
'Ukh  ■  1AXA  ■  rnVhi-Of^  *  ilX.^«i»aH*  i  Mhao  i  <}Af"  a 

un^vitt  t  ;M&ai^  I  ')o,ii  I  «-xi3 1  nx'}i*  I XA I  rox  >  may 

JB^KI*  •  X*<:f  ■  Xfl0- 1  *f^^ » AAA1* » *iiahli^  »  m^ 
f**i^  •  «X?7^1A4iUI » •^>bA1* »  »A91A  «  ffliw^A-fl « 
ihf 9^  I  X0>^^  I  «X^A  *  •70-^-  *  00X11*  *  WA  >  l-flCh  > 
X7IW  «  0nX'}'h  I WA 1 1f'A*«»- 1  XA  I  Iff  <  tf A0<  i  0<Ai*  > 

mil  I  fhi  I  XA  I  xii*  I  jir^h  >  xr0<A'i'  >  ihii-oh  >  nx- 

Jt* » mmc^d  a  XdCf: » MJA«»* » 0'A+  •  aahl » /^thC  •  -i 

a  I  •??  *  ddv^  ■  0-Ai- 1  ;h«»  I  Xiicyf*  ■  ^A«h4>  •  0^a<hi  > 
••A+ » ■!>+ » ^/^ih^  •  a«i»^;h;v » -ocy*  •  of^hM^  • 

r AA » ^Jf.4^1l  •  >l*Wh  "  m/^Pir^X  •  XI/^X  •  fl*A+ « 
Xfi-  *  Qi:  *  tf*4-All  I  fltioo  I  ^^A  >  HXjS^ilbA0<  *  i-Ai^h  > 

••M/^l*  ■  XA«» »  XAO  •  AX'7'ac±ll  •  'Tt- » 


?5 

'       ■  ■  — 

Kf  aiA. "  KA«*  *  'U:  *  ««^4»^  *  iMh  *  Mi-  *  hmUkiUk 
C I  KA«"  *  h All  *  '»]Uh  *  XT CA«h^  i  fl^A^ll  ■  «AK«i»%  > 

f  l^H  t  HMnA  *  bA?^  *  Mi- 1  urt  ■  «i>7AA  *  VHll  • « 
bC'f ft  »  OfitfAJth  I  iini>  *  Ah  I  rftiwo-  *  0y*ftA  ■  ^ji. 

A  •  a^d,h  I  Aibh^  *  AKtli  *  J&KlUt  >  AIIAiLSL  *  ^A^A 

lUH-  i  IIKIi- » AAT  •  •h*fl  •  Vft+llt^  •  IW-A- » J&K 
tV  ■  KIILK'fkkC  •  Xil  <  AX^X  1 00»A^)  i  hjfMi  *  b 
CA-f  A  *  flMi- 1 A Ar  >  A^A-A^  i  hM:  i  Mi-  *  AM  *  tf-A-  ■ 
0.+ » bCAilT} » h«" » •fl*^ » ftA«» » fiVt » VI  •  tf-A^*^  • 
Virt  I  •IkiXiHil  <  m\a  ■  tf-Ar  *  fl"gi^- 1  MAIf-A*  ■  AAT  i  f 

Aorii  nil*  KitUiiUbC  I  xy*AW  >  )&  <  ^  >  xAf  I  nxii- 1 
AAf*  a  htajh-oju:  *  hr^M  •  iw-a-  *  tMti  *  '»axaii  ■ 

•VAtn^'^h  ■  nX'»i-  •  AAT  i  A^JCA^  i  XAt  •  X'»i- 1  AA 
A  *  If-A- <  ai- *  bCftilTI  *  TH»  *  AAT  I  AA#»  *  Ufll  ■  XA 
0»  <  Irf-A*  *  0IHIh»  >  h'fCfi  •  X'TH.X'lUbC  ■  9d/^n  *  XA«"  * 

HX'»iuwh  <  od)i  <  X Ao  I  mhrc  *  0ft«»h  <  ^jm  *  tin  * 

iD7]L0-d  t  Xli-  <  MX^A^/^  t  AAa»h  *  ta«A  t  AAA  *  tf-A 
>  *  K:A  *  «7'0^i-nL  *  flii  *  ^A^  *  AA«»  *  d*H  »  AVtw  i 

Hi:  t  r A-c  >  A^i  *  iHi  t  tffl^^ft  I  fty*h  *  I  U'O  I  rb^  *  A 

t^Wit-t  1  XihHil  I  X*M*^»  I  aXi-»  >  mehi^  *  OAAf*  >  At 
•0 1 1|0"  I  nUJ^X  I  mKr0- 1  ihJ&iDi- 1  Kill  *  )<hf  *  ntf-Ar  > 

•n  *  atacft<fft  *  wiii  *  Ah  I  rftMM  «y*AA  >  ^im  *  «^4. 

ft  •  ftibh^  •  mhXii '  fMX  '  »UMX  *  AA^Afl"  •  Mr  * 


86 


Mrt  •  flK1+  •  •Tinea  •  iDh*n  1  f  Ai*at^  1  Hlf-A- « |1K 

cft-f  ft » nx*** » nine*  i  Mt  •  h«»  •  h-h  « myt-^  •  •Yin^ 
iLK-fUbC  •  KfAM « F^^  nAf « nx-Ji- 1  -Tino  H  M 

iLK-fUbC  •  Hlf-ft*  *  ^Xill  I  tnhhh  •  <D?fti<fl^<}h  I  AM 

+ » •Tifli*  i  Ht » h«» » H+l » fJiflCt « iDtf-A- 1  •7i'0^i*  > 
U'O  >  ^th'}  *  ah«»  *  ^4A I  ^L^A-h  >  fliO  <  IlilC  >  Hi-  >  ^ 
•n^  I  •Tia^>  I  iDhAd;>*^  >  f  ia^>  «  o^A.  I  fl>i*  >  HtHr  *  0 

fl«»Jt^+ » Kt  ■  i'l/^X » X'TM.*  •  af.n^ah  1 0Ch  •  ffl^T- 
f » I  tf-A-«^  >  Xy*^£-«»  I  IJCti  *  XA I  JS.](AX>  I  4*^A  *  mo- 
4.h  I  A0»ll  *  tfAVflhA  *  inc  *  AXXA¥  >  XX4¥  ■  a»^XAA 
i*  I KXA4^  a  OStDAXrh  >  HOi>  >  Ah  *  f'AA.if'  i  09"  A  A  >  4* 
Jf.ft  *  «»1/.ft  t  A-Oih^  1 0X111  *  ^XUSl  *  0HA^]^  I  0A1A 
«•  •  9Af* « K  « 

XA*t  1 0X1+ 1  MA  *  tfhdfl » VA-hflt^ » MH-A- 1  j&Xi 

II  >  X^XiMwC  ■  Xil  i  AXIlLX  *  00»£^>  *  X.rA'A  >  hC 

foL  90i>-  A-f  ft  «  flXII-  *  ilihd  *  04*  I  ^A I  MA  ■  XQ  >  XlAi  >  ha»  >  ? 

«fca  I  l-d+n  I  A»  •  A-OIM » 9fl•;^+  •  0A«»«»T*A  •  AAf" « XI 

, ,  II » wjf r » HXy^-idh •  AH» i  +x«»^»»hu»+ 1 H-iuM  •  k 

P I  J&JU'h  >  XllLX-fliibC  I  Xy*Am  a  ^^T*  XAfl  I  flXli-  • 
MA  I X7^  a  X^X'fldi.C  *  hrMni  >  IW-A-  >  ^Xin  >  1AX 
Ah  1 0?A'Mlt^1h  I  flXli*  ■  HB^  I  MA  •  Xl^  >  14:0  *  A+ 
P  >  A)  I  AilH-i  I  ?ai>;H*  ■  AoofdA  i  dAf*  i  XIHiJ&OCT'i 
IIXf")0>h  •  Ar* » +Xfli»i  •  ||U»+ » rAA  •  tf-A-*^  i  JbA.A » 
♦M+  •  ♦A0-A1* » 0  V+Vl* » 0rAA  •  tf-A" » Wl*»y  •  A* 
£-ft+  *  X«ht  *  Xli- 1  AAA  i  I^A•  *  Ai*  *  hCA-l:^'}  a  0KA-i- 

t  *  Hj&mf.  I  ttii'Hh'i  *  0ax'>i*  1  tf-A*  ■  Av-oh  i  a^ta  •  0 


87 


iiKf"A^^  *  fUhi*h  *  hoo  I  lUICh  *  Anah  *  «l^A-  *  Mh  t 

017  *  M/A-MIA.  >  •llA^A'hCA.  I  K'7CC  1  Kill  1  ««^T^  1 
^-Aii*  >  XiAh  1 0hJu-A  *  Mh  I  dtp  *  Afki*  •  InCiKtSTl^  ■ 

QA^Hi^  n  aS«A£-ll  t  Hpii  1  Ah  ■  f"AIWil<  *  «f"AA  *  t4< 
A I  «^iLA  *  MiJtAr  I  tfX'^ll  1  J&XlUt  *  «IIAA  ■  •A9A«»  ■ 
•JAr  I  Jim  « 


iM  j-;\  lu^ 

'J  \^^  C>  jI\  il  .iA^S^\  o\iJ\.  ^\  oUl  j>\J\  4fl\  ^.    JJ^ 

^  U /i,  J-;\  0>\5  <it\i  .  Jj-iR 
5  V^  J  ^Jifij  urAy^\>  lt^j  Vab  J«f  "^  *^y^j  cw*0  uhM> 


10  ^^  W!  fv^  y-o  *>•>  j^o*  ^j^.j  '^w^  ^  ^  j^^  y-! 
v.'i\  4fi\  ijij\.  a  vj\  >\  \ru  jp.\,  j'o/;  o\  vjp  v^^^  ii^\ 

*  liTjP-^  Wrf^  VjlTj:  *tj»\ij  L'X'Xjs^  ^j^\  rjj  cf 
*  om.  Jt«  a.  *  \yi^  a.b.  3  J.\:^  a. 


90 


iMj  ^^\  i^^\  ^  J*  .ojJi\  c^  dU«.  ,^jJ\  \j*  .to,  ^ 

\>,  W  W  J* -^  \>L  o/^ -^  Ci^  o/j  "^  ^\/^  0^  "^  OLri 

viLi; i>» jS>» Oi>-^ H-*j  iXi*-"^  i}r^J (^^ iX>"\> 
ii<^  V  u-^Ij-^J^  J^  o/^J  -^-^^  >*«^^  O^  a*H^  ^.  •  LT*^  5       IS 

jori^  j;:^  \-ife  0^ 
J,^  ;^\  J^  .^fcsi.  j^'il  y4^  J\;^^  ^"il  .^^U\  6 

P.44CI  J^\  \i\  45*^1  dj^  0^  r^^  C)^  W  I  o^"^  or^^  V;^^  ti^  «> 

*  .•.yUu.a.b. 


91 


\/\.  \i\j  oJ»Vi  V>i  fv^  QV>  \^  C\.j  \ji-  \i\  j\,ij  iMj  v«^\ 

t;^  j\\  .:^\  ^  Mm;.  Gu^f  Ccu>  \1j>^  C&i  {J^^^  ^  jTcr  y^ 

j\^\  s^\  J,  o^^\Jl\  ^  «fJL«:  I  pj;  '^j  Ax»-j  J\as:  "^  :4cifawp.44  e.s 

dll  ^ij  j\iiS  Cu-  dJi  ^Uj  4a\  f^dil  Jyj  »5 Ji\  ^\i  VyJ  J\5  diJ^P 


CU^ 


93 


lO 


y  f jt  J^*«"j  o^  J^^  ^^  vlA^  o^  hy}^  V  ^Ji  i5«Ji^  f^jL^ 

j\  \i*-  *ilL>.  Ji  v»J\  JC\^\  •iio.  s-«i^  ^jP  ^j  4^ij^ij.^^ 

;\Li.  >  J-Vjfl  <>.^  irf.\;  "^  JjJl  ^\,  ;.:iUl  ot^U\  >^\  J. 


*  adds  WVju^^  *  5^ 


93 


>p  ^\  J,.  J\  ^u-:iU  V-^\  \j(>J  ^  X  J^  Jr->»  >  u-^- 

^  i^  ^oc-r  of.  t^^^  ej'^^  v.^\  u^^\  J^  ^^  ^^ 

Ov4^  t>  Ot-^^  ^\^  (^))  Oi^  W!t>  tfi  J^i  'y^.j  ^^"^ 

^-•i  O^  J*"-  Cf  ^PjtJ  ^l^^  OJ?*^  V/^  JC-^^  C*^^-  ^- 
yJa-*il\  f\;^  ^>H  J\»  Cfr-A»-^'^\  i—5  Jir^   .y*  gU^  14 


4^\  tub. 


94 


o^Mj  V/ij  l»^.  (^^"^j^  Vw>^  •-»^\^  *rA>  C  ^■^■^  (^^  ^^  f^ 

*  ^ 

^  c»*j\i.  j/»  U\i  ote/»l^  <^^)^  <j^^ 
i-XA  \»%  J.\j\  si±  j.\iJ  \i\i  J\j  J.\;^  ^^  .^  ^U  i6 

U  Ui\  J.^.^  \jjiii,  \S^  ^^  y«\^'A  \,^  ^Ai\  ;^\ 


4l 


\  •  titt  •    \^*^ 


J^.  \^  ^  \y»Jjj  ^^\  \^.j  U-ift  .y.^  ^jM'i'^  ^i*^\  t> 


Cfr 


95 


*ii  Ji\^\,^\  jJ4i  j\iJ\  u4^  J\5  j\iJ\  s-'j  '^  o-^^  »8 
.jj-^  Ji  W  ^^  J^-^j  jTt^^j  gJuJi  \».  otJi^  VW  ^A.  ^ 

5  J^  Jt  ^  (>^  ^  Jr^  ^  |iV^  VW  O^  y^.  "^^  ^  •j-»»-j  V 

^^  <-ij  ^\  ju*.  y  tf ja\  j^j\  ^^  \Juk  \i>A>.j  \jU  jj 

J\5*Cp  j\  Jif"^  yj |C^ cJ\i  .iJ-^  Jt,U>  ^j»^^  \j^cJ\5 

^J*-  /«^  cr^  o\^  f^  0»j  i:^./>«%  O^  ^  v-^  "^   -Cixr-^^  *° 

!y.\  \j  ^>e  J\5  *  Ji.*^  J\  |cV>  4U\  J*  j:;-..  J\^  <\  ju.  4j\»  ;^U^ 


96 

p.47  c  I  ^ly^  ^  \yu(  ;JUJ\  J$^  I  Jm^  p.  <.a\<iA\^  La\\,  C  >,^l\\  J^ 
C*  fV^  -V>-^  J^  ^^-"^^  O-  J^^^  y^O  *^  U-«J^  C^-^\  J>^ 

j>,JlX  U*  JUj  j\j  U  Jyj^  \i^  J«^^  ji-  .^\  Jyo  vi^\ 

^iL.N\  j\  U;  \i\J .  .j^j  *ift  .jj  wJuJ^\  J-jf  Uij  \jU  ^jkij  C\^  IS 

j\jp.\  j;.y  J,  oy^  f\i4  V.  a;\  \ifc  j  »^\  AJte.  ,x  J«»*  t5Ji\  oJ».j 

^»i«»*  OJ^  (»-*   LTl)^    Hf  Cr  W  V^V  t^^   •/'\^^  J^  J^^  ^-^ 

U\  V.\»    4jifr    .A   JmIT  ,5JJ\    .JL*.^  uJuJ^    J^  ^   L  ^   *ji^^   20 
P.47C.3  I    ^j!^\   jVi  aJIS.  ^.Jj\   OLJ*^.    4*.    OL^^.  V-Ji\  J5^  wJ«-N\  j\j 


97 


jf jd  W^  •r*^^  cfj*^  «J^  "-i»*o  »*-b^^  i  ^>'*  '^Z:^  •■**'j 

10  itc<«\A;«i\«  ¥f  ^^  4^  ^  ^^ 

^  ^\^'4\  Jil  j\.>  ^>li  ;j^  a*>  cJir  o\  Je  o^-  :iU  C> 
j^\,  ^\jj\  a6  I  *  J^\  JS3  \J»  ik^\  ^  tu^^  ;u»^  J"?-*^  P.4«  c  I 

;^\  J\  \>as  \,J8H  »5ii\  ^^ ^^\  ^  .oi/J\^ eU\  a7 


98 


^j!L  1^5^  Jb.\^  O^jU  d]J\#  jn  ,\  oWa)  (iij  'S^^O^  J»  -^ 

J  a^\,  y  jiro\^  V-  i\^^\  ^j  i^AJ'.f^^  j^  j\  \>^    5 

•4  O^  i*->^  *E^  J^  ^-^  O^j"^^  cr>  ^^  oV^  0»^J^\^  IS 
^  \^Jbit.  ^^.  c;.  ^\  ^'il\  u-^\  Jril    .0.^\j  Cr^\  a8 

^\  Uj\,  j^^  j\  W.  .  ^jrt  j\  u^  ^\  (j-io  ^.-^  tr*j 

^\  ^j*^  %  jU  ^\  ;^\;  .  ^\  ^  \jpb  U"^  V^  \^U  \:>:  ao 


'  su  onL  /iO /A  here  and  below. 


o«  O 


99 


\j$i  :Ai  \  V  J*k^  s-^Vt  y  0^0^  f ^^  W-.  OS-  *iJS  oW.\ 

^;;V<«>-i  ^^!i>^  JM9 1;*^  -^.c^}  o^  S^  o\LJi\  Li  %  iXA\ 
IS  U\  jr,  U\  /JJ\  Ji  -ilj  U\  J^-  U\,  /i\\  JA  /Ji\  Ci» 

yj  \i*  jj  ,j^j  ^V^  yj^  o«->jV  j^  oi'^%i  ot^jjj  o^. 

*o«Jy 

J«-\  ^^\  Jb-\,  jU\  \i\  .4^.  o-  J?-"^  .oyB\j  '^^\  33 


ca 


xoo 


j\  \^Ju-e  ot->i\  ^^.  *^3.\  o^.  j\  ^.>1\  c^^  ^  a;'^  iiU  f:A^\ 

(^  (^^\  (V--J  (^W  (^^  \i\^  (^^^  ^  (^-  ^  ^  ^^^^  o^\ 
4»  wi\>^\j  sV.^\  o!?lb  -^^  s^V  J^*^  -oA  e^^  34 

^  uL.j  <Ji  ^^,J^  jJi  ^j%\  }kJi\  J\iW\  \jJk*  o^ 

J».ji\  \,AuH  o^  -^  CO  *-^  cr  -M^  j^  (V^  fM  J^  J-^-  "^  CO 

p.So  CI  ;j^  >   I  wiij^  ^\  c-.;  >.\  ^U  -W-Vj  u-i-ii\  jW  i>  -^o 

J^.  «VJt  o\  v^  V«%  ot^^  C;-  ^^\^  ^^\^  u^"^  '^  ^^\^ 


zoz 


;jt»\^  ijyil  iyU.\  ^l*j^i^\  iJ^  ^xs^  sj^  **'jja  ^'-^J 

iMU\  i-^\  i  i Jb.\,  ii^^  sj^\j  «Uj  iJ^\,  ;53*  '^\j  <<^ 

dU3  Ju,^  4iJ^  jr\^  O^^  oU*^  4^  <<«^^  J^.  i5J^^  Jf'  •>!•  4;% 
lo  >j  ^\i\  ^^\  J  bjW  j:;.  j.\5,  C  U^  4:i\;e  oVy  J«J\  tA^ 

V^\  Ot"^-  J^J  v**^^  »:**<  Cf"  \A^J  <i^y^\  J\  .A-MOj  Oi^xA^ 

i-*^^  ,i-»«y^^  £^\  u-«i^  C^-)V  cry  -^Aj  v^  '^y^\> 

iiyi^\j  cj\ykJ\  <^^j  •>»•^  J53  ^^i5J^\  X^  <.\^  ^j;^  v«JSl\ 
IS  ^jjl\  ^j»jS\.  I  dW*\  j\  5i\5  ijJuyW,:iU  ,5Ji\  ^\t  y.^\  *-^  i 

t^O  (^  "A  --ii-.'il\  J<,  i-!^\  \>iO.  ^  ^g  \^.  diii  JUjj 

o\>,  ii\ii  i^-iljil  tf  Jl\  ^  osi*-  V  J-f  i^^^  ^^  V  vo  ^.  J^o 

^^  <^\  ;-iS3\  J  ^\  ^jj\y  ^%  s-'^N  \te\  d)l  4^\  »i]ci\/ 

4ii\  ^\,  ,>i\  *.jii  dw\  j\  i\j  ^  a^\,  jr  ^v,  J*  *5i, 
jr^j  \i\i  ^.Jd\  ^^\j  j^jj\  ^-A  ^^.  ^\j  j^\  k>  ^'^\ 

J>.^ 'r^  W  Ja  tf  Ji\^  «i^  Vt^^  J|A>  f^  **fe^  j  j^  •*»-\> 


loa 


U^\^\  \^M^  |y\^\.  u^  |.y<«uu  U\  \^.^  \^.  \^  \^>  U\J 

*oj  g-^\  JL-.^  ^\sa\^  jiA  >  ^•^\  Jl^^  ^^  oitliV 

W^  0?Ty^  iJ^l?  O!^^  ^^  *  ^  ^^  Oi*^^  C^  \;S  V»  Ji^  (5J1\  \Jift 

OS3\  ijU  \^  ^\  ij\j.  J  J-^j  \y.\  ot  Ji\  -u.  \,jJ,  jU  J\it\ 
^Sl  CI  J^\;;.  tf  Ji\  ^  ^^  JU(.  jU\  jjA  I  ^Jm  J^.^  a..\,  J^ 

■M>  Sci^^  U»  *Oi«^  J>H  J|^\tf.  t5 Ji\j  g-^^  ^.  W  fi  j»  \-^ 

CtJi*.  -.\  \^  v>y^  o^  ^JS  W^  J^  <-JiiJ  'lAi^  •J*^j\  J^H 

.  ^iSJ^\  ^fe-i  siJ,  ,^\j  tfj\iJ\j  J.V,'^\  :^  .  o A  u-^  35 
'  ^^\  a.b.     *  4i^\  a.       3  ^j*  added  above  an  erased  letter,  a. 


I03 


^  ^i,  V  j$^j\  ^  .5Ai^  ^;\  j^-^  .^>j\,  ^u\  36 

>  ^  .i\i-  \;iS'\;  JT^  ^i  \i\j  iU.j  dl^  j<.\:  dl;\i  C  5ir 

IS  C*%ia  ^\  is\  :^J\  ^  J\  4lk>  rfJi\  Juyj  dJbfc  J^.  if  Jl\  ^ 

c^  ;  J^j  \>^  o^^i^  u-t-ii^  Jj  o-  <«  tf^  '*0S^^  ^j-^^ 


I04 


CU^  \>  <^  ^  Ujl\;  tf  Jl\  l^J\  J-.^  ^  ^  0^0^  JJi^  jV 

^Jii-i  u.\  .jii-^R,  Ait  j\i  j>..-ii-M\  ^\  jVj  g^.  J*^  J^c^ 

^\ ^  ^\,  ;i\jj<.  ^\i\.  ,ii4^ ^^i^  ^.^j^  W  i5 Ji\  fj^  10 

f>\  "^^  J^\  Sj  >iA  >  ii>,  S^  VA  t^^^  ti^j  oyA 

i  Jiu-^\  O.  J.-\  o^^.  O^  ^."^  ^\>"^  -Cw-e^"^  MVi\  40 
'^  \^,j»  ^^j  ^y\  j\  ^  ty*^  r^  ^J  cM  O*  ^^  O^^  J^  ^^^ 


'  s.  coirected  from  ibt  reading  of  b,  which  is  given  as  above. 


I05 


\^  tills  jiyj  ^^ji  \jiuflj  ^  \^.  o^  Jr»  o*  ay'yij  o.^*A  <^«Ji^ 
»5Ja\  *i\  o>?,  ««>i\  c^jj*^\  aJJ  :iU  i^  <;- v^.  N  0^  <J^ 

'  a.  (corrected  in  the  margin  from  U«*).  b. 


io6 


^  ^4.  \^  ^iiJ^  ^yuj  W  jfti  iS^\  ^^\  ^i  i  .^il\  a-j^\j 

Jj  ^  i\jjSl  \^\5  \i\  4u^j  ^^  jr  .„,4J\,  i^\  ^j^  iafr\^\  s 

•»-^  J^  t:-* ->•  ^  v3>.  O^  t>^  (i^\ -J^  .  («M\  V  t5ii\  cf ^\ 

,:)¥-•>•  ^  »iJi"^  i;)^  J^wW^j  J* t^-j^^  «i»r^  ^.jfc-i^  <iy  Jj)^ 

»  cf^\  a.  b. 


•il-^j'  J*  Cfv^j  ^*»-^  J^j  ^>^  ""r  •'^  j^  ^  i-ifo^j  •  ^ 

"  .il-rf-  O^  -^^  4>  CC  2-*?  "^^^  j'-'^-  ^-'J  ■^•■''-  3  '^  ^^ 

<j  iJ^-  0^  j'^  Or-*  L<'^\>  'jtV  L*-^^  i-l»j«  vSJ^I  gr-.  o- 
^\.,  \,^  iS.'iii  c.\jb  Jfolj  ^  yi  >j-a:  tJ^l  ^  »u>  -j* 

dliJl\  ^\r»  J*  ^^^  \jJie-  J«V\  ^  j\i  J^  .ijL ji\  ^  \i\  4i^ 

«,  ,X^. y»j \5X-^j  ijUfW  iiw-y^i  ^i»  . ^JS i.\f^\i)^ 

^j.  y4.\  ^.  isJJl  \jfe  ij_«j  j«\!iH  J\i\  j»  U»  ■Jijt.iiik'r 
.fji  ^\  ^Jll  ^\  J,  i^j,,  ^U\  fU  «1-  uJ  .«\.\,  .(U  \i\  «K. 

•it  ^J  Vj«i  «>»  U^*  jAj,  jjWj  J*.l>  fjl;.  t\j  jkt  d  Jiji\ 


io8 


(fi^  Je  fj^  Cii J^^  J^  ^  V- W  o*  Cr-^  i>i  *^'^  '^-J^  J^ 


xog 


^  \;^^  V.«^j  ^j!j^j  \ii:\}i  yt  \Juk  <Zj\;«^\  j  \^\««\  v«::Xii  V«\» 
S  ^^  (A  J^  05^^\  err  J*£>?  O^  •«>  0^>»  u4  .^k^U^'CW 

««•  cr  oi^i^  .-i*  Jl^  v^ V  J^^  U5S \>.  J  ^il\>H^\yJ\ 
«,  ^-ift^  v.*^\  «U  J\  Jyol\,  A^*iA  s^sTjli;  ^  <jA  ^i  '<i\^jj  <v 

;^  :Ae  Uji-i\  cr  •>jJr^^>^\  J^J^  *ie\  C  J"^"^  »A  v**^  s^\^V 


'  a  his  no  dots. 


no 


L**^  O^  C>^  u^  •  cri-V  J^lj*  \>^  j^  «^-*^^  ^^  ^-^  ^^  **^ 

^\^\  •^\  ^  jk*  J  ^\  >U  ^\  \y^  J  ^\  >"^  J^^  ^\ 

cf  -Wji  y»j  '^  o^  J»^o  cr^^  u^.  }j  "^V^  e-'-o  ^^  ^^  ^"^ 

j\  .^  aJBj  U»  .4a  ^W  jUrt  o/i  .Ji  o\jM\  o'J'Cif. 


xn 


^:^  J  jj   .yaiw  W--!  i-rS3\  fM  O^  -w-ii^  >  ^\  J^'^J 

v^>\  \>r-\  ojJ4\  Jr^  {fjl^  U  J\  .Us  U*  .  v^\jl\  >M  Jl  y 

^\  y»j  <^\  ^J4J  j^--,  tr^\^j   .  Ui  J^^  <i\i.  ^  ^iTjiS  ui\/il\ 
IS  ^\  J*.*^  iij^  jju  ^^j  ^yi  \y>j.  ^j  iUr  «Si\ i^Ji- ^    |  u4>  ^S7  ci 

(iy^.  f\?^  0>*  O?^-^.  ^  O^^^  ^  ^^^  O^  >k\fe^'il\  .  .>it  tf  Ji^ 


m 


ij^^jO*.  Jlib-  I  J{  ^/jJ\  4^  Mj»^,^.  ^j  t/-M  ^\ie  ^j  <^j 
\i\  g~^^^V  \»:»!!-  o*  *«»^^  /j-w*  Of^^  ("^^  i^  *-^^  -l?-*^  ^^ 

P   W  ^\  l^)'^ ^\  j.\J^  J.  jr\>iy    L   y-U\  \J*  >^ 

4l  t5Jl\  U  ^-^  Ji\o*  jAj  ^*  o-  Jrt  Vu  Jo;  iJ JS\  o\  \>:j  IS 

^^\  ^  ^JJ\  ^\  JU^  ju."^\  ^^  J  ^^.^  ^il\  ijU^j  «, 


113 


J»  i.b  ^\S  U\  yUi  "il^  ^\l\  ^\  ^^)\j  ^\^  I  ^\  ^\j  p.  58  C.1 

*iJ\J  \p\i  \i\i  iJ^Sfyi  ^J^OiAfO'S^  *-V^\  ••*•  J*^^ 
b/l  ^^^  yj\,  ^5  \^  \i\i  .  f^M-^i  •/ W»  J*-  *J\  ^^ 

j.\^  J^*  wU\  ;a J  4<u  >.\  o5ia-\  J^\  iii\J^  ^  j^-^^j  J^U^ 
s  ^j  uu!L\  J^W\  o/^  <A^\^  cif^'  ojU.  ^JJi\  >  Li\j 

W  j*^  J>o  ^-^\  JTf-^.  tf^^-ii-"^  J^  Jif'^^  i  \^>.  \* 

Ji>  ^^  ^JL\  J>."J  \ftU,  o\  ^  ti\  o\jU\  J'^'^\  J^ 

Ob;\iJ\,  wjtt-'il\  4^\  ^j  ij>X  SU,  Ciuj  j,5C<u,  \jlLJ  ^\«li\  *J 

IS  Jttp  j\*J\  jLJl\  wii:^  .  L;i\  U\  JUiJj  j,/ji\  os#\iJ\  \^.  j/j4\ 

30  \^\;  JyJi;\  D;\^  f^  *^X\   \^U^  <^  U  J>\iiy^  jV^    .C^ 

•  '-^J^  ^J^  -^  s-;\  J\  Cri-cJi-  \>/ .  sl>  U\»  A>.\  wiL  "ilj 


n4 


\Slt  ^Ji.\  UUj  UU  jL\^  .Ju^j  |.^  f \^  JuliL-  Ji.  «i\^^  «-^  ^^ 
<i^\ ptt.  J-4»  \ iC, jj.\$3\  j^^^^,'^ ijM )i^\ sJiJW 

^\ .x^ ,_j^,  ^ ^j  ^ ^\ ^jy  Jji.  o\  J^o  i-»:ii\>  5 

^>.  tf  Jl\  JjXij  ^\  JU*  ^  \i»  Jyo  '-ii-^^  J^Wj  *r-^\  J^ 

.^V  4»^  O^  oS^^  ^  *^j^\  i^  ^  ^^'^  J^\  J^^ 
^\  JL*  e;.  JS\  >  Jlj^iiJ^\  ^.  villi  4^j  ;-jal\  *^fi\ 

t5JJ\  S^\j   .  fliL,  V^\  ^Ui\  J>^  \^.  \e  \»  \i\j  .  fj\i  IS 

^  J- ^  <^\  W  \^j>?j  ol^\  ^:^  ^^  J- -il  i^\^\  j^  \j]L^. 

0^>>>.  Oi-^^>^. -J^  • '^J  ,^^  ^-ii\  \> V"^  ^^  C^-^^  f^^ 

•  VjJW  ,^\  **^u  i^  u-^^  ti^-^  f^  *i^  \Ao  **>>  ^^  -^ 

o\-.^\  J».*ilj  ;-\^\j  Ui\  i^  JV^  -OJ-^J  ^^\  53 


'  o\;>->  »• 


"5 


^\^\  Jrf-  J5,  '^\  Jo.\,  y  ^^  a;-^  ^  *»\>*\  J^"^  \J^  •<i)\ 

♦  41\  ;^  g>il  J.  ijdji  tf,3j4  4;\y  ^^^ 

or  J**f  jVi1*«>\  J*-"^  ^  j^ol^  c)»*J*  *J*  "J*  c^j  **-^^  -^S^ 


tat 


1x6 


^f.j  \JL*  *1  \jj>o  ^ii5U  <^  ^  \Qi  U^  .>\  v^ 


_  _  ^  •  Oy^^J  cM^  57 

iii\Ji\  i^  ^  U-jJj"^  \  J-e-J  otlA"^  J*^j  u-^^  f^o  *^  ^J^.  %  5 


j^  iaii  J.  .i-.\Al\^  U\  4«i;  \^ Ci  JUL  "i/j  ^\i '^  U\ oL\^\, 

'  ^y^  c/-^^^  ^^yy 

'  b  (a.  om.) 


117 


^j^  :iU  ..M^  ^^. o^  o\  jW*  ^jJ  j*yi o^^ \i\,  JJLji  J  -Vi 

0\  \^  J.,y  ;V\^\  ^.^;  J  J^\j  ^  o^o\^  •v.;\  iJ^> 
*j\  oijls-  y»^  U^  ."il^  O^O^  u">*^^  Wxrt  ^  \y  oj^    •  \y^ 

IS  •^j!i\  diii  wid,  J>^  W^j,  jl,  i>  ^^j\  s\^\.  or^>.  J,  o\j 

'  added  above,  a.  '  \yM  a. 


ii6 


^fij  U*  <i  \^Jj!ij  ^^iiiL.\  i^*.  ^  1Q»  U^  .J^  ^^ 


_  _  ^  •  0>-*^l>  C^ ^  57 

iijL  ^JuJ^j  .i^\  ^jj  .Jt*^  aJoL  <$^  "J  4:\i  .^jiiJ^\  ^^\ 

;i5U\  ;«■  o-  ^jJj"^  \  J*^j  0*1^^  J^^  c/-^^  f-i-o  *^  4^^.  "^j  s 

'  b  (a.  om.) 


ng 


:i\  p,  U 


•  ^J^  j^  jr\i  V  4ii\  j;\^\  *i--i\  f^.  o"^  ^^  ^-j*-  y-4  *-^ 

5  v^^  i^-^^  •^V^  -^^^  y»  i5-ji\  »>~  jV  i$-ji\^  i^\  ^^^  p^~>  ^y 

cX<\  \^  j\  J\  ij.U\^,\.j\:>\  ^  v.i-w\  *;\>^^  v^J\ 

.  ^V  os^jl^  >  J>  i5Ji\  \J*  ^\  j.;i;\  o:i^«^\  4;-^av-a^\  fU  J 
lo N|,  *p  U:5U  jr;ij\  ^^  ^  ^\ ^^.  U  US3\  41\  jI,  \l.  ;p^ 

IS  ^\  \y*'\  OL^\  V  0*-t-»^\  W'^^  ^^^3  Wii\  Jj\  ^^\»U 

cJjJ\j  UJ\  \>^  iwVi\  <*U\  \>^  i-oU  ipU  \>^  iii\i\ 

.j\^\  U  U^  JJi\  jyr-j  Up  >\  Jl\  o\i  sX  ^^  •  »^.-^\  C-*  ^^-^^^ 
J^  »ii*j  rx^\  )-\  ^U\  ;«.U\^  4e.U\  dlk  J  v'^\  sjLoi  U>U\ 


p.  62  c.: 


'  the  word  is  lost  in  a. 


«  ^^\a.b. 


n8 


jr  j\i  ov;-  ^  i2*^  Ji-%  o\  ^j-*s  «5Ji\  f^J^  ^\  ^c^  f\^\ 
p.6ica  * ^^\  J\i  Jl\ o« cn^  (^  hi/i  (V^  |i- J^ 

*^^  ^  cr  S '  •^^\^  ^V  (v>-^  J-*  lV^  •  ox^^j  ^J^  64 

vi--J\  <J\k,  ^Xfi.  J\  \^.  i-yj  OV  J^- 0>^\^  u-^\  65 
'  O-^  *•        *  altered  from  ^  a. 


"9 


•  ^.^^  js"  jr\i  o  4ii\  ^ju.\  c-iJ\  f.^.  o^  *ii\  *^  \>i^  <-A 


5  H-Juo  (5-J^\  -W-^P^  •i^\  y  (5'j^\  •  J»  jV  (5 J^\^  /M^  <^^  ^^  W 


^i<\  y.  o\  j\  vu\  J.  i,\;jii\  ^  v^\  *j\>.'^^  vs-;\ 

.  ^\,  oc.^\  >  Jj;  i5il\  U  ^J^\  ^^\  ^:,!A*^\  a:-^  crw*^\  f U  ^> 

vM\  J  Jifci,  ^\  i^"^  j^  f^\  siiii  j  O^  ^\  J*  J  Oli\  \> 

oJu-  ^  \^u  oi-a\  ^  ^"^  J-;\  f^  u.\  \>:  %  ,^\iA  4a\^ 

IS  ^^  \j*-\  ji  Jl\  *^y»  o*-.-'^^  *0'->-'^^  \-Vi\j  W^\  Jj^  ^,j;\iVu.\ 
^jj\,  bJ\  \>j  i^U\  <*U\  \>j  <-oU\  ipU\  \>^  ;ilU\ 

jr  cJib  c->^\  P  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^^  •iJ'i:  j  s,*)\  Juai  <oU\ 


p.  62  CX 


'  the  word  is  lost  in  a. 


•  p:^\a.b. 


no 


lO 


MJi\  *-fli  i-a53\  J\  \^  j\  \jj Ji  J  \i\j  .  Cj^\j  o»^\  68 

y-r=  Gl\  \is;;  i,«i\  ^.  i^jj\  ^  ^\u\  o^*^\  o^  ^*j*^  ^r^ 

^\  o^\  f  cKo^  ii-*o  tt»4>  ••^j  ^  '■^  -^^  J^JU*  ^-i=^\ 

t^.  %  '  O^^  *^  'oi-^^  C  «^'  «^^  ^"""''^  -«^-^^  ^^^-  ^^^  '^^-  '5 
.vii\ii\  f^\  J  .i-j\  i5JJ\  JrV  .>i*\>-»,  j^\jt  \^Jij  ot-J^  ^^^ 


t5Jl\ 


20 


m 


l>yi  Cai\j  Jj)J\  s^j  Jj\»  yk  v^\  ^  i\,\j»  •Jcf.  ^  4i\»  .  1U\ 
\.y\  '  j»  K^\^\j  L«l\  «.\  .Ji^jj  J53  ikU  4\  Ji»  ^  4!*^  .  ;.\i:..\. 

AjJ.  J  .j-rt  ^\  j\  U\,   .^  ^\  s-A  ^  ^y,  i5 Jl\  ^  L  J. 

^"ii  \^\i  ^si\  "iiyi  .^\  ^^.  lo^  ^i  \^  jyja\  "^^  .  j\^ 

Sirte  cn>  •  ^^'^\  J^^  ^  \y^.  (V^  ti^  i^"^^  T^  ^>  J\  ^J^  O- 
V»j  ^y^^   --O^  OJ^^  ^(^  \^^\^  ^y#  .a*<*^j  ^\  ^\ 
'  J  a.  b.  »  Jij.  a. 


laa 


W  ^  W  0*J  i^j^  *^Ji^  C;*  Jt»  t^  J:»  CO  t>- J;*  ^Jj»0* 


oy>^  fj  •  u*/  **!^  -►^  ^-^j  j^V  Vl^  Vj  •  -^^  -^^  >< 

,jaii\  ^jy  s^  \^L.j  .U*  jj^.  ^\  ^\  iS^\  \Jl*  ^.  vL/i\ 
\;\yl\j  .  JL»iI\  *J»  ^U  ^^^\  j)jjl  jf  V^^o  *^Vi{  \j^i>o  IS 

4Xt5Al\  ^\  X*  ^^  j\  JjL.   .^l*  \jj  i>.  pi  \yfe  o^\  cfj 

J^  ^j^\  J\  4  J\i  c5JJ\  O.U  v>W  Ji*\,  Js.  <rjj  trj  *il\  «> 

*  added  above,  a.  *  \J^.  '  \J^. 


133 


<.  .^\  i5%  «uAil  ^.j  A«  ji  \4  J^\^  JTjA  Oio^  Oi^^  ^J 

<-jJi  J^\j  jrj,  .^>.  o\  cfty^\  \jyii  -^  M^\  4e^\  '.iJJ\j 
C^  ^Ji-^  J^^J  U»J  \3\j  U*  ^^  "il,  UW  ULS  ^^\  <i  ^^\ 

^^^\  g.jie  J  <s3j  .4,'^\  j\  vj^  ;;-c  ^j  4^*^  J^  .  Je^ 
J^  A.j,^  v»U^\L.  ^  Jm.  U>  4U\  .\<;1  ^  4<p*  ^^\  ;*i^ 

lo  ^\*\^\ji\:j;^\ 

*  # 

,;^\j  <L»L\  >\:^\  Uy  j\  os*;^  />*^    •  "^.^J^  J^  ^  Otf^**^ 
M;  •^\>  J^  ^''^J    ••*••  C^JJ  •^^.  *^^  Oe>'\>  ^  (^W«*\ 

iSjjl   .  4U\  fU  il^i>\  V  W»  t^i^  f  W  J^  W  Ji- .J^.^ 
.  JL^\,  ^\,  i.^\  JT^.  o\  j<  o^  v^l*  -i^^\>  u-r^  C^. 

^.  S^  0¥J^\  J\  jV:  ^\  <-JLi^  .<^  i«\^\,  iy^  v*-Si\^ 


'  ,yJi\  8.  '  added  above,  a. 


134 


*^y  .  ilyi\  ^jV  \^ji  j\^^  J«i\  j\  ofj\jf-  J>j  ^^yj 

J  i5Jl\  U  .g-^\  Ji^jJ\  JU\  i^\  U^j  O^  Jy^\   *OirJ*-^V, 

v«^  o^U\  j)^\  tyrj^  <^  <Ji  ^i  <\  ^^  .  \ iC  jiil\  \i^  Ixm  15 

v»y  ^  i5iS\  jyjl  ^.  i5JS\  ^\  J»-jl\  \J*  c^j  .  .>»  Jj\/\. 

p.65  e.1  ^\^\  ^  ^y  j  ij^  ^j  I  .  <11\  oa  o*-  Vi^\>  ^r**  ^V-^^ 


MS 


*  added  above. 


Statutes  of  the  Apostles 


i««- 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT 

In  the  name  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son  and  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  one  God.  This  is  the  Sinodos  of 
the  fathers,  the  Apostles,  which  they  ordered  for  the 
direction  of  the  Church. 

All  hail,  our  sons  and  our  daughters,  in  the  name  of  5 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Statute  I.  Said   Yuhanes,    Matewos  and  Petros  and 

Filepos  and   Seme'on    and   Yaekob  and   Natnael   and 

Tomas  and  K^fas  and  Endreyas  and  Bartalomewos  and  10 

Yehuda  and   Ya'ekob  the  brother  of  our  Lord :  When 

we  were  assembled  together  with  the  knowledge  of  our 

Lord  Jesus  Christ,  our  Saviour,  he  commanded  us  and 

said  to  us :   Divide   the  earth   amongst  yourselves,    so 

that  every  one  of  you  may  take  his  place  according  to  15 

your   number.     Take   the    order  of   Bishops,   and   the 

seat   of  Presbyters,   and   the    works  of   Deacons,   and 

the    intelligence  of  Readers,   and   blameless   Widows ; 

and  the  work  on  which  the  foundations  of  the  Church 

9 


128  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


may  be  confirmed,  and  by  which  they  may  make  a 
pattern  of  that  which  is  in  the  heavens ;  and  that  they 
may  keep  from  all  wickedness;  and  know  that  they 
themselves     will    answer    in    the    day     of    Judgment 

5  because  they  heard  but  did  not  keep.  And  he  com- 
manded us  to  send  these  words  into  all  the  world.  And 
it  is  proper  that  every  one  of  us  should  be  according  as 
our  Lord — to  him  be  glory — revealed  to  us  with  the 
will  of  God  the  Father  by  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  remem- 

lo  bering  his  word,  that  we  should  command  you  therewith, 
as  a  reminder  and  instruction,  O  brethren. 

Statute  2.  Said  Yuhanes :  O  brethren,  we  know  that 
we  shall  be  examined  about  all  that  was  given  to  us ;  and 

15  that  therefore  we  should  not  accept  the  person  of  anyone 
who  is  with  us.  And  if  there  should  be  one  who  is  with 
him,  who  says  what  is  not  seemly,  he  shall  be  reproved 
because  what  he  says  is  not  good.  And  they  caused 
Yuhanes  to  speak  first     Said  Yuhanes,  that  there  are  two 

20  separate  places,  one  for  life  and  one  for  death.  Between 
these  two  places  is  separation  :  and  the  place  of  life  is 
this,  that  thou  shouldst  love  the  Lord  thy  God  and  thy 
creator  with  all  thy  heart  and  praise  him,  because  he 
saved  thee  from  death.     This  is  the  first  commandment ; 

25  the  second  however  is  this,  that  thou  shouldst  love 
thy  companion  as  thyself :  in  this  is  all  the  law  and  the 
prophets,  O  my  beloved. 

Statute   3.    Said    Matewos :   All   that   thou   dost   not 

30  wish  that  they  should  do  to  thee,  thou  shalt  not  do  to 

thy   neighbour.      This   means,    that    that    which    thou 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  1 29 

hatest  for  thyself,  thou  shalt  not  do  to  thy  neighbour. 
And  do  thou,  O  Patros  my  brother,  teach  them  with 
this  word. 

Statute  4.  Said  Petros :  Thou  shalt  not  kill  life,  and   5 
thou    shalt    not  commit  adultery,    and   thou   shalt   not 
corrupt  young  children.     Thou  shalt  not  steal,  and  thou 
shalt  not  be  a  soothsayer,  and  thou  shalt  not  be  a  star- 
gazer,  and  thou  shalt  not  be  a  magician.     And   thou 
shalt  not  cause  abortion,  nor  after  the  child  is  born  shalt  10 
thou  kill  it.     And  thou  shalt  not  covet  any  of  thy  neigh- 
bour s  goods,  and  thou  shalt  not  hate  any  man,  and  thou 
shalt  not  be  a  false  witness.     And  thou  shalt  not  be  a 
speaker  of  evil  against  any.     And  thou  shalt  not  think 
about  doing  evil,  and  thou  shalt  not  be  of  double  heart  15 
and   of  double   tongue;  because  he   who  is  of  double 
tongue  is  a  deadly  snare.     And  thy  words  shall  not  be 
vain,  and  thou  shalt  not  be  false.     And  thou  shalt  not 
be  a  hypocrite,  nor  a  lover  of  great  possessions,  nor  a 
defrauder,  nor  unfair,  nor  one  of  evil  heart,  nor  proud,  ao 
And  thou  shalt  not  devise  evil  against  thy  companion, 
and  thou  shalt  not  hate  any  man,  but  reprove  him ;  and 
for  some  pray,  and  to  others  be  merciful,  and  others  love 
much  more  than  thyself. 

Statute  5.  Said  Endreyas :  O  my  son,  flee  from  all 
evil,  and  hate  all  evil;  and  thou  shalt  not  be  angry, 
because  anger  leads  to  murder;  because  anger  is  an 
evil  demon.  And  thou  shalt  not  be  envious  or  irascible 
or  a  lover  of  fighting,  because  this  depraves  and  causes  30 
to  inherit  evil 


130  STATUTES  OF  THK  APOSTLES 

Statute  6.  Said  Filepos:  O  my  son,  thou  shalt  not 
be  lustful,  because  lust  leads  to  adultery,  and  afterwards 
makes  a  man  the  ridicule  and  derision  of  all.  Because 
lust  is  a  seducing  demon ;  so  when  the  demon  of  anger 
5.  unites  with  lust,  it  is  perdition  to  him  in  whom  it  happens ; 
and  where  there  is  an  unclean  spirit  there  is  sin  of  the 
soul.  If  he  finds  a  little  (place)  where  he  may  enter, 
then  he  enlarges  that  place,  and  takes  with  him  all  the 
unclean  spirits,  and  they  enter  into  that  soul,    and   he 

10  will  not  let  them  leave  that  man ;  and  it  is  impossible 

%'    4er  him  to  lift  himself  up  at  all  to  see  the  right     Make 

a  limit  at  which  to  lay  aside  your  anger,  that  ye  may  cool 

and  delay  anger  after  your  anger ;  lest  Satan  cast  you 

into  a  very  wicked  deed.     Anger  and  lust  are  evil,  and 

i{  when  they  remain  for  much  time,  unless  (men)  cool  their 
anger  they  will  become  demons ;  and  when  the  demons 
get  men  into  their  power,  they  set  fire  to  their  souls,  and 
when  they  have  brought  them  to  do  sin  and  wrong,  they 
deride  them  and  rejoice  over  the  ruin  of  their  souls. 

90 

Statute  7.  Said  Seme'on  :  O  my  son,  thou  shalt  not  be 
a  speaker  of  evil,  nor  of  lofty  look ;  because  by  this  may 
be  adultery. 

5  Statute  8.  Said  Ya'ekob :  O  my  son,  thou  shalt  not 
be  one  who  interprets  prodigies,  or  who  is  an  augur ; 
because  all  this  guides  to  idolatry.  Nor  shalt  thou  be  a 
wizard  or  a  charmer,  or  a  chooser  of  hours,  or  a  chooser 
of  days,  or  a  star-gazer,  or  a  magician,  or  of  men  who  deal 
y)  with  omens ;  nor  shalt  thou  desire  to  be  acquainted  with 
them  ;  because  all  this  is  for  thee  idolatry. 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  13I 

Statute  9*  Said  Natnael :  O  my  son,  thou  shalt  not  be 
a  liar,  because  lying  tends  to  theft :  nor  shalt  thou  be  a 
lover  of  gold,  nor  a  lover  of  vainglory ;  because  all  this 
is  sin,  and  leads  to  theft. 

S 

Statute  ID.  Said  Yehuda :  O  my  son,  thou  shalt  not 
be  a  murmurer,  because  murmuring  leads  a  man  to 
cursing.  Nor  shalt  thou  be  overbearing,  or  oppressive, 
or  malicious ;  because  in  all  this  will  be  unbelief.  Be 
gentle,  because  the  gentle  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  lo 
the  heavens.  Be  kind  and  merciful  and  peaceable,  with 
a  heart  pure  from  all  evil,  without  sin.  And  be  good 
and  humble,  and  keep  thyself  in  trembling  at  the  word 
which  thou  hast  heard.  And  thou  shalt  not  boast,  nor 
put  thyself  with  the  great,  but  with  men  righteous  and  is 
humble ;  and  receive  everything  which  happens  to  thee 
with  thanksgiving  to  God ;  and  know  that  nothing  what- 
ever happens  except  from  God. 

Statute  II.  Said  Tom§s :  O  my  son,  him  who  spoke  30 
to  thee  the  word  of  God  which  became  to  thee  the  cause 
of  life,  and  gave  to  thee  the  signet-ring  of  honour,  love 
as  the  apple  of  thine  eye ;  and  be  mindful  of  him  by  day 
and  night,  and  honour  him  as  God  most  high.     For  the 
place  where  they  remember  the  name  of  God,  God  is  there ;  as 
and  visit  those  other  holy  ones  every  day,  that  thou  mayest 
rest  on  their  word :  and  he  who  approaches  to  the  holy 
will   become   holy   like   them.     And   honour    them    as 
much  as  thou  canst :  both  with  thy  toil  and  the  work  of 
thy   hands  sustain   them :  since   God    has    made    thee  )o 
worthy  to  find  from  them  sustenance  spiritual  and  that  of 


132  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

the  body,  and  eternal  life,  it  is  proper  for  thee  to  give 
them  the  perishable  food  of  this  world ;  because  *  the 
labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire ' :  '  thou  shalt  not  muzzle 
the  ox  in  the  threshing-floor ' :  *  who  planteth  a  vine 
5  and  eateth  not  of  its  fruit?' 

Statute  1 2.  Said  Kefas :  O  my  son,  thou  shalt  not 
cause  division  among  men,  but  reconcile  in  peace  those 
who   quarrel.     And   decide  with  justice,  and  thou  shalt 

lo  not  accept  the  person  of  a  rich  man  in  case  of  his  being 
a  sinner,  because  riches  avail  not  with  God.  Nor  shalt 
thou  honour  the  great,  nor  intercede  for  him  with  a 
writing;  but  with  thee  all  shall  be  equal  in  all  things. 
Nor   shalt   thou   be   doubtful   when    thou  prayest ;   but 

15  think  (well)  what  thou  desirest,  and  he  will  fulfil  it  to  thee 
then.  Nor  shalt  thou  be  one  who  thinkest  when  thou 
openest  thy  hand  for  that  which  thou  wilt  then  gain,  but 
when  thou  hast  finished  (receiving)  draw  it  back  to  thee. 
If  thou  hast  anything  in  thy  hand,  give  it,  and  seek 

30  deliverance  from  thy  sin.  Nor  shalt  thou  be  doubtful 
when  thou  gfivest;  and  when  thou  prayest,  thou  shalt 
receive  with  gladness,  and  know  who  it  is  who  will 
repay  thee.  Nor  shalt  thou  repel  him  who  begs  of 
thee,    but   shalt   share   with   the   needy   in    everything. 

as  Nor  shalt  thou  say  about  anything,  my  goods  are  for  me 
alone.  And  if  you  have  become  sharers  together  in  that 
which  is  incorruptible,  how  much  rather  then  in  the 
corruptible. 

30  Statute  1 3.  Said  Bartalomewos :  I  beseech  you,  O 
our  brethren,  while  ye  have  good  time  and  are  indeed 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  1 33 

able  to  do  good  to  all,  neglect  not  to  give  while  ye  have 
aught  to  give ;  because  the  day  of  God  is  near,  and  all 
things  visible  and  secret  will  pass  away,  and  God  will 
come  and  his  reward  with  him.  Be  doers  of  the  law 
yourselves,  and  teachers  of  yourselves  as  God  taught  yoa  5. 
And  keep  that  which  was  taught  you,  and  you  shall  not 
add  to  it  nor  diminish  from  it.  And  said  P^tros  :  O 
brethren,  the  Scriptures  teach  you  concerning  the  rest 
of  the  words  and  the  statutes,  and  we  indeed  speak  that 
which  was  commanded  us.  And  said  all  of  them :  10 
Petros  shall  speak. 

Statute  14.  Concerning  the   ordination   of  a   Bishop. 
If  it  should  be  a  district  having  few  of  the  Faithful,  and 
if  not  many  people  that   they  may   form  an   assembly  15 
about  the  bishop,  not  even  as  many  as  twelve,  they  shall 
send  a  message  to  the  Churches  next  to  their  district 
where  there  are  many  believers,  that  they  may  bring 
three  believers,  holy  and  chosen  men   of  that  district 
And  they  shall  try  them  carefully  concerning  that  which  20 
befits  them  for  the  good  work :  if  he  is  a  man  who  has 
a  good  character  among  the  people,  without  sin,  and 
without  anger,  and  a  lover  of  the  poor,  and  kind,  not  a 
drunkard,  nor  adulterer,  nor  lover  of  the  greater  share 
for  himself,  nor  a  railer,  not  unfair,  nor  the  like  of  that.  35 
And  it  is  good  also  that  he  be  without  wife,  though  if  he 
have  married  one  (wife)  before  he  is  ordained  bishop  he 
shall  live  with  her.    *And  he  should  be  one  who  shares  in 
good  doctrine,  and  who  can  expound  the  Scriptures  ;  and 
if  he  should  be  one  who  cannot  expound  the  Scriptures,  jo 
he   should  be  humble  and  abound  in  love  to  all  men. 


134  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

That  the  bishop  may  be  condemned  in  nothing  whatever, 
nor  let  him  be  reproved  in  anything,  y 

Said  Yuhanes  :  If  the  bishop  who  is  to  be  ordained 
knows  how  to  keep  himself  and  (has)  the  love  of  God, 
5  two  presbyters  who  have  been  approved,  shall  be 
appointed  to  be  with  him.  And  they  all  said : 
Not  two  but  three,  because  they  are  twenty  and  four 
presbyters,  twelve  on  the  right  and  twelve  on  the  left. 
And  said  Yuhanes :  Well  it  is  that  you  have  reminded 

lo  me,  O  brethren :  lo,  they  who  are  on  the  right  take 
the  cups  from  the  Archangels  and  they  offer  to  the 
Lord ;  and  they  who  are  on  the  left  have  authority 
over  all  the  angels.  And  it  is  proper  for  the  presbyters 
that  they   should   be  like   old   men   who   have   passed 

15  the  time  of  intercourse  with  wives,  and  they  shall  par- 
take of  the  Mystery  with  the  bishop,  and  help  with  him 
in  everything  whatsoever,  and  gather  round  him  with 
love  of  their  shepherd.  And  the  presbyters  who  are  on 
the  right  shall  be  careful  to  give  assistance  at  the  altar. 

10  Let  them  be  worthy  of  the  honour,  and  reject  him  who 
is  worthy  of  rejection.  And  the  presbyters  who  are  on 
the  left  shall  attend  to  all  the  people,  that  they  may  be 
quiet  and  not  in  commotion,  and  be  controlled  with  all 
control  and  obey  with  all  obedience. 

Statute  15.  Concerning  the  ordination  of  a  Reader 
(anaguenestis).  Said  Ya'ekob,  that  a  reader  shall  be 
ordained  after  he  has  been  first  tried.  He  shall  not  be 
of  many  words,  nor  a  drunkard,  nor  a  scoffer.  And  he 
50  shall  be  of  good  character,  and  a  lover  of  the  good  ;  one 
who  is  quick  to  go  every  day  to  the  church,  who  remem- 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  1 35 

bers  there  the  judgment ;  and  he  shall  be  obedient,  and 
one  who  reads  well,  and  who  knows  the  duty  (lit.  place)  of 
him  who  reads,  that  he  should  do  according  to  what  he 
reads ;  and  one  who  fills  the  ear  of  others  with  his  word, 
ought  he  not  to  do  it  himself?  Will  it  not  be  written  5 
against  him  as  a  sin  before  God  ? 

Statute  1 6.  Said  Matewos  :  Deacons  shall  be  ordained, 
as  it  is  written :  By  the  testimony  of  two  and  three 
every  word  shall  be  established.  And  they  shall  be  tried  10 
concerning  all  the  service,  having  the  testimony  of  all 
the  people,  that  they  live  with  one  wife,  and  have  reared 
their  children  in  purity,  and  such  as  are  merciful  and 
humble,  and  such  as  are  not  murmurers,  and  such  as 
are  not  double-tongued,  nor  wrathful,  because  wrath  15 
depraves  a  wise  man.  j  And  they  shall  not  respect  the 
person  of  the  rich,  nor  act  unjustly  to  the  poor ;  nor 
drink  much  wine ;  and  they  shall  work  hard  for  the 
hidden  Mystery  and  the  beauty  of  the  consolation.^  And 
they  shall  bid  those  of  the  brethren  who  have  somewhat  90 
to  give  to  him  who  has  nothing,  and  thus  they  shall  also 
be  sharers  in  giving.  And  they  shall  honour  all  with  all 
honour  and  modesty  and  fear,  and  they  shall  keep  them- 
selves in  all  purity.  And  some  of  them  they  shall  teach, 
and  some  of  them  they  shall  question,  and  some  of  them  35 
they  shall  reprove  and  some  they  shall  console.  As  for 
the  rejected,  they  shall  also  expel  them  at  once,  and  they 
shall  know  that  those  who  oppose,  the  revilers,  the  re- 
jected, are  those  who  are  your  adversaries.  , 

^  This  seems  a  misunderstanding  of  the  Arabic. 


136  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

Statute  17.  Concerning  the  Widow.  Said  KefaS: 
Three  widows  shall  be  ordained.  Two  of  them  shall 
devote  themselves  to  prayer  for  all  those  who  are  in 
affliction  ;  and  sufficient  daily  sustenance  shall  be  given. 
5  But  one  of  them  shall  stay  with  the  women  who  are 
suffering  from  illness,  that  she  may  further  their  recovery, 
and  be  watchful,  and  inform  by  sending  word  to  the 
presbyters.  And  she  shall  not  be  a  lover  of  gain,  nor 
shall  she  be  a  drunkard,  lest  she  leave  off  her  work  of 
10  watchfulness  and  praying  in  the  night.  And  if  one  (of 
them)  wishes  to  do  a  good  work,  let  her  do  it  according 
to  the  commandment,  that  she  may  comfort  the  heart  of 
the  sorrowful,  because  the  goodness  of  God  has  been 
first  made  known  (to  her). 

Statute  18.  Concerning  Deacons,  that  they  should  be 
doers  of  good  works.  Said  Endreyas :  Deacons  shall 
be  doers  of  good  works  by  night  and  by  day,  with  every- 
one in  every  place ;  and  they  shall  not  exalt  themselves 

ao  over  the  poor  and  needy,  nor  respect  the  person  of  the 
rich ;  and  they  shall  look  out  for  those  who  have  nothing, 
and  give  to  them  of  that  which  is  left ;  and  shall  bid 
those  who  have  somewhat  to  give  alms  to  them,  that 
they  may  do  what  our  Lord  said :  I  was  hungry  (and) 

25  ye  fed  me.  For  he  who  ministers  well  the  ministry 
without  fault  shall  inherit  a  place  of  rest. 

Statute  1 9.  Concerning  the  statute  of  the  Lay  people. 

Said  Filepos  :  The  lay  people  shall  do  the  commandment 

30  which  is  told  to  them  with  cheerfulness ;  and  they  shall 

obey  those   who  devote  themselves  to  the  altar;  and 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  1 37 

they  shall  all  of  them  please  God  in  that  which  is  given 
to  them  and  ordered  them.  And  ye  shall  not  learn 
enmity  one  with  another  because  of  that  which  is  com- 
manded you ;  but  rather  shall  each  one  hasten  (in  his 
work),  according  as  it  has  been  given  him  from  God;  5 
and  he  shall  not  hate  nor  cause  a  neighbour  to  be  hated 
by  an  accusation.  Even  the  angels  do  not  overstep 
that  which  is  defined  for  them. 

Statute  20.  Concerning  the  reminder  that  the   Obla-  10 
tion  is  the  Body  of  Christ,  and  that  which  comes  after  it 
Said  Endreyas :  We   have  already  ordered   this   which 
was  said  concerning  the  Oblation,  that  it  is  the  Body  of 
Christ  and  his  precious  Blood,  and  we  declare  (it)  to  you 
with  certainty.     And  said  Yuhanes  :  Have  ye  forgotten,  15 
O  brethren,  that  on  the  day  when  our  Lord  offered  up 
the  bread  and  the  wine  he  said :  This  is  my  Body  and 
this  is  my  Blood.     For  he  did  not  command  that  they 
should  treat  those  as  common  things.     And  said  MartSl 
concerning    Maryam :    See    her    laughing.      And    said  20 
Maryam  :  It  was  not  because  of  that  that  I  laughed,  for 
our  Lord  said  to  us :  It  is  good  that  the  sick  should  be 
healed  by  the  whole. 

* 

Statute  21.  Said  Kefa :  It  is  not  fitting  for  women  to  25 
raise  their  voice  while  they  stand  in  the  church,  but 
rather  to  prostrate  themselves  with  face  toward  the 
earth.  Said  Ya'ekob :  How  can  they  order  for  women  a 
ministry  of  the  Mystery,  but  only  this  ministry  that  they 
should  help  the  needy  ?  Said  Filepos :  O  brethren,  50 
concerning  the  charitable  action  which  a  man  does,  (in 


138  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

doing  it)  he  gathers  for  himself  a  good  treasure  in  the 
kingdom  of  the  heavens  ;  for  the  good  deed  is  reckoned 
to  him  by  God,  who  continues  for  evermore.  Said 
Petros :  O  brethren,  ye  know  that  we  indeed  are  not  set 
S  over  anyone  with  compulsion,  but  we  give  command 
from  God.  We  beseech  you  to  hear  and  keep  the 
commandments,  and  add  not  to  them  nor  diminish  from 
them,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  whom  be 
honour  and  praise  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen. 
10 

Statute  22.  Concerning  the  ordination  of  Bishops  and 
the  right  order  of  the  Oblation.  The  bishop  shall  be 
ordained  as  we  have  already  spoken  ;  one  who  has  been 
chosen  by  all  the  people  together,  with  the  presbyters 

15  and  deacons  on  the  day  of  the  sabbath.  And  all  the 
bishops  shall  go  with  mutual  consent  and  lay  their  hands 
upon  him ;  and  the  presbyters  standing  by  keep  quiet, 
and  all  of  them  together  in  silence  and  praying  in  their 
hearts  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  help  them  and  descend 

«o  upon  him.  And  every  one  of  the  bishops  shall  pray, 
and  all  of  them  severally  standing  up  shall  lay  their 
hands  upon  him  who  is  ordained  bishop,  and  they  shall 
pray  over  him  thus,  saying:  God,  the  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  Father  of  mercies  and  Lord  of  all 

as  comforts,  who  dwelt  with  the  lofty  and  (yet)  sees  the 
humble,  and  who  knew  all  before  it  came  to  pass. 
Thou  gavest  an  ordinance  to  the  Church,  by  the  word 
of  thy  grace;  thou  who  foreordainedst  originally  a 
family  of  righteous  men ;  from  Abreham  thou  ordainedst 

30  judges  and  priests ;  and  thou  didst  not  leave  thy 
sanctuary  without  ministers ;  and  ever  since  the  creation 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  1 39 

of  the  world  thou  hast  desired  to  be  glorified  in  the 
(place)  which  thou  chosest.  And  now  pour  out  from 
thee  the  might  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  thou  gavest 
to  thy  beloved  Son  Jesus  Christ,  which  thou  grantest  to 
us  the  holy  Apostles,  thy  helpers  in  thy  Church  (work-  5 
ing)  with  the  plough  of  thy  Cross  and  in  the  place  of 
thy  holiness — ^to  thee  be  glory,  and  praise  unceasingly 
to  thy  Name.  Give,  (thou)  knower  of  the  heart,  and 
send  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  thy  servant  whom  thou  hast 
chosen  for  the  pontificate,  that  he  may  feed  thy  flock  10 
and  minister  as  priest  to  thee  without  blame,  serving 
thee  by  day  and  night,  and  supplicating  to  see  thy  face 
worthily ;  that  he  may  offer  thine  Oblation  in  thy  holy 
Church ;  in  the  Holy  Spirit  of  the  priesthood,  having 
authority  to  forgive  sin  according  to  thy  commandment,  15 
(and)  to  give  the  ordination  of  thy  ordinance,  and  loose 
all  bonds  of  iniquity,  according  to  the  authority  which 
thou  gavest  to  thine  Apostles ;  and  that  he  may  please 
thee  with  gentleness  and  purity  of  heart,  offering  to  thee 
a  sweet  savour,  through  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ,  through  ao 
whom  to  thee  be  glory  and  might  and  honour,  to  the 
Father  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit  in  thy  noly 
Church  now  and  always  and  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 

And  after  the  bishop  has  been  ordained  every  one  of 
them  shall  salute  him  with  the  mouth,  kissing  him  who  35 
has  become  a  bishop,  and  to  whom  this  grace  has  been 
imparted.  And  the  deacon  shall  bring  to  him  the  Obla- 
tion ;  and  he  then  having  laid  his  hand  upon  the  Oblation 
with  all  the  holy  ones  and  the  presbyters  shall  say,  thus 
gfiving  thanks :  The  Lord  (be)  with  you  all.  And  the  30 
people  shall  say :  Perfectly  with  thy  Spirit  may  he  be. 


140  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

And  the  bishop  shall  say  :  Lift  up  your  hearts.  And  all 
the  people  shall  say :  We  have  (them)  with  the  Lord 
our  God.  And  the  bishop  shall  say  :  Let  us  give  thanks 
to  the  Lord.  And  the  people  shall  say  :  Right,  it  is 

5  meet,  and  just. 

And  then  the  bishop  shall  say  the  (words)  of  the 
Oblation  as  follows :  We  give  thanks  to  thee,  Lord, 
through  thy  beloved  Son  Jesus  Christ,  whom  in  the  last 
days    thou    sentest    to    us,    thy    Son,    a    saviour    and 

lo  redeemer,  the  messenger  of  thy  counsel.  This  is  the 
Word  who  is  from  thee,  by  whom  thou,  being  willing, 
madest  all  things ;  and  thou  sentest  thy  Son  from  heaven 
into  the  womb  of  the  Virgin,  he  who  became  flesh  and 
was  borne  within  her.     And  thy  Son  was  manifested  by 

15  the  Holy  Spirit,  having  been  born  of  a  Virgin,  that  he 
might  fulfil  thy  will  and  make  a  people  for  thee.  Spread- 
ing out  his  hands  for  suffering,  that  he  might  release  the 
sufferers,  who  trust  on  thee.  He  who  was  delivered  up 
of  his  own  will  to  suffering,  that  he  might  abolish  death 

20  and  burst  the  bonds  of  Satan  and  trample  on  Siola,  and 
lead  forth  the  holy  ones;  (that)  he  might  establish 
the  covenant  and  make  known  his  resurrection.  On 
that  night  in  which  he  was  betrayed,  he  took  bread,  he 
gave  thanks  and  said  to  them  :  Take  and  eat     This  is 

25  my  Body  which  for  your  sake  is  broken  for  the  remission 
of  sin.  And  likewise  the  cup,  having  given  thanks  he 
said :  This  is  my  Blood  which  for  your  sake  is  shed : 
take  and  drink  of  it:  and  when  ye  do  this,  make  a 
memorial  of  me.     Remembering  therefore  thy  death  and 

30  thy  resurrection,  we  offer  to  thee  this  bread  and  this  cup, 
giving  thanks  to  thee  because  thou  hast  made  us  worthy 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  I41 

to  Stand  before  thee  and  minister  as  priests  to  thee.  We 
pray  to  thee,  Lord,  and  we  beseech  thee  to  send  thy  Holy 
Spirit  upon  this  Oblation  of  the  Church,  that  in  joining 
(them)  together  thou  mayest  grant  to  them — to  all  of  them 
— to  them  who  take  of  it,  that  it  may  be  to  them  for  holi-  5 
ness,  and  for  filling  (them)  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  for 
strengthening  of  faith  in  truth,  that  thee  they  may  glorify 
and  praise  through  thy  Son  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ, 
through  whom  to  thee  be  glory  and  might  in  the  holy 
Church  now  and  always  and  for  ever  and  ever.     Am€n.    10 

Concerning  the  Oblation  (of  oil).     Oil  he  shall  offer 
according  as  the  Oblation   of  bread  and   wine,   giving     y^ 
thanks  as  in  that  ordinance.     Whenever  he  does  not  speak  i^  j 
the  same  words  he  shall  give  thanks  according  to  the 
various  meaning  of  each  one,  but  also  with  the  other  words,  15 
saying  thus  :     Having  sanctified  oil,  thou  shalt  grant  to  all 
who  are   anointed   or   receive   it  that  with  which  thou 
anointedst  priests   and   prophets;   and   in   like  manner 
strengthen  those  and  all  who  taste,  and  sanctify  them  who 
receive  it.  20 

And  the  people  shall  say  :  As  it  was,  is  and  shall  be 
to  generation  of  generation  and  to  age  of  age.^     Amen. 

The  bishop  shall  say :  And  again  we  beseech  thee. 
Almighty  God,  the  Father  of  the  Lord  and  our  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ,  to  grant  us  to  receive  with  blessing  this  25 
holy  Mystery  ;  and  that  he  may  not  condemn  any  of  us, 
but  cause  worthiness  in  all  them  who  take  the  reception 
of  the  holy  Mystery,  the  Body  and  the  Blood  of  Christ, 
Almighty  Lord,  our  God. 


^  This  is  usually  rendered  '  for  ever  and  ever.' 


142  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


The  deacon  shall  say  :  Pray  ye.  And  the  bishop  shall 
say  :  God,  almighty,  g^nt  to  us  the  reception  of  thy 
holy  Mystery  as  our  strengthening;  nor  condemn  any 
amongst  us,  but  bless  all  through  Christ,  through  whom 

5  to  thee  with  him  and  with  the  Holy  Spirit  be  glory  and 
might  now  and  always  and  for  ever  and  ever.     Am€n. 

The  deacon  shall  say :  As  ye  stand,  bow  down  your 
heads. 

The  bishop  shall  say :  Eternal  God,  knower  of  that 

lo  which  is  secret  and  that  which  is  open,  to  thee  thy 
people  bowed  down  their  heads,  and  to  thee  they  bent 
the  hardness  of  heart  and  flesh,  look  from  thy  worthy 
dwelling-place,  bless  them  both  men  and  women,  incline 
thine  ear  to  them  and  hear  their  prayer,  and  strengthen 

15  (them)  with  the  might  of  thy  right  hand,  and  protect 
(them)  from  evil  sickness,  be  their  guardian  for  both 
body  and  soul,  increase  to  them  and  to  us  also  thy  faith 
and  thy  fear,  through  thine  only  Son,  through  whom  to 
thee  with  him  and  with  the  Holy  Spirit  be  glory   and 

ao  might  now  and  always  and  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 

And  the  deacon  shall  say :  Let  us  attend     And  the 

bishop   shall  say :    Holiness   to   holy    ones.     And    the 

people  shall  say :  One  holy  Father,  one  holy  Son,  one  is 

the  Holy  Spirit     The  bishop  shall  say  :  The  Lord  (be) 

aj.  with  you  all.  And  the  people  shall  say  :  With  thy  spirit 
And  then  they  shall  lift  up  their  hands  for  glorifying ; 
and  the  people  shall  come  in  for  the  salvation  of  their 
souls,  in  order  that  their  sin  may  be  remitted. 

The  prayer  after  that  they  have  communicated  :  God, 

30  almighty,  the  Father  of  the  Lord  and  our  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ,  we  give  thee  thanks,  because  thou  hast  imparted 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  1 43 

to  US  the  reception  of  the  holy  Mystery :  let  it  not  be  for 
guilt  or  condemnation,  but  for  the  renewal  of  soul  and 
body  and  spirit  through,  etc^  And  the  people  shall  say : 
Amen. 

And  the  presbyter  shall  say  (the  prayer  of)  laying  on  5 
of  hand  after  they  have  received.  Eternal  God,  almighty, 
the  Father  of  the  Lord  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ, 
bless  thy  servants  and  thy  handmaids,  protect  and  help 
and  prosper  (them)  by  the  power  of  thine  Archangel 
Keep  and  confirm  in  them  thy  fear  by  thy  greatness;  10 
provide  that  they  shall  both  think  what  is  thine  and 
believe  what  is  thine  and  will  what  is  thine ;  gprant  to 
them  peace  without  sin  and  anger  through,  etc. 

The  people  shall  say  :  Amen. 

And  the  bishop  shall  say :  The  Lord  (be)  with  you  is 
all. 

And  the  people  shall  say  :  With  thy  spirit 

And  the  deacon  shall  say  :  Go  forth  in  peace.     And 
after  (that)  the  Keddase  *  is  finished. 

20 

Statute  23.  Concerning  the  ordination  of  Presbyters. 
If  the  bishop  desires  to  ordain  a  presbyter,  he  shall  lay 
his  hand  upon  his  head;  and  all  the  presbyters  shall 
touch  him  and  shall  pray  over  him.  In  the  form  which 
we  said  before  he  shall  pray,  saying :  My  God,  the  25 
Father  of  our  Lord  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  look 
down  upon  this  thy  servant,  and  impart  to  him  the  spirit 


1  ( 


Through,  etc'  means  '  through  thine  only  Son,  through  whom  to 

thee  with  him  and  with  the  Holy  Spirit  be  glory  and  might,  now  and 

always  and  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen.' 

^  The  holy  communiMi  service. 

10 


144  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

of  grace  and  the  gift  of  holiness,  that  he  may  be  able  to 
direct  thy  people  with  pure  heart :  as  thou  lookedst 
upon  thy  chosen  people  and  commandedst  Moses  to 
choose  presbyters  whom   thou   filledst   with   the    Holy 

5.  Spirit  which  thou  grantedst  to  thy  servant  and  minister 
Moses,  so  now.  Lord,  give  to  this  thy  servant  the 
grace  which  fails  not,  preserving  to  us  the  spirit  of  thy 
favour,  and  vouchsafe  to  us,  whilst  thou  fillest  us  with 
thy  worship   in  our  heart,  to  glorify  thee,  through  thy 

'<^  Son  Jesus  Christ,  through  whom  to  thee  (be)  glory  and 
power,  to  the  Father  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit 
in  the  holy  Church  now,  etc.^ 

And  all  the  people  shall  say :  Am€n  and  Amen.  He 
is  worthy  of  it 

15 

Statute  24.  Concerning  the  ordination  of  Deacons. 
And  if  the  bishop  desires  to  ordain  a  deacon,  he  shall 
choose  (him)  as  we  have  already  said ;  and  the  bishop 
alone  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  his  head.     Why  do  we  say 

20  that  the  bishop  alone  is  he  who  lays  his  hand  upon  him  ? 
For  a  sign  it  is  of  this  thing,  that  he  was  not 
ordg^ined  for  priesthood,  but  only  for  the  service  of  the 
bishop,  that  he  may  perform  the  commandment  with 
which  he  was  commanded   by  him.     And   he   was   not 

25  ordained  to  be  the  teacher  of  all  those  who  are  in  Orders, 
but  to  be  one  who  will  think  of  what  is  proper  (to  be 
done)  and  will  inform  the  bishop.  And  he  was  not 
ordained  to  acquire  the  great  Spirit  of  which  the  pres- 
byters partake,  but  to  occupy  himself  with  that  which  is 

^  '  Now,  etc*  means  *  now  and  always  and  for  ever  and  ever. 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  I45 

proper,  that  the  bishop  may  trust  him,  and  that  he  may 
acquaint  the  bishop  with  that  which  is  fitting  (for  him  to 
know).  The  bishop  is  he  alone  who  shall  lay  his  hand 
upon  him  ;  whereas  for  the  presbyters  indeed,^  the  bishop 
and  all  the  presbyters  take  part  with  him,  and  they  shall  s 
lay  their  hands  upon  him,  for  it  is  one  (and  the  same) 
Spirit  which  descends  upon  him  (and  them).  And  the 
presbyter  alone  shall  not  do  it ;  nor  have  the  ordained 
clergy  power  to  ordain :  and  because  of  this  the  reader 
also  and  the  subdeacon  shall  not  be  ordained  by  the  lo 
presbyter  alone,  but  the  bishop  alone  shall  ordain  and 
lay  his  hand  upon  him. 

The  prayer  of  the  ordination  of  deacons :  God,  who 
hast  created  all,  and  by  thy  word  hast  set  (it)  in  order, 
the  Father  of  our  Lord  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  15 
whom  thou  sentest  that  he  might  minister  according  to 
thy  will,  and  reveal  to  us  thy  secret  counsel ;  g^rant  spirit 
and  grace  and  diligence  unto  this  thy  servant  whom  thou 
hast  chosen  to  be  a  deacon  in  our  Church,  and  to  offer  in 
thy  holy  of  holies  *  that  which  is  offered  to  thee  by  thine  20 
ordained  Chief  Priests  to  the  glory  of  thy  name ;  thus 
without  blame  in  pure  life  having  served  the  degrees  of 
ordination  he  may  obtain  the  exalted  priesthood  and  thy 
honour,  and  glorify  thee,  through  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord,  through  whom  to  thee  with  him  (be)  glory  and  as 
might  and  power  and  praise  with  the  Holy  Spirit  now,  etc. 

Statute  25.  Concerning  those  who  confessed  and  were 
condemned  for  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     If 

^  Ludolfs  print  ends  here.  ^  Lit  '  holy  holiness.' 


146  STATUTBS  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

the  confessor  has  been  in  the  place  of  punishment,  in 
chains  for  the  name  of  Christ,  they  shall  not  lay  hand  on 
him  for  a  ministering,  for  that  is  the  honour  of  a  deacon  : 
but  (as  for)  the  honour  of  the  presbyterate,  though  he 

S  hath  the  honour  of  the  presbyterate  by  that  which  he 
confessed,  (yet)  the  bishop  shall  ordain  him,  having  laid 
his  hand  upon  him.*  And  if  the  confessor  was  one  who 
came  not  before  the  judges,  and  if  he  was  not  punished 
with  chains,  nor  was  shut  up  in  prison,  nor  suffered  any 

10  affliction,  but  withal  was  only  derided  for  the  name  of 
his  Lord,  and  was  not  condemned  to  the  least  punishment, 
yet  he  professed  all  the  work  of  the  priesthood  which  is 
meet  for  him,  they  shall  lay  hand  on  him  and  make  him 
a  deacon.     And  the  bishop  shall  give  thanks  as  we  have 

15  already  said.  And  it  is  necessary  that  he  should  mention 
the  things  which  we  have  already  said,  that  he  should 
recite  clearly  and  carefully,  and  give  thanks  to  God 
according  as  it  is  proper  for  each  to  pray.  And  if  there 
was  one  who  could  pray  with  devotion  or  use  (make)  a 

ao  grrand  and  elevated  prayer,  and  he  himself  being  good  ; 
and  if  he  prayed  and  speaks  praise  with  moderation,  no 
one  shall  be  prevented  from  praying,  who  is  truly  right 
(in  his  faith). 

2$  Statute  26.  Concerning  the  ordination  of  Widows.  If 
a  widow  is  ordained  she  shall  not  be  sealed,  but  be  made 
by  the  name.  And  if  it  was  one  whose  husband  died  a 
long  time,  she  shall  be  ordained.  And  if  it  was  one 
whose  husband  had  lately  died,  she  shall  not  be  trusted. 

^  The  passage  is  probably  comipt ;  a,  ^,  and  c  read  '  holiness '  for 
'presb3rterate,'  but  in  a  the  word  is  marked. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  I47 

But  even  if  she  is  aged,  she  shall  be  tried  many  days, 
because  lust  will  contend  with  those  who  are  ordained  to  a 
place.  ^  And  the  widow  shall  be  ordained  by  word  only, 
and  she  shall  (then)  be  joined  to  the  rest  of  the  widows  ; 
and  they  shall  not  lay  hand  upon  her,  because  she  does 
not  offer  the  sacrifice,  nor  has  she  a  (sacred)  ministry. 
For  the  sealing  is  for  the  priests  because  of  their  ministry, 
but  (the  duty)  of  widows  is  about  prayer,  which  is  the 
duty  of  all. 


10 


Statute  27.  Concerning  the  Reader  and  the  Virgins 
and  the  Subdeacons,  and  concerning  the  grace  of  healing. 
To  the  reader  who  is  ordained  the  bishop  shall  deliver 
the  Scripture,  and  shall  not  lay  hand  upon  him.     As  for 
the  virgin  also,  he  shall  not  lay  hand  on  a  virgin ;  but  15- 
it  is  with  her  heart  alone  that  she  became  a  virgin.     As 
for  the  subdeacons,  he  shall  not  lay  hand  upon  a  sub- 
deacon,  but  he  shall  make  (mention)  over  them  of  the 
name  that  they  may  minister   to  the  deacons.     As  for 
the  grace  of  healing,  if  some  one  says,  *  I  have  acquired  ao 
the  grace  of  healing  and  prophecy,'  they  shall  not  lay 
hand  upon  him  until  his  deed  make  evident  that  he  is 
trustworthy. 

Statute  28.  Concerning  new  persons  who  wish  to  be  35 
baptised,   and   concerning  the  occupations  which   they 
ought  to  leave  off.     New  persons  who  are  to  be  baptised 
in  order  that  they  may  hear  the  word,  shall  be  brought 
to  the  teachers  before  all  the  people  come  in ;  and  they 

1  This  seems  a  misundentanding  of  the  Arabic  version 


148  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


shall  a^  tiiem  for  what  reason  tfaev  soi^t  the  Faith. 
And  thejr  who  broi^t  them  shall  be  witness  for  them 
as  to  whether  thejr  are  able  to  hear  (the  word).  And 
they  shall  examine  them  concerning  their  life  as  to  what 
5  they  are ;  if  they  have  a  wife ;  or  a  woman,  if  she  has  a 
husband :  or  if  he  was  a  slave,  if  his  master  allowed  him 
to  hear;  and  if  his  master  was  not  witness  for  him, 
he  shall  go  away:  and  if  his  master  was  an  idolater, 
they  shall  hear  from  him  and  they  shall  know  if  it  was 

10  with  permission  of  his  master,  that  there  be  not  scandal 
And  if  he  was  a  man  who  had  a  wife,  or  a  woman  who 
had  a  husband,  they  shall  know  if  the  man  lives  with 
his  wife,  and  the  wife  with  her  husband.  And  if  it  was 
a  man  who  did  not  live  with  a  wife,  he  shall  be  instructed 

15  not  to  be  a  fornicator,  but  to  marry  according  to  law  or 
to  remain  so  (as  to  obey  the  law).  And  if  it  was  a  man 
who  had  a  devil,  then  he  shall  not  hear  the  word  of 
instruction.  Concerning  the  occupations  and  the  crafts 
beside  the  occupations   of  those  whom  they  bring  to 

JO  exhortation.  And  if  there  was  a  pander,  he  shall  be  re- 
jected. And  if  there  was  one  who  makes  an  image  or  who 
divines,  they  shall  teach  him  that  he  should  not  make  an 
image ;  and  if  he  will  not  give  up  the  image  he  shall  be 
rejected.     And  if  it  was  one  who  caused  to  go  to  the 

«5  Circus,  let  him  leave  off  or  be  rejected.  And  if  it  was 
one  who  teaches  children  the  work  of  this  world,  then  it 
is  good  if  he  leave  off ;  yet  if  there  is  no  other  occupation 
by  which  he  may  live,  he  shall  be  excused.  And  let 
him   who  causes    to  go  to   idolatrous    sacrifices   leave 

90  off  or  be  rejected.  And  if  there  is  one  who  hunts  or 
teaches  hunting,  or  who  teaches  fighting,  or  war,    or 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  I49 


a  driver  of  horses,  let  him  leave  off  or  be  rejected.  And 
if  it  was  a  priest  of  the  gods  or  a  guardian  of  the  gods, 
let  him  leave  off  or  be  rejected.  A  soldier  of  the  prince 
they  shall  not  receive,  and  if  indeed  they  received  him, 
if  he  was  commanded  to  kill  he  shall  not  do  (it) ;  and  S 
if  he  does  not  leave  off  he  shall  be  rejected. 

Statute  29.  Concerning  other  persons.  Either  he  who 
is  a  soldier  among  the  believers  and  among  the  in- 
structed, or  a  star-gazer  or  magician  and  the  like,  and  a  lo 
magistrate  with  the  sword  or  chief  of  praefects,  and  he 
who  is  clad  in  red,  let  him  leave  off  or  be  rejected.  And 
a  catechumen  or  believer,  if  they  wish  to  be  a  soldier, 
shall  be  rejected,  because  it  is  far  from  God.  An 
adulteress,  or  a  man  without  pity,  or  a  man  who  does  15 
that  which  is  not  proper  to  be  mentioned,  shall  be  re- 
jected, because  they  are  alien  and  unclean,  and  it  is  not 
fitting  to  bring  them  to  be  ranked  in  the  congregation 
of  the  Faithful.  And  if  it  was  a  star-gazer  and  a  diviner 
by  the  sun,  or  soothsayer,  or  interpreter  of  dreams,  or  20 
seducer  of  the  people,  or  who  puts  on  clothes  for 
lascivious  ornament  or  a  maker  of  potions,  let  him  leave 
off  or  be  rejected. 

Statute  30.  Concerning  Concubines.  If  there  is  any-  25 
thing  which  we  have  omitted,  decide  as  is  proper.  A 
man  shall  give  up  his  concubine,  and  if  she  was  a  servant 
of  the  man  and  if  she  has  brought  up  her  children,  and  if 
she  did  not  come  near  another  man  beside  him,  they 
shall  receive  her,  but  if  she  had  been  near  another  man,  30 
she  shall  be  rejected.     And  a  man  who  has  a  concubine 


I50  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


let  him  desist  or  marry  according  to  law ;  and  if  he  is 
not  willing  to  desist  let  him  be  rejected.  And  if  there 
is  aught  that  we  have  omitted,  decide  as  is  proper, 
because  we  all  have  the  Spirit  of  God. 


S 


Statute  31.  Concerning  the  time  during  which  they 
shall  hear  instruction  after  (they  have  left  off  their) 
occupations.  The  catechumens  shall  remain  three  years 
hearing  the  word  of  instruction :  yet  if  he  was  a  good 
lo  scholar  and  one  who  knows  good  conduct,  no  length  of 
time  need  be  required  of  him  (to  hear),  but  the  conduct 
alone  shall  decide  for  him. 

Statute  32.  Concerning  the  prayer  of  him  who  hears 

15  instruction  and  his  kiss.     When  the  teacher  has  finished 

the  admonition  the  catechumens  shall  pray  alone,  apart 

from  the  believers.     And  the  women  shall  stand  in  their 

place  in  the  church ;  and  the  women  believers  shall  pray 

alone  and  the  women  catechumens.     And  if  the  pnayer 

ao  is  finished,  the  catechumens  shall  not  kiss  one  another 

with  the  believers,  because  their  kiss  is  not  yet  pure. 

And  the  believers  shall  kiss  one  another ;  man  shall  kiss 

man  and  woman  shall  kiss  woman,  and  males  shall  not 

kiss  females.     And  all  the  women  shall  have  their  heads 

3^  veiled  with  a  pallium  or  with  a  mantle,  and  not  with 

sindon  only,  because  this  is  not  what  is  allowed  to  them. 

Statute  33.   Concerning  the  laying  hand    upon  the 

catechumen.     And  after  the  prayer,  when  the  teacher 

^  has  laid  his  hand  upon  the  catechumen  he  shall  pray, 

and  dismiss  them.     And  if  it  was  one  belonging  to  the 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  ISI 

church  who  teaches,  or  a  layman,  he  shall  do  likewise. 
And  if  a  catechumen  was  arrested  for  the  name  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  he  shall  not  be  doubtful  about  the  testimony 
(which  he  gives) ;  because  if  they  overpower  and  injure 
him  and  kill  him  before  he  receives  baptism  for  the  for-  5 
giveness  of  his  sin,  he  shall  be  justified ;  because  he  was 
baptised  in  his  own  blood. 

Statute  34,  Concerning  him  who  is  baptised.  When 
one  has  been  chosen  or  who  is  ready  for  baptism  they  lo 
shall  examine  their  life ;  if  they  lived  in  the  fear  of  God 
before  they  are  baptised,  if  they  honoured  the  widow,  or 
if  they  visited  the  sick,  or  if  they  did  all  good,  and  if 
there  is  witness  in  their  favour  from  those  who  bring 
them ;  and  if  they  have  done  thus  they  shall  hear  the  15 
Gospel  from  the  time^  that  they  were  set  apart,  and 
they  shall  lay  hand  upon  them  and  every  day  instruct 
them.  And  when  the  day  draws  near  on  which  they 
shall  be  baptised,  the  bishop  binds  every  one  of  them  by 
oath,  that  he  may  know  if  they  are  pure.  And  if  one  ^ 
was  found  who  was  not  pure,  they  shall  put  him 
aside  by  himself;  for  he  has  not  hearkened  to  the 
word  of  instruction  with  faith ;  because  it  is  not  proper 
to  baptise  (///.  do  to)  an  utter  alien.  And  they  shall 
instruct  those  who  shall  be  baptised  that  they  should  25 
wash  and  be  exorcised  on  the  fifth  day  of  the 
week  (sabbath) ;  and  if  there  was  a  menstruous  woman 
among  them,  she  shall  be  put  aside,  that  she  may  be 
baptised  on  another  day.  And  those  who  desire  to 
be  baptised  shall  fast  on  Friday,  and  the  bishop   shall  30 

^  Reading  the  variant  of  b  c. 


152  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

assemble  all  those  who  shall  be  baptised  on  Saturday  into 
one  place,  and  shall  command  all  of  them  (to  make) 
prayer  and  prostration ;  and  when  he  has  laid  his  hand 
upon  them,  let  him  exorcise  the  unclean  spirit  that  he  may 
5  flee  away  from  them  and  not  enter  into  them  again.  And 
when  he  has  finished  his  exorcising,  he  shall  breathe  upon 
them,  and  they  shall  read  to  them  the  Scriptures,  and 
exhort  them.  And  they  who  shall  be  baptised  shall  not 
bring  with  them  any  ornament  of  gold,  nor  ring  nor 
lo  gem  of  any  kind ;  but  every  one  of  them  shall  give 
thanks,  and  it  is  fitting  for  them  whom  it  beseems  to 
bring  their  Oblations  also  at  the  time. 

Statute  35.  Concerning  the  order  of  Baptism,  and  the 

iS»  profession  of  the  Faith,  and  the  confession  of  sin  at 
baptism  and  the  Oblation  ;  and  concerning  the  milk  and 
honey.  At  the  time  of  cock-crow  they  shall  first  pray 
over  the  water.  And  it  shall  be  either  such  as  flows 
into  the  tank  of  baptism  or  is  caused  to  flow  down  upon 

20  it  And  it  shall  be  thus  unless  there  is  a  scarcity  of 
water ;  but  if  there  is  a  scarcity  they  shall  carry  water 
to  the  tank,  having  drawn  (it  from  a  well).  And  they 
shall  put  off  their  garments  and  be  baptised  naked. 
And  they  shall  baptise  the  little  children  first ;  and  if 

25  they  can  speak  for  themselves,  let  them  speak.  But 
if  they  cannot,  their  parents  shall  answer  the  word 
instead  of  them,  or  one  of  their  relatives.  And  after- 
wards they  shall  baptise  the  grown-up  men.  And  after- 
wards all   the   women  shall  loose  their  hair ;  and  they 

50  shall  be  forbidden  to  wear  their  ornaments  and  their 
gold,  when  they  are  baptised,  and  none  of  them  shall  go 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  153 

down  having  anything  alien  with  them  into  the  water. 
And  whenever  they  baptise,  the  bishop  shall  give  thanks 
over   the   oil   which   is   in   a   vessel,   and   it   is   named 
mystic   oil ;  and   he   shall   take   other  oil   and  exorcise 
Satan  in  it,  and  it  is  named  oil  which  has  been  exorcised   5 
from  every  unclean  spirit.     And  there  shall  be  a  deacon 
who  will  carry  the  oil  in  which  (Satan)  was  exorcised,^  and 
he  shall  stand  on  the  left  of  the  presbyter ;  and  another 
deacon  shall  take  the  mystic  oil,  and  shall  stand  on  his 
right     And  let  the  presbyter,  having  taken  every  one  of  10 
those  who  shall  be  baptised,  bid  them  renounce  and  say : 
I  renounce  thee,  Satan,  and  all  thine  angels  and  all  thine 
unclean  works.     And  when  he  has  professed  this,  he  shall 
anoint  him  with  the  oil  which  he  made  pure  from  all  evil,    . 
saying :  All  unclean  spirits  shall  depart  from  him.     Thus  15 
he  shall  deliver  to  the  bishop  him  who  shall  be  baptised, 
naked,  or  to  the  presbyter — to  him  who  stands  at  the  . 
water  of  baptism.     Let  the  deacon  go  down  with  him  to 
the  water,  and  he  shall  say  and  instruct  him  :  I  believe  in 
one  God,  the  Father  almighty,  and  in  his  only  Son,  our  ao 
Lord  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  Holy  Spirit, 
giver  of  life  to  all  creation,  the  Trinity  equal  in  Godhead, 
one   Lord,  and   one   Kingdom  and  one  Faith  and  one 
Baptism,  in  the  holy  Church  Catholic,  and  life  eternal 
Amen.     And  he  who  shall  be  baptised  shall  also  say  25 
again  thus :  Yea,  I  believe.     And  thus  he  shall  baptise 
him   and   lay  his  hand  upon  him,  and  upon  him  who 
answers  for  him.     And  he  shall  dip  him  three  times; 
and  he  who  is  baptised  shall  make  declaration  every 

^ Reading  the  variant  oih  cde. 


154  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

single  time  that  he  is  dipped,  and  afterwards  he  shall  say 
to  him  again :  Dost  thou  believe  in  the  name  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  only  Son  of  God  the  Father, 
that  he  became  man,  in  an  incomprehensible  miracle  by 

5  the  Holy  Spirit  and  by  our  lady  Maryam,  the  virgin, 
without  seed  of  man,  and  he  was  crucified  in  the  time  of 
Pilatos  Pant^nawi :  and  he  died  by  his  own  will  for  our 
salvation,  and  rose  from  the  dead  on  the  third  day,  axkl 
released  the  captives,  and  ascended  into  the  heavens,  and 

10  sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  and  he  shall 
come  to  judge  the  living  and  the  dead  at  his  appearing 
and  his  kingdom :  and  dost  thou  believe  in  the  Holy 
Spirit,  the  good  and  the  sanctifier,  and  in  the  holy  Church  : 
and  dost  thou  believe  the  resurrection  of  the  body  which 

15  shall  happen  to  all  men,  and  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens, 
and  eternal  judgment.  And  he  who  is  baptised  shall 
answer  concerning  all  this,  saying :  Yea,  I  believe  in 
thia  And  then  when  he  has  come  up  from  the  water 
the  presbyter  shall  anoint  him  with  the  mystic  oil,  saying  : 

3o  I  anoint  thee  with  holy  oil.  And  afterwards  they  shall 
put  on  their  garments.  And  afterwards  they  shall  enter 
the  church,  and  the  bishop  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  them 
and  pray  and  say  :  God,  who  hast  made  these  worthy  of 
the  washing  of  new  birth,  and  of  the  forgiveness  of  sin, 

as  make  them  worthy  to  be  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit ; 
and  speed  forth  and  send  upon  them  the  grace  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  that  they  may  serve  thy  will.  Glory  to  the 
Father  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  holy 
Church  henceforth  unto  age  of  age.     And  afterwards  the 

30  presbyter,  having  poured  into  his  hand  the  mystic  oil, 
shall  pour  on  the  head  of  them   all,  saying  :    I  anoint 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  1 55 

thee  with  holy   oil   in  the  name  of  God   the   Father 
almighty  and  in  Christ  Jesus  his  only  Son  and  the  Holy 
Spirit.     And  having  sealed  all  in  their  forehead,  he  shall 
kiss  them,  and  say :  The  Lord  (be)  with  you  all.     And 
he  who  was  signed  shall  answer  again,  and  say :  With    s 
thy    spirit.      And    after    this,    when     everything    has 
been  finished,  let  them  pray  with  all  the  people:   and 
they   shall   not   before  pray   with   the   fiiU    {lit.   elder) 
Christians,  but  only  after  they  have  done  the  thing  which 
we  say.     And  after  they  have  finished  praying  they  shall  lo 
g^ve  the  salutation  one  to  another  with   their  mouths. 
And  the  deacons  shall  bring  the  Oblation  to  the  bishop, 
and  he  shall  give  thanks  over  the  bread  and  the  cup ; 
and  the  bread  that  it  may  become  the  Body  of  our  Lord 
Christ,  and  the  cup,  the  wine  mixed,  that  it  may  become  15 
the  Blood  of  our  Lord  Christ,  this  which  was  shed  for  us 
and  for  all  of  us  indeed  who  believe  in  him.     And  the 
milk  and  honey  (shall  be)  mingled  together,  and  he  shall 
make  them  drink  of  them,  because  of  the  fulfilment  of 
the  promise  which  he  promised  to  our  fathers,  saying :  I  20 
will  give  to  you  the  land  which  floweth  with  milk  and 
honey :  this  is  the  Body  of  our  Lord  Christ  which  he 
gave   to   us   who   believe   in   him,    like  food  of  young 
children,  who  were  begotten  of  him,  those  who  believe 
in   him,   that    he   may   make   every   bitter  heart  sweet  as 
by  the  sweetness  of  his  word.     All  this  the  bishop  shall 
go  through  to  those  who  are  baptised.     And  the  water 
also  of  the  Oblation  he  shall  show  in  ^  the  bread  like  the 
inward  part  of  man,  who  *  is  soul  as  well  as  body.     And 

^  *  In '  and  '  who '  are  the  readings  of  b  and  c  respectively. 


156  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

all  this  explanation  is  what  the  bishop  shall  give  to  all 
who  are  baptised.  And  the  bishop  therefore  having 
broken  the  bread  of  life,  shall  give  a  piece  of  it  to  each 
one  and  say :  This  is  heavenly  bread,  the  Body  of  our 
S  Lord  Christ  And  he  who  receives  shall  answer  and 
say :  Amen.  And  if  there  are  not  sufficient  presbyters 
the  deacons  shall  take  the  cups  and  stand  in  order ;  the 
first  he  who  has  the  honey,  and  the  second  he  who  has 
the  milk :  and  he  who  administers  shall  say :  God,  the 

10  Father  almighty:  and  the  third  he  who  has  the  wine. 
He  who  administers  shall  say  :  This  is  the  Blood  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  he  who  receives  shall  say : 
Amen  and  Amen.  And  when  he  receives  the  Body  he 
shall  say  :  Amen  ;  and  at  the  Blood  he  shall  say :  Amen 

15  and  Amen  :  a  trinity  this  is  therefore  that  it  shall  be.  And 
each  one  (of  them)  shall  be  careful  to  do  good  works 
which  please  God,  living  in  the  right  way  and  united 
to  the  Church,  performing  this  instruction,  and  pro- 
gressing in  the  service  of  God.     This  we  have  taught 

20  you  to  be  said  openly  concerning  Baptism  and  the 
ordinance  of  the  Oblation  ;  and  behold,  we  have  finished 
the  instruction  which  we  give  to  you  concerning  the 
resurrection  of  the  body,  and  the  rest  as  it  was  written. 
And  if  there  is  anything  else  which  is  right  to  be  told, 

as  then  the  bishop  shall  tell  it  and  give  it  to  those  who 
are  communicated.  And  they  shall  accept  (it),  and  none 
shall  know  it  except  the  believers,  but  only  after  they 
have  communicated.  And  they  shall  first  receive  this 
holy  blessing,^  which  Yuhanes  speaks  of  that  there  was 

^  Comipt  reading  of  the  unpointed  Arabic,  which  really  reads  *  ticket,' 
referring  to  Revelation  ii.  17. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  1 57 

written  upon  it  a  new  name  (which)  no  one  knows  except 
him  who  receives  the  blessing.^  And  on  the  sabbath 
and  on  the  first  day  of  the  week  if  it  be  possible  the 
bishop  himself  with  his  own  hand  shall  deliver  to  all  the 
people  while  the  deacons  break  the  bread.  And  the  5 
presbyters  also  shall  break  the  delivered  bread.  And 
whenever  the  deacon  approaches  the  presbyter,  he  shall 
hold  out  his  robe,  and  the  presbyter  himself  shall  take  (the 
bread)  and  deliver  to  the  people  with  his  hand.  And  on 
other  days  they  shall  give  (it)  according  to  the  com-  10 
mandment  of  the  bishop. 

Statute  36.  Concerning  Widows  and  Virgins,  and  at 
what  time  the  bishop  should  fast.  And  they  shall  do  as 
we  have  often  said.  The  widows  and  virgins  shall  fast,  15 
and  pray  in  the  church.  And  the  presbyters  and  the 
deacons  shall  fast  at  any  time  they  will.  And  likewise 
shall  the  people  fast.  And  the  bishop  ought  not  to  fast, 
except  at  the  time  when  all  the  people  fast ;  because  if 
they  bring  that  which  is  proper  to  bring  into  the  church,  20 
and  no  (one)  can  be  refused ;  and  (the  man)  having 
broken  his  own  bread,  he  shall  taste  and  eat  with  the 
other  believers  who  are  with  him  ;  and  they  shall  receive 
from  the  hand  of  the  bishop  a  piece  of  delivered  bread 
before  they  partake.  It  is  Eulogia  (awlogiya) — everyone  25 
shall  receive  the  bread  which  has  been  offered.  For  this 
is  bread  of  blessing,  and  not  the  Oblation  as  the  'Body 
of  our  Lord  Christ. 

Statute  37.  Concerning  the  time  at  which  it  is  seemly  ^ 

^  See  note  on  p.  30. 


158  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

to  eat  It  is  not  proper  for  the  catechumens  to  eat  with 
the  believers.  Before  any  taste  and  drink  anything 
whatsoever,  it  is  proper  for  them  to  take  the  cup  and  give 
thanks  over  it,  and  (then)  drink  and  eat,  for  (then)  they 

5  are  pure.  To  the  catechumens  let  them  give  the  bread 
of  blessing  and  the  cup.  The  commandment  concerning 
the  impropriety  of  the  catechumens  eating  with  the 
believers,  and  of  the  catechumens  sitting  down  with  the 
believers  at  the  table  of  the  Lord.     And  it  is  right  for 

lo  him  who  eats  to  remember  him  who  invited  him  and 
gave  him  all  the  food,  every  time  that  he  eats ;  for  this 
cause  he  asked  them  to  come  into  his  house :  for  this 
cause  it  is  seemly  that  they  should  eat  with  caution  (lit. 
fear)  and  moderation  what  is  sufficient  and  not  be  drunken. 

15  And  they  shall  eat  and  drink  with  regularity  and  not 
drink  until  they  are  drunken  ;  that  men  may  not  deride 
them  ;  and  that  he  who  invited  them  be  not  pained 
because  of  their  folly.  But  rather  shall  they  pray  that 
the  holy  ones  may  enter  the  house.     For  he  said :  Ye 

20  are  the  salt  of  the  earth.     Behold,  he  gave  to  you  the  last 

of  them  all  with  him,  that  ye  might  take  from  him  your 

portions :    but  eat    with    moderation    and    drink    with 

moderation,  that  there  may  be  some  left ;  and  that  that 

.  which  is  left  from  you  may  be  sent  by  him  who  invited 

25  you  to  whom  he  will ;  and  he  shall  say  that  this  meat 
and  this  drink  are  the  leavings  of  the  holy  ones.  And 
they  shall  rejoice  at  your  going  to  them  ;  and  they  shall 
eat  what  ye  leave,  and  he  shall  say  this  meat  is  the 
leavings  of  the  holy  ones.     And   they  shall  rejoice   at 

30  your  coming  as  they  eat :  and  further,  those  who  are 
invited  shall  eat  without  conversing,  but  when  the  bishop 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  159 

allows,  they  shall  speak,  and  ask  what  is  suitable,  and 

they  shall  answer.     And  when  (one)  has  finished  saying 

all  the  things  which  are  suitable  which  he  wished  to  ask, 

then  again  they  shall  be  silent  with  modesty,  until  the 

bishop  again  asks  them  at  the  supper.     If  the  believers    5 

shall  be  without  the  bishop  at  the  supper,  either  from  the 

presbyter   or   the  deacon   they  shall   take   the  Eulog^a 

with  the  hand.      And   likewise   the   catechumens  shall 

receive  a  piece  of  the  mystic  bread.     And  if  there  are 

any  laity  among  them,  they  shall  eat  in  silence :  and  the  lo 

laity  are  not  allowed  to  make  the  Eulogia.     And  having 

gfiven  thanks,  every  one  shall  eat  in  the  name  of  the 

Lord  and  drink  with  moderation,  having  called  upon  the 

name  of  God.     Because  thus  is  it  due  to  God,  that  we 

should  be  zealots  among  the  peoples,  all  of  us  equal  and  15 

quiet  and  pure  and  without  fault     For  God  the  Father 

rejoices  in  his  work,  and  we  indeed  (are)  his  work,  if  we 

are  pure. 

Concerning  the  gift  to  the  sick.     The  deacon  in  time 

of  adversity   shall    give   the   sealing   to   the  sick  with  ao 

diligence.     If  there  is  no  presbyter  to  give  that  which 

was  distributed,  as  much  as  ought  to  be  received,  (the 

deacon)  shall  give  thanks  and  shall  take  count  there  of 

them  who  take  (it)  away,  that  they  minister  with  care 

and  give  the  Eulogia.     If  there  is  any  who  takes  it  away,  25 

let  them  bear  it  to  widows  and  the  sick. 

Concerning  the  bringing  in  of  lamps  at  the  supper  of 

the  congregation.     When  the   evening   has   come,   the 

bishop  being  there,  the  deacon  shall  bring  in  a  lamp, 

and  standing  in  the  midst  of  all  the  Faithful,  being  about  30 

to  give  thanks,  the  bishop  shall  first  give  the  salutation, 

II 


!>- 


l6o  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


thus  saying:  The    Lord  (be)  with   you   all.     And   the 
people  also  shall  say  :  With  thy  spirit.     And  the  bishop 
shall  say  :  Let  us  give  thanks  to  the  Lord.     And  the 
people  shall  say:  Right  and  just,   both   greatness  and 
5  exaltation  with  glory  are  due  to  him.     And  they  shall 
not   say:    Lift  up   your  hearts,   because  that  shall   be 
said  at  the  time  of  the  Oblation.     And  he  prays  thus, 
saying:  We  give  thee  thanks,  God,  through  thy  Son 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  because  thou  hast  enlightened  us 
10  by  revealing  the  incorruptible  light,  we  having  therefore 
finished  the  length  of  a  day  and  having  come  to  the 
beginning  of  the  night,  and  having  been  satiated  with 
the  light  of  the  day  which  thou  hast  created  for  our 
satisfaction,  and  now  since  we  have  not  been  deficient 
15  of  the  light  of  the  evening  by  thy  grace,  we  sanctify 
thee  and  we  glorify  thee   through  thine  only  Son   our 
Lord   Jesus   Christ,   through   whom  to   thee  with   him 
(be)  glory  and  might  and  honour  with  the  Holy  Spirit 
now,  etc.     And  they  shall  all  say  :  Amen.     And  having 
20  risen  up  therefore  after  supper,  the  children  and  virgins 
having  prayed,  they  shall   say   the  psalms :   and   after- 
wards the  deacon,  holding  the  mingled  cup  of  the  Pres- 
fora,  shall  say  the  psalm  from  that  in  which  (is)  written 
Hale   luya,    [and]  after  that   the    presbyter    has   com- 
as manded  :  *  And  likewise  from  those  psalms.'     And  after- 
wards the  bishop  having  offered  the  cup,  as  is  proper 
for  the  cup,  he  shall  say  the  psalm  Hale  luya ;  and  all  of 
them  as  he  recites  the  psalms  shall  say  Hale  luya,  which 
is   to   say :   We   praise   him    who   is   God   most   high : 
30  glorified  and  praised   is  he  who  founded  all  the  world 
with  one  word.     And  likewise,  the  psalm  having  been 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  l6l 


completed,  he  shall  give  thanks  over  the  cup,  and  shall 
give  of  the  fragments  to  all  the  Faithful.  And  as  they 
are  eating  their  supper  the  believers  shall  take  a  little 
bread  from  the  hand  of  the  bishop  before  they  partake 
of  their  own  bread,  for  it  is  Eulogia  and  not  Eucharist  5 
as  of  our  Lord. 

Statute  38.  And  when  the  bishop   speaks  let  every 
one  be  silent     And  if  the  bishop  is  not  present  they 
shall  receive  the  bread  of  blessing  from  the  presbyter  or  10 
from  the  deacon.     And  when  the  bishop  speaks  let  all 
be  silent,  nor  shall  one  answer  another  a  word,  for  the 
bishop  shall  ask  them.     And  if  (not)   the   bishop   but 
only  the  Faithful   are   present  at  the  meal,  they  shall 
take  the  Eulogia  from  the  hand  of  the  presbyter  if  he  15 
is   there,  and   if  the  presbyter  is  not  there,  they  shall 
take  from  the  hand  of  the  deacon ;  and  the  catechumens 
also  shall  take  their  portion  of  the  mystic  bread.     And 
if  there  are  laymen  only  they  shall  eat  quietly :  and  for 
the  laymen  it  is  not  proper  that  they  should  make  the  10 
Eulogia. 

Statute  39.  Concerning  the  meal  of  the  widows.  And 
if  there  is  anyone  who  desires  at  any  time  to  invite  the 
widows  and  those  who  are  aged,  he  shall  satisfy  them  25 
(with  food)  and  send  them  away  before  it  shall  be 
evening.  And  if  it  is  not  possible  because  of  the  clergy 
who  have  been  invited,  he  shall  give  to  them  food 
and  wine,  and  having  given  then  send  them  away 
immediately,  and  each  of  them  shall  do  as  they  wish  30 
(with  it)  in  their  houses. 


l62  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

Statute  40.  Concerning  the  ordinance  of  the  gift 
which  is  of  the  Apostles,  according  to  the  orthodox 
statement  (Jit.  word).  We  have  written  concerning 
graces  so  far  as  God  our  Lord  has  granted  to  us  of  his 

5  own  counsel.  Formerly  he  gave  grace  {lit  it)  to  man, 
while  bringing  near  to  him  that  which  had  gone  astray 
in  type ;  and  now  (he  gave)  the  beloved  Son  who  is  in 
all  the  holy  ones.  Having  come  to  the  source  of  the 
proper  tradition  in  the  churches,  we  have  attained  that 

10  (men)  should  learn  well  what  has  been  (received)  until 
now ;  they  handed  them  on  and  kept  them  as  our  ordin- 
ances :  yet,  though  they  knew  that  they  were  quite  firm 
concerning  that  which  had  been  found  for  them,  now 
unawares   they  slipped   away.     And   those  indeed  who 

15  knew  not,  (to  them)  the  Holy  Spirit  is  giving  the 
perfection  of  grace.  For  them  who  believe  rightly  as 
they  know,  how  seemly  it  is  that  they  should  hand  on 
and  keep  those  things  which  are  established  in  the 
Church.     Concerning  the  ordinance  of  baptism.     Those 

20  who  shall  be  baptised  shall  do  thus  {lit.  thus  it  is).^ 
They  shall  come  into  the  baptistery,  and  they  shall  give 
their  names.  And  then  first  they  shall  examine  their 
lives  as  to  whether  they  are  fit  for  baptism,  and  if  they 
read  the  Scriptures,  and  also  if  they  have  learnt  the 

3$  psalm.  And  likewise  there  shall  be  sponsors  for  him  who 
shall  be  baptised,  and  thus  he  who  is  sponsor  shall  know 
that  he  shall  give  account  at  the  day  of  judgment  for 
it  And  they  shall  cause  therefore  *  the  prayer  to  follow 
after  the  examination,  saying  thus:   [The  prayer  con- 

^  Or  *  Those,  etc.,  shall  come  as  it  were  into  the  baptistery/ 
^  Reading  the  variant  oib  cde. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  163 

cerning  those  who  gave  their  names]  Lover  of  man  and 
merciful  author  of  blessing,  merciful  and  whose  habit  is 
goodness,  and  the  fountain  of  all  blessing,  thou  who 
madest  that  which  was  not  into  that  which  was,  with 
each  one  ^  which  was  made  thou  gavest  size  and  place :  5 
thou  art  able — remove  it  and  take  it  away.  Now,  Lord, 
take  away  and  remove  this  thy  servant  from  wickedness 
into  goodness.  Grant  that  he  may  inherit  the  blessed  * 
sonship  which  is  in  the  heavens,  that  he  may  then  no 
longer  be  one  born  of  flesh,  but  may  abide  truly  in  thine  10 
obedience:  through  thy  only  Son  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
through  whom  to  thee  with  him  and  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  (be)  glory  and  might  now,  etc. 

The  prayer  for  those  who  gave  their  names.  And 
again  we  beseech  God  the  almighty,  the  Father  of  the  15 
Lord  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  for  those  who  gave 
their  names,  that  he  may  open  the  ear  of  their  heart 
and  enlighten  the  eyes  of  their  mind,  and  give  to  them 
the  light  of  knowledge,  he  who  has  authority  over 
mercy,  the  Lord  our  God  ao 

And  the  deacon   shall  say :  Pray  ye   for  those  who 
gave  their  names. 

And  the  bishop  shall  say :  God  the  almighty,  thou  who 
calledst  thy  servants,  who  gave  their  names,  from  dark- 
ness into  light,  and  from  ignorance  into  the  knowledge  25 
of  the  truth :  blot  out  all  the  vestige  of  error  from 
their  thought;  place  thy  law  and  thy  commandment 
within  their  heart :  and  give  to  them  knowledge  which 
is  seemly,  impart  to  them,  both  men  and  women,  the 

^  Reading  the  variant  of  </  r.  ^  Zf /.  *  as  a  blessing.' 


l64  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


washing  of  regeneration  for  the  forgiveness  of  sin  ;  make 
them  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  through  our  Lord 
Christ,  through  whom  to  thee  with  him  and  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  (be)  glory  and  might  now,  etc. 
5  The  prayer  of  consecration  for  those  who  bring  the 
bread  and  water  or  oil  to  be  blessed  in  the  holy  forty 
(days),  after  the  examination  of  those  who  are  to  be 
baptised.  God,  my  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  lover  of  man, 
who  alone  hast  made  oblation.^     And  thou  knowest  and 

lo  to  them  indeed  who  are  able  thou  speakest  the  great- 
ness of  the  honour  of  the  Father  and  of  thy  creation. 
Thou,  the  Mediator,  the  Chief  Priest  for  every  soul,  and 
the  healing  for  those  who  are  suffering.  Thou  whose 
name   is  sanctified   by  the   holy   ones,  may  the   power 

15  which  enlightens  thy  name  lighten  upon  the  oil  and 
water  and  bread,  and  make  them  to  become  safety  and 
healing  and  purification  for  those  who  offered  in  faith, 
for  thy  name  is  restoration  to  us,  and  redemption,  revela- 
tion, and  sanctification.     And  to  thee  be  glory  and  to 

ao  thy  holy  Father  now,  etc. 

And  he  who  comes  to  baptism  shall  learn  the  com- 
mandment as  he  receives  (baptism) :  how  seemly  it  is 
that  he  live  carefully,  as  he  to  whom  will  be  imparted 
the    holy   atonement    of   grace   by   eating.      At    early 

25  morning  the  bread  and  water  shall  be  blessed,  and  he 
shall  be  anointed  with  the  oil,  until  (the  time)  when  shall 
be  imparted  that  holy  grace  of  baptism.  When  therefore 
he  will  come  to  baptism,  he  who  will  baptise  him  shall 
take  him,  and  having  turned  him  then  to  the  west,  with 


^  Reading  the  variant  oibcde. 


A 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  1 65 


his  right  hand  or  both  his  hands  outstretched,  and  his 
face  opposite  towards  the  east  without  fear — -'and  if  he 
was  a  full-grown  man  he  shall  speak :  but  for  the 
children  who  cannot  speak,  and  if  it  was  a  weak  person, 
the  believing  father  and  believing  mother  shall  speak,  s 
or  relatives  likewise  (being)  believing  men  and  believing 
women.  And  he  shall  anathematise,  being  naked,  in  the 
water  without  fear,  saying  thus  : 

[The  first  prayer  for  baptism,  over  the  water]  God, 
my  Lord  almighty,  who  madest  heaven  and  earth  and  lo 
sea  and  all  that  is  in  them,  who  madest  man  in  thine  own 
form  and  likeness,  who  mingledst  and  unitedst  the  im- 
mortal with  the  mortal,  who  madest  living  man  a  com- 
bination of  the  two,  and  gavest  to  that  which  was  made 
body  a  soul  also,  which  thou  causest  to  dwell  within :  iS 
stir  this  water  and  fill  it  up  with  thy  Holy  Spirit,  that  it 
may  become  water  and  Spirit  for  regeneration  to  those 
who  are  to  be  baptised :  work  a  holy  work  and  make 
them  to  become  sons  and  daughters  of  thy  holy  name : 
wash  them  with  water,  and  instruct  them  by  the  Holy  ao 
Spirit,  through  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Christ  thy  Son, 
through  whom  to  thee  with  him  be  glory  and  might 
now  and  always  and  with  the  Holy  Spirit  for  ever 
and  ever.     Amen. 

The  prayer  of  the  consecration  of  the  water.     Eternal  iS 
God,  who  knowest  what  is  secret,  we  pray  and  beseech 
thee,  send  thy  Holy  Spirit  and  his  power  upon  this  water 
and  change  it  and  sanctify  it  and  bless  it  and  set  it  against., 
all  that  opposes,  cause  it  to  be  against  all  divination  and 
potions,  both  those  which  are  drunk,  and  those  which  are  50 
sprinkled,  or  (used)  in  any  other  way ;  cause  it  to  be  for 


1 66  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

healing  and  for  life  to  him  who  shall  receive  of  it  in  faith, 
and  in  the  glory  of  thy  only  beloved  Son,  for  to  thee  is 
glory  and  might  with  the  Holy  Spirit  now,  etc. 

The  prayer  for  the  holy  waters  of  the  Yurdanos,  which 
5  are  mingled  with  sweet  scent.  As  the  priest  stands 
towards  the  east  with  the  proper  vestment,  and  while  the 
clergy  stand  in  their  several  orders  of  sequence,  he  shall 
say,  having  first  finished  the  ordinary  form  of  prayer :  God, 
my  Lord  almighty,  thou  madest  heaven  and  earth  and 

lo  sea  and  all  that  is  in  them  ;  and  thou  madest  man  in  thy 
form  and  in  thy  likeness ;  and  thou  placedst  him  in  the 
garden,  that  he  might  live  an  immortal  life ;  but  he,  having 
fallen  into  error  by  Satan,  the  enemy  of  our  kind,  became 
the  cause  of  death  upon  us  all :  yet  thy  goodness  did  not 

15  therefore  desert  us,  but  thou  sentest  thine  only  Son  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  into  the  world,  and  not  to  judge  the 
world,  but  to  save  the  world  by  him.  He  therefore  having 
come,  changed  our  birth  into  the  new  (birth)  which  is 
by  this  water  and  Spirit  of  regeneration.     And  for  this 

ao  cause  I  call  upon  thee,  my  Lord,  maker  of  all,  who 
mingledst  and  unitedst  mortal  with  immortal,  having 
made  living  man  a  combination  of  the  two,  giving  move- 
ment to  the  created  body,  and  soul  which  thou  causedst 
to  dwell  (in  it) :   stir  this  water  and  fill  it  up  with  that 

25  which  is  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  it  may  become  water 
and  also  Spirit  of  regeneration  to  those  who  shall  be 
baptised  in  it  Cause,  my  Lord,  that  they  may  become 
little  sons  and  daughters  of  the  holy  name ;  and  purify 
them  and  wash  them  with  water  and  instruct  them  with 

30  the  Holy  Spirit,  through  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Christ 
with  the  Holy  Spirit     May   it   be  to  all  who  shall  be 


TRANSLATIOH  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  167 


baptised  in  it  a  washing  of  regeneratioa  for  cleansing 
from  all  sin.  And  prqare  tlio%  whom  the  Holy  Spirit 
chose,  to  come  upon  them;  that  (dot hed)  with  incorinptible 
vesture  they  may  rise  at  the  resurrectioo  of  the  dead; 
and  may  every  evfl  spixit  be  removed  from  thenu  havii^  s 
been  expelled  according  to  thy  hcdy  in£dfible  promise  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,^  through  whom  to  thee  widi  him 
and  with  the  Holy  Spirit  (be)  glory  and  might  and  great- 
ness from  before  the  age  now  and  always  and  to  geneia* 
tion  of  infinite  generation,  and  to  age  of  age.     Amen.        wo 

And  then  the  priest  shall  go  down  into  die  water  of 
the  Yurdanos,  taking  hold  o(  the  head  of  him  who  shall 
be  baptised,  and  saying  to  him :  I  baptise  thee  in  die 
name  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  and  die  Holy  Spirit, 
and  at  each  of  the  names  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  he  15 
who  is  baptised  also  saying  Amen.  And  then  having 
come  up  from  the  water,  they  who  promise  for  him 
shall  receive  him,  and  he  uriio  was  b^ytised  shall  find 
then  a  dean  linen  doth,  that  with  it  the  water  may 
be  wiped  off,  and  that  he  may  be  kept  with  great  ao 
care.  And  if  he  who  shall  be  baptised  is  weak,  he 
shall  stand  up  naked  in  the  eariy  morning  as  soon  as 
one  can  see,  and  thus  he  who  b^ises  shall  pour  water 
upon  his  head,  saying :  I  baptise  thee  in  the  name  of 
the  Father  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Sfnrit,  and  at  25 
each  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity  he  pours  forth  once, 
and  not  afterwards  as  to  alL'  And  after  they  have 
clothed  him  with  the  baptismal  (robe),  the  Chief  Priest 
shall  make  prayer  for  the  men,  and  if  not,  the  priest 

^  Reading  the  yamntoidcde.  '  Reading  the  variant  of  d. 


r. 


l68  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

before  the  unction  with  the  chrism  of  him  who  was  thus 
sanctified. 

The  prayer  of  the  holy  oil  of  chrism  with  which  the 
catechumens  {lit.  new  ones)  are  anointed,  and  for  full 
5  Christians  who  are  sick.^  God,  my  Lord  almighty,  the 
Father  of  our  Lord  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ, 
stretch  out  thy  hand  invisible  upon  the  fruit  of  this 
olive  with  which  thou  anointedst  the  Priests  and 
Prophets  ;   and  thou  hast  given  power  to  it  with  thine 

lo  own  hand,  that  for  those  who  shall  be  anointed  there- 
with, it  may  be  for  healing  and  safety  and  benefit  in  all 
diseases  and  sicknesses,  and  for  extermination  of  every 
Satanic  adversary ;  make  an  unction  by  thine  own 
grace,  really  for  them  to  whom  it  is  given,  the  Holy 

15  Spirit,  through  the  name  and  through  the  power  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  through  whom  to  thee  with  him 
and  with  the  Holy  Spirit  (be)  glory  and  might  now, 
etc.  And  breathe  on  his  face  thrice. 

The  prayer  of  the  holy  oil   for  anointing  him  who 

30  is  to  be  baptised.  God,  my  Lord  almighty,  God  of 
hosts  [lit.  powers),  we  call  upon  thy  great  name  and 
powerful  in  all  things  and  the  Holy  Spirit  and  thy 
universal  name.  We  pray  thee  and  we  beseech  thee  to 
send  upon  this  oil  spirit  and  power,  and  cause   it   to 

25  become  a  breastplate  of  the  faith  against  all  work  of 
Satan,  and  make  (it)  for  the  perfection  of  all  piety  and 
knowledge,  through,  etc. 

The  prayer  of  the  holy  oil  for  unction  with  the  chrism 
of  those   who  are   baptised.      Thus   in   giving  thanks 

^  This  must  be  the  rubric  for  another  prayer  as  in  h. 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  169 


shall  the  bishop  speak  and  say  :  The  Lord  (be)  with  you 
all.  And  the  people  who  stand  by  shall  say :  With 
thy  spirit.  And  the  bishop  shall  say  :  Lift  up  your 
hearts.  And  they  who  stand  by  shall  say  :  (We  have 
them)  with  the  Lord  our  God.  And  the  bishop  shall  5 
say :  Let  us  give  thanks  to  the  Lord.  And  those  shall 
say:  Right  and  just,  it  is  meet  And  then  the  Chief 
Priest,  to  whom  alone  it  belongs  to  consecrate  the 
chrism,  having  taken  it,  standing  rightly,  shall  offer 
up  the  prayer  and  shall  complete  the  invocation  of  the  "> 
coming  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  say  thus :  Right  it 
is  and  just.  We  praise  thee  and  glorify  thee  and 
confess  thee  and  worship  thee  and  give  thanks  to  thee 
for  all  the  mercy  which  thou  hast  done  for  us  and  all 
thy  benefit :  when  the  world  was  gone  astray  thou  savedst  J 5 
(it),  having  sent  thine  only  Son,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
not  to  judge  the  world,  but  to  save  the  world,  and 
gather  together  our  dispersion,  that  we  may  assemble, 
and  confess  thee  the  one  true  God  who  sentest  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  through  whom  we  offer  this  chrism  «> 
which  thou  hast  g^ven  to  us  for  healing  and  for  using 
in  other  necessities,  that  thou  wilt  be  willing  and 
wilt  send  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  it,  through  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ ;  and  that  it  may  become  an  unction  of 
holiness  and  seal  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  every  person  25 
of  those  who  receive  the  washing  of  regeneration  and 
forgiveness,  as  far  as  thou  hast  given  to  them  :  and  may 
it  be  to  them  redemption  and  sure  grace  and  a  holy  seal 
of  unction  and  communion  of  their  nature  with  the  Holy 
Spirit ;  and  cause  that  they  may  be  named  (his)  temple,  30 
through  the  name  of  our  Lord  and  our  Saviour  Jesus 


I70  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


Christ,  through  whom  to  thee  with  him  and  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  (be)  glory  and  might  from  before  the  age 
and  unto  the  age,  now,  etc. 

The  prayer  of  the  holy  oil,  the   oil  with   which  he 

5  who  is  baptised  is  to  be  anointed  on  the  place  of 
anointing.  My  Lord,  almighty,  who  wast  to  the 
Prophets  God,  and  to  the  Apostles  God,  the  Father  of 
our  Lord  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  who  from  the 
beginning  by  the   Prophets  preachedst  the  coming  of 

10  our  Lord  Christ,  who  sentest  Yuhanes  ,the  Prophet 
before  his  coming,  give  power  to  this  holy  oil  and 
bless  it  for  baptism,  may  it  sanctify  thy  servants  and 
handmaids  and  prepare  them  {lU.  him)  for  thee,  while 
they  {lit.  he)  call  upon  thee ;   and  cause  it  to  destroy 

15  all  poison  and  expel  every  evil  and  unclean  spirit,  and 
may  all  unclean  lust  remove  away  by  this  unction, 
through  the  name  of  thy  only  Son  ;  and  may  it  be 
sanctified  by  thine  own  grace,  and  be  to  all  who  are 
baptised    oil    of   healing    and    safety    and    power    for 

ao  planting  the  good  olive  tree  and  for  (bearing)  fruit 
toward  thee  and  to  Christ,  through  the  Holy  Spirit, 
by  the  faith  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  and  our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  through  whom  to  thee  with  him 
and  with,  etc. 

as  And  breathe  into  the  oil  thrice.  And  with  it  he  shall 
anoint  him  who  is  baptised  on  his  breast  and  on  his 
shoulders  and  all  his  body,  saying :  The  oil  of  holy 
unction  against  every  adversary,  operate  for  grafting 
into    thine    own    good    olive    tree,    the    Church,    and 

30  work  blessing.  And  he  shall  answer  and  say  :  Amen. 
And  if  it  is  a  man  (this  is  done)  by  him  who  ministers. 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  171 


or  by  the  priest  who  is  there ;   or  (if)  a  woman,  by  a 
female  believer  who  is  perpetually  virgin. 

Further  (the  prayer)  for  the  laying  hand  upon  the 
catechumens.  God  the  almighty,  the  Father  of  the  Lord 
and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  to  thee  have  humbled  5 
their  heads  thy  servants  the  catechumens,  and  to  thee 
they  have  subdued  the  hardness  of  heart  and  flesh,  look 
down  from  thy  worthy  dwelling-place,  bless  them,  male 
and  female,  and  may  thine  ear  hearken  to  them  and 
hear  their  prayer.  Give  them  to  know  the  power  of  the  10 
word  with  which  they  are  instructed  as  a  sure  utterance ; 
and  in  due  time  impart  to  them,  male  and  female,  the 
washing  of  regeneration  for  the  forgiveness  of  sin  ;  make 
them  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Spirit  through  Christ : 
for  to  thee  is  glory  and  power  and  might,  now,  etc  15 

Concerning  the  oil  of  chrism  for  those  who 
are  baptised.  The  bishop  shall  speak  thus  in  giving 
thanks  after  the  several  bishops  and  presbyters  and 
deacons  are  ready.  The  Chief  Priest  being  present 
shall  celebrate,  saying :  The  Lord  (be)  with  you  alL  30 
They  who  stand  by  shall  say :  With  thy  spirit  And 
the  bishop  shall  say :  Lift  up  your  hearts.  They  who 
are  present  shall  say  :  We  have  (them)  with  the  Lord 
our  God.  And  the  bishop  shall  say :  Let  us  give 
thanks  to  the  Lord.  And  they  who  are  present  shall  25 
say  :  Right  and  just,  it  is  meet 

And   then    the  Chief  Priest,  to   whom  alone   it   be- 
longs to  consecrate   the   chrism,  having   taken   it,  and 
standing   in  front  carefully,  shall    offer  up   the  prayer 
and   say   the   invocation   of  the   coming  of  the    Holy  30 
Spirit,  [the  bishop]  thus  saying:   Right  it  is  and  just 


172  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

We  praise  thee  and  glorify  thee  and  confess  thee 
and  give  thanks  to  thee  in  all  that  thou  hast  done 
to  us — blessings  and  all  thy  benefit :  for  thou  savedst 
the  lost  world,  thou  sentest  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ  our 
5  Lord,  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  to  save  the  world  by 
him,  and  he  gathered  together  our  dispersion ;  and  we 
know  that  thou  alone  art  the  true  Lord  who  sentest 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  through  whom  we  offer  to  thee 
this   chrism,    which    thou    hast    given    us   for    healing 

lo  and  using  in  other  necessities,  that  thou  wouldst  be 
willing  to  send  thy  Holy  Spirit  upon  it,  through  our 
Lord  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  and  may  it  become 
an  unction  of  holiness  and  seal  of  the  Holy  Spirit  for 
those   who   shall   receive    of    it,   and    the   washing    of 

15  regeneration  to  them  to  whom  was  given  redemption  and 
sure  grace ;  may  it  seal  them  with  the  seal  of  unction 
and  washing  of  their  nature ;  cause  that  they  may  be 
named  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  through  the  name 
of  our   Lord   and   our   Saviour  Jesus   Christ,    through 

20  whom,  etc. 

And  breathe  thrice  into  his  face,  and  then  anoint 
him  with  the  holy  chrism  on  his  forehead  and  breast, 
saying  to  each :  I  give  to  thee  the  holy  unction  and 
the  seal  of  grace   of  the  Holy  Spirit.      And   he   who 

25  is  sealed  shall  say :  Amen.  If  it  is  a  presbyter 
who  baptises,  let  him  take  the  chrism  from  the 
bishop,  and  anoint  them  after  they  have  put  on  the 
baptismal  (robe);  and  then  he  proceeds  to  pray,  and 
having  finished  the  prayer  of  the  holy  oil,  they  cause 

30  three  little  children  to  come  near  to  him,  and  their 
elders  likewise,  and   having  turned   them   towards   the 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  1 73 


west,  first  they  shall  anathematise  Satan,  saying  thus : 
I  anathematise  thee,  Satan,  and  all  thy  wicked   angels 
and  all  thy  work  and  all  thy  errors  and  all  thy  orders. 
And  then  turning  himself  again  towards  the  east   and 
stretching  out  his  hands,  he  confesses  God,  saying :    I    5 
believe  in  one  God,  the  Father  above  all,  almighty,  and 
in   the   only  Son,  our   Lord   Jesus   Christ,  and   in  the 
Holy  Spirit,  and  in  the  resurrection  of  the  body,  and  in 
the  holy  assembly,  the  one  Catholic  Church.     And  then 
he  shall   say   thrice :    Amen.     And   he  shall   say   thus  w 
stretching  out  his  hands  and  humbling  his  head  in  fear, 
saying  as  he  hears  from  him  who  baptises  him  thus,  this  . 
faith  in  the  Trinity :  I  believe  in  thee,  the  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  in  thine  only  Son  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord  and  our  Saviour,  and  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  in  the  i5 
resurrection  of  the  body,  and   the   holy,  one.  Catholic, 
Apostolic  Church.    And  they  shall  ask  him  thrice,  saying  : 
Dost  thou  believe  ?    And  thrice  he  shall  say  :    I  believe, 
I  believe,  I  believe.     And  if  it  was  a  man  fully  grown 
he  shall  speak :  and  concerning  children  who  have   no  *> 
word  or  a  dumb  person  or  sick,  the  believing  father  and 
believing  mother,   or   relatives   knowing  (them),   being 
likewise  believers,  shall  speak  instead  of  that  child  or 
instead  of  him  who  has  no  word  or  instead  of  the  sick, 
saying  each  of  their  names.     And  after  the  confession  of  25 
faith  he  says  thus  : 

(The  prayer)  of  the  laying  on  of  hand.     My  Lord 
almighty,  the  Father  of  our  Lord  and  our  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ,    to   whom    thy  servants    and    handmaids    have 
humbled   themselves ;   and   to   thee  they  have  subdued  30 
the  hardness  of  heart  and  flesh,  look  down  from  the 


174  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

heaven  thy  sanctuary,  stretch  out  thine  invisible  hand 
upon  them.  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  who  through 
thine  only  Son  hast  made  known  knowledge  of  thee  in  the 
earth,  and  hast  prepared  for  them  with  a  heavenly  calling. 
5  Confirm  these  persons,  that  they  may  obtain  thy  power, 
and  confirm  their  faith,  that  nothing  shall  ever  separate 
them  (from  it),  but  let  them  be  united  in  thine  only 
Word,  through  whom  to  thee  (be)  glory  and  might  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  now,  etc. 

lo  And  breathe  thrice.  And  thus  shall  they  be  anointed 
with  the  holy  oil  on  the  place  of  unction,  anoint  his 
heart  and  his  breast  and  on  his  back  and  on  all 
his  body,  saying  thus :  May  the  unction  of  holy  oil 
operate  against  every  adversary  and   for   the  planting 

15  firmly  of  the  faith  in  the  good  olive  tree,  the  Catholic 
Church,  and  do  good.  And  he  who  is  anointed  shall 
say :  Amen. 

The  prayer  after  the  unction.     Father  of  thine  only 
Son    Jesus    Christ,    the    root    which    is    not    cut    off, 

30  redeemer  of  the  sold,  cause  not  to  remain  any  trace 
of  the  old  state  in  those  who  are  converted  to  thy  faith ; 
who  are  obeying  thee.  Cause  that  they  may  be  in 
purity  of  soul,  children  of  regeneration,  those  who  share 
in    thy    grace;     and    impress    upon    them    the    living 

25  character,  through  thine  only  Son,  through  whom,  etc 
And  then  the  priest  shall  take  him  and  go  down  into 
the  Yurdanos  and  baptise  him,  and  as  he  baptises  him 
he  shall  look  toward  the  east,  (being)  in  the  proper  vest- 
ment    And  the  clergy  also  standing   in   their   orders, 

30  The  presbyter  shall  first  baptise  the  children,  and  further, 
the   Chief  Priest   being  down   in   the   Yurdanos  shall 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  1 75 


baptise,  laying  his  hand  upon  him  whom  he  baptises  and 
saying  thus :  I  baptise  thee,  N  or  M,  in  the  name  of  the 
Father  and  the  Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  And  he  who  is 
baptised  shall  say :  Amen.  And  then  after  he  has 
baptised  he  shall  go  forth  to  the  Table  as  if  for  the  $ 
Eucharist :  and  after  they  have  prepared  it  (sc.  the 
Table)  for  each,  the  bishops,  presbyters,  and  deacons 
being  present,  the  Chief  Priest  shall  sanctify  with  the 
chrism,  saying  thus : 

The  prayer  of  blessing  and  of  laying  hand  on  those  lo 
who    have    been    baptised,    before    the   anointing   with 
the   chrism  which   has   been   sanctified,  the   bishop   or 
the  presbyter  who  baptised  saying  thus :   Eternal  God, 
almighty.  Father  of  the   Lord  and   our  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ,  who  hast  regenerated  us  thy  servants  and  thy  15 
handmaids  by  water  and  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  wash- 
ing of  regeneration  which  thou  grantedst  to  them   for 
the  forgiveness  of  sin,  send  now  upon  them  the  Holy 
Spirit,  the  Comforter,  that  therefore  he  may  impart  to 
them  an  entering  into  thy  heavenly  kingdom,  according  ^ 
to   thy  holy  infallible   promise,  through  our  Lord   and 
our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  through  whom  with  him  and 
with  the   Holy  Spirit  be  glory  and  honour  and  might 
now,  etc. 

And  breathe  thrice,  and  then  anoint  them  with  the  25 
holy  chrism  on  the  forehead  and  on  his  breast,  saying 
to  each  one  :  The  holy  unction  and  the  seal  of  the 
grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  And  he  who  is  sealed  shall 
say :  Amen.  And  if  it  is  a  presbyter  who  baptises,  let 
him  take  the  chrism  from  the  bishop  and  anoint  them,  30 
after  they  have  been  clothed  with  the  baptismal  (robe). 


12 


176  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

And    then    (comes)  the   order    {lit.    sequence)    of    the 
Presfora.^ 

The  (prayer  of)  unction  of  oil  which  the  Chief  Priest 
consecrates  for  those  who  receive  the  washing,  and  for 
5  sick  believers.*  God,  my  Lord,  almighty,  the  Father  of 
our  Lord  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  stretch  out  thine 
invisible  hand  upon  the  fruit  of  this  olive  with  which 
thou  anointedst  the  Priests  and  the  Prophets ;  and  thou 
hast  given  power  with  thy  hand  that  it  may  become  to 

10  those  who  shall  be  anointed  with  it  for  healing  and 
benefit,  and  for  every  disease  ^nd  every  sickness. 
Destroy  every  adversary,  and  make  (it)  the  unction  of 
thy  grace  for  remission  of  sin  to  those  to  whom  has 
been   g^ven   the    Holy    Spirit,    through   the   name   and 

15  through  the  power  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  through 
whom  to  thee  with  him  and  with  the  Holy  Spirit  (be) 
glory  and  might  from  before  the  age  now,  etc. 

And  breathe  therefore  thrice.  Before  the  Presfora 
and  after  the  departure  of  the  catechumens  there  shall 

20  be  prayer  of  three  kinds,  for  peace  one,  for  the  con- 
gregation one,  and  for  the  Patriarch  (papas)  one. 

And  then  the  deacon  shall  say  with  a  loud  voice : 
Those  who  are  not  admitted  to  communion  depart 
And  none  of  the  catechumens  shall  stand  here  within. 

25  And  further,  the  subdeacon  shall  open  the  doors; 
and  further  he  shall  say ;  Those  who  are  not  admitted 
to  communion  depart.  And  then  further,  the  deacon 
shall  say  to  the  people :  Kiss  one  another  with  a  kiss 
of  holiness.     And  then  when  they  have  severally  given 

^  The  holy  communion  service.  -  This  is  a  rubric  in  b  d. 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  177 


the  salutation,  the  chief  deacon  shall  say :  Shut  the 
doors,  O  subdeacons.  This  indeed  as  it  was  said  at 
the  prayer  of  the  congregation.  And  if  the  bishop 
administers  the  baptism,  or  one  ordained,  he  shall  not 
say :  There  is  not  here  a  catechumen  who  is  not  one  5 
of  the  congregation,  nor  is  there  any  adversary  here. 

On  the  day   alone   on   which   they  receive   baptism, 
after  the  Presfora  he  shall  offer  the  cup  and  the  milk 
and   honey  with   the   bread   and  the  cup  of  wine :  and 
they  shall  bless  (them)   together,  and  those  alone  who  «o 
receive  for  the  first  (time)  shall  receive  of  it 

And  then  the  bishop  shall  say  the  thanksgiving  of 
the  milk  :  We  give  thanks  to  thee,  God,  almighty,  the 
Father  of  our  spirit,  who  hast  begotten  us  again  by 
water  and  the  Spirit  through  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  15: 
whom  thou  gavest.  He  instituted  the  holy^  washing 
(of  baptism)  for  the  forgiveness  of  sin  to  our  race. 
Because  we  are  thy  flock  which  is  in  secret,  born 
of  the  word,  and  we  are  nourished  with  the  milk  of 
nourishment  of  thy  grace  in  the  bosom  of  our  holy  ao 
mother  by  the  voice  of  the  consolations  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  And  thou,  O  Lord,  always  hast  given  to  us 
food  and  nourishment  of  thy  sons,  milking  out  the 
milk  of  life.  According  to  the  form  and  command  of 
creation  we  offer  to  thee  this  milk  and  honey  which  25 
flows  from  the  holy  Church,  our  mother,  who  caused  us 
to  grow  by  her  breasts,  which  were  sanctified  by  thee. 
O  Lord,  bless  it  with  blessing  and  sanctify  it  with  sancti- 
fying,  that  it  may  become  to  them  who  partake  of  it 

^  Reading  the  variant  of  by  etc. 


178  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

incorruptible  communion,  nourishment  and  washing ;  let 
it  be  for  instruction  ^  in  thy  fear  and  in  soberness,  and 
for  measure  of  stature,  because  thine  all  honourable 
name  has  been  glorified  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 

5  And  thou  shalt  give  of  his  Body,  and  say :  This  is 
the  Body  of  Christ.  And  he  who  receives  shall  say : 
Amen.  And  thou  shalt  give  the  cup,  and  say :  This  is 
the  Blood  of  Christ  And  he  who  receives  shall  say : 
Amen  and  Amen. 

10  And  afterwards  thou  shalt  pray  thus,  having  laid  thy 
hand  upon  their  head,  and  say :  I  bless  thee,  O  Lord, 
because  thou  hast  imparted  to  thy  servants  and  thy  hand- 
maids the  washing  of  regeneration  for  the  forgiveness  of 
sin,  (and)  that  which  is  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the 

15  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ.  We  pray  thee  and  we 
beseech  thee,  surround  thy  servants  and  thy  handmaids 
with  the  power  of  thine  Angels,  and  be  to  them  protection 
by  thy  divinity,  cause  them  to  obtain  the  heavenly  mystery, 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  through  whom,  etc. 

30      The  ordinance  of  Baptism  is  finished. 

Statute  40.  Concerning  the  fruit  which  it  is  seemly  to 
offer.  All  shall  give,  and  be  careful  to  offer  the  first 
fruits  of  the  crops  to  the  bishop,  and  he  shall  offer,  while 
25  blessing  and  naming  him  who  offers,  saying :  We  give 
thanks  to  thee,  God,  and  we  present  to  thee  the  first 
fruit  of  that  which  thou  hast  g^ven  to  us  as  good  things, 
having  been  pleased  and  by  thy  word  hast  commanded 
the  earth  to  bear  its  various  fruit,  for  satiety  of  food 

^  Variant  oib  c  de. 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  1 79 


for  men  and  all  the  animals,  that  we  may  glorify  thee, 
O  God,  in  all  the  profit  which  thou  causest  to  all  creation 
by  various  fruits,  through  thy  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord, 
through  whom  to  thee  with  him  (be)  glory,  and  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen.  5 

Concerning  the  fruits.  The  priest  shall  bless  these 
fruits:  grapes  and  figs  and  pomegranates,  and  fruit  of 
olive,  apples,  plums,  quinces,  peaches,  tamarinds,  almonds. 
And  they  shall  not  bless  Egyptian  figs  nor  garlic  nor 
onions  nor  any  kind  of  gourds  nor  any  vegetables :  nor  lo 
shall  they  offer  any  other  fruits  except  flowers  of  rose. 
And  all  which  they  shall  eat,  they  shall  eat  with  thanks- 
giving to  God,  to  whom  be  glory.  Give  thanks  to  him 
while  ye  take  the  fruits. 

Statute  41.  Concerning  that  it  is  not  fitting  for  any 
man  to  eat  during  the  fasts  of  the  Pascha  (Fasika),  ex- 
cept at  the  time  in  which  it  is  proper  to  eat.  For  the 
following  persons  the  fast  shall  not  be  reckoned,  either 
the  pregnant  or  the  sick.  They  who  cannot  fast  the  90 
two  days  shall  fast  on  the  sabbath,  for  it  is  necessary 
then  that  they  should  fast  with  bread  and  water.  And 
if  there  is  one  on  board  ship  or  one  who  by  some 
mischance  mistook  the  day;  being  aware  of  it,  after 
Pentakoste  he  shall  fast  in  compensation.  It  is  not  the  35 
Pascha  which  he  keeps,  but  a  likeness  of  it  after  it  has 
passed  by :  therefore  in  the  second  month  he  shall  not 
omit  (to  fast),  and  having  returned  from  his  journey  he 
shall  do  it  knowing  the  certainty. 

Statute  42.  Concerning  that  it  is  seemly  for  the  deacons 


l8o  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


to  wait  upon  the  bishop.  And  every  one  of  the  deacons 
with  the  subdeacons  shall  turn  to  the  bishop  and  tell 
him  concerning  the  sick,  that  he  may  visit  them,  for  if 
the  Chief  Priest  visits  the  sick  diligently  they  shall  be 
5  consoled ;  for  he  has  remembered  them. 

Statute  43.  Concerning  the  time  in  which  it  is  proper 
to  pray.  Believers  at  the  time  they  awake,  having 
risen  from  sleep,  before  they  do  any  work,  shall  wash 

10  their  hands  and  pray  to  God ;  and  after  that  they  shall 
go  to  their  work.  And  if  there  should  be  the  word  of 
instruction  delivered,  they  shall  choose  to  go  thither 
where  is  the  word  of  instruction,  that  is,  the  word  of 
God,    which    strengthens    the    soul.     And    they    shall 

15  hasten  to  go  to  the  church,  where  is  the  Spirit,  and  they 
shall  bear  fruit  there. 

Statute  44.  Concerning  that  it  is  seemly  to  receive  of 
the  Eucharist  early  at  the  time  when  they  offer  (it)  up, 
90  before  that  they  taste  anything.  All  believers  shall 
accept  the  admonition  that  they  should  receive  of  the 
Mystery  before  that  they  taste  anything.  And  if  he  who 
receives  has  faith,  then  if  one  gave  to  him  deadly  poison 
it  shall  not  hurt  him. 

Statute  45.  Concerning  that  it  is  proper  to  guard  the 
Mystery  carefully.  It  is  not  seemly  that  any  should  be 
poured  from  the  cup ;  but  everyone  shall  be  most  care- 
ful lest  any  beside  believers  receive  of  the  Mystery  ;  and 
5»  that  none  of  it  fall  or  be  thrown  away ;  because  it  is  the 
Body  of  Christ :  and  all  believers  shall  eat  of  it,  and  it  is 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  l8l 

not  proper  to  neglect  it :  [because]  it  is  not  seemly  that 
any  should  be  poured  from  the  cup  ;  because  the  cup  was 
blessed  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  thou 
shouldst  receive  of  it,  because  it  is  the  Blood  of  Christ. 
But  ye  shall  therefore  take  the  greatest  care  that  none  of  5 
it  be  poured  out  or  dropped,  lest  an  alien  spirit  lick  it  up, 
and  lest  it  should  be  that  thou  thyself  should  deny  and 
despise  the  precious  Blood  of  Christ,  with  which  he 
redeemed  thee,  and  became  to  thee  the  means  of  his 
mercy  towards  thee  :  and  thou  shalt  be  as  having  denied  10 
Christ  If  a  little  of  his  Body  has  fallen,  or  if  (any) 
has  dropped  from  the  cup,  thou  shalt  find  judgment  in 
that  thing  with  which  he  redeemed  thee. 

Statute  46.  Concerning  the  Deacons  and  Presbyters.  15 
It  is  seemly  that  they  should  assemble  every  day  with  the 
bishop  in  the  place  where  he  is,  that  he  may  command 
them  according  to  order.  And  the  deacons  and  pres- 
byters shall  not  neglect  to  assemble  with  the  bishop 
every  day,  unless  sickness  of  body  prevents  them.  And  20 
having  assembled  together  they  shall  instruct  those  who 
are  in  the  churches  ;  and  likewise  having  prayed,  they 
shall  turn  each  to  their  own  work. 

Statute  47.  Concerning  the  grave.  No  man  shall  25 
compel  by  his  command  to  bury  a  man  in  a  grave  which 
is  made  for  all  the  poor ;  but  they  shall  give  wages  to  the 
hired  man  who  digs,  and  to  him  who  guards  that  place, 
and  to  him  who  has  the  care  of  those  things.  And  the 
bishop  shall  sustain  him  with  what  they  offer  to  the  30 
churches. 


-  '  —^  — — -^-^-^ 


1 82  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


Statute  48.  Concerning  the  times  at  which  it  is  seemly 
to  pray,  and  to  hear  instruction ;  and  the  sealing  the 
forehead  with  the  sign  of  the  Cross.  All  believing  men 
and  women,  having  risen  at  dawn,  before  they  do  any 
5  work,  should  wash  their  hands  and  pray  to  God ;  and 
then  turn  to  their  works  :  and  if  they  tell  them  where  is 
the  word  of  instruction,  everyone  shall  choose  to  go 
thither  to  the  place  of  instruction :  and  he  shall  know 
this  in  his  heart,  and  consider  all  which  he  heard,  that 

10  God  speaks  by  the  mouth  of  him  who  instructs,  and  it  is 
he  who  dwells  in  the  church,  and  he  shall  cause  to  pass 
away  from  him  all  wickedness  in  the  day  ;  and  it  shall 
be  reckoned  great  loss  to  him  who  fears  God,  if  he  goes 
not  to  where  is  the  place  of  instruction,  and  especially 

15  for  him  who  can  read.  And  if  there  is  an  instructor 
he  shall  not  defer  (from  going)  to  the  church  and  the 
place  where  is  the  instruction.  Then  indeed  to  him 
who  speaks  shall  be  g^ven  the  word  which  he  speaks. 
This  is  profit  for  everyone,  (viz.)  what  he  shall  hear; 

30  and  thou  shalt  hear  that  which  thou  thought  not 
there,  and  thou  shalt  profit  by  that  which  the  Holy 
Spirit  gave  to  thee  by  h'im  who  instructs :  and  thus  thy 
faith  shall  become  firm  because  of  what  thou  hearest 
And   further,  they  shall  tell  thee  in  that  place  what  it 

35  is  proper  for  thee  to  do  in  thy  house:  and  therefore 
all  men  shall  hasten  to  go  to  the  church  and  to  the  place 
wherein  the  Holy  Spirit  rises  (like  the  sun).  And  if 
there  is  a  day  on  which  there  is  no  instruction,  every 
one   shall  stay  in  his  house,  and   shall   take  the   holy 

50  Scripture  and  read  as  well  as  he  can,  for  it  is  good 

And  if  thou  wast  in  thy  house,  pray  at  the  third  hour 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  1 83 


and  glorify  God  :  and  if  thou  wast  in  another  place,  and 
if  that  hour  has  come  to  thee,  pray  in  thy  heart  to  God ; 
because  in  that  hour  they  stripped  Jesus  Christ  and 
nailed  him  upon  the  wood  of  the  cross :  and  therefore 
the  ancient  law  commanded  to  give  the  bread  which  5 
they  offer  at  the  third  hour,  as  a  type  of  the  Body  of 
Christ  and  his  precious  Blood ;  and  they  sacrificed  the 
Iamb  which  was  a  type  of  the  perfect  Lamb,  for  Christ  is 
the  Shepherd,  and  he  is  the  Bread  which  came  down  from 
the  heavens.  And  again  pray  at  the  sixth  hour ;  for  10 

at  that  hour  was  the  hanging  of  our  Lord  Christ  upon 
the  wood  of  the  cross,  and  the  day  was  divided  and 
darkness  came :  and  they  shall  pray  at  that  hour  a  strong 
prayer  ;  and  they  shall  be  like  the  word  which  our  Lord 
Christ  prayed,  and  made  all  the  world  darkness :  and  15 
the  catechumens  shall  make  a  great  prayer.  And 

at  the  ninth  hour  they  shall  be  long  in  prayer,  and  a 
prayer  with  glorifying,  that  ye  may  join  in  glorifying 
with  the  soul  of  the  righteous  ones,  glorifying  the  living 
God  who  faileth  not,  who  remembered  his  righteous  20 
ones,  and  sent  to  them  his  Son,  that  is,  his  Word  to 
enlighten  them :  because  in  that  hour  the  side  of  Christ 
was  pierced,  and  the  blood  and  water  flowed  out :  and 
then  the  rest  of  the  day  shone  when  the  evening  came. 
And  therefore  thou  also  as  thou  makest  beginning  of  25 
another  day,  as  a  likeness  of  the  Resurrection,  pray 
before  thou  restest   thy  body  in   thy  bed.  And 

at   midnight  having   risen   from   thy   bed,  and   having 
washed  thy  hand  with  water,  pray.      And  if  thou  hast 
a  wife,   both  of  you  pray.      And   if  she   has   not   yet  30 
become  a   believer,  go  aside  from  her  and  pray  alone. 


1 84  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

and  return  again  into  thy  bed.  Because  thou  art 
bound  by  marriage  thou  shalt  not  leave  off  praying; 
because  ye  are  clean,  and  it  is  not  for  you  (to  be  as) 
unclean.  Those  who  have  been  baptised  require  not 
5  to  be  washed  again,  because  they  are  clean. 
And  if  thou  breathedst  into  thy  hands  and  sealest  thee 
with  thy  spittle  which  goes  forth  from  thy  mouth,  thou 
wilt  be  clean  all  over.  This  is  from  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and   the   drop  of  the  water  of  baptism   ascends   from 

lo  the  out-gashing  which  is  the  heart  of  the  Faithful, 
and  purifies  the  believers.  At  this  hour,  therefore,  they 
shall  pray  carefully,  because  the  presbyters  who  handed 
down  to  us  thus  instructed  us,  that  at  this  hour  all 
creation  prays  to  God.     The  stars  and  the  plants  stand 

15  up,  and  the  waters  stand  up  at  that  hour,  and  all  the  hosts 
of  the  heavens,  the  angels,  ministering  at  that  hour, 
with  the  soul  of  the  righteous,  glorify  God.  And  there- 
fore it  is  seemly  for  all  who  believe  to  be  careful  to  pray 
at  that  hour.     To  this  our  Lord  also  is  being  witness, 

ao  thus  saying :  Behold  there  was  a  cry  (at)  midnight, 
saying.  Behold,  the  bridegroom  has  come,  rise,  go  forth 
to  meet  him.  And  he  repeated  it,  saying :  Watch, 
because  ye  know  not  in  what  hour  your  Lord  will 
come.  And  at  the  time  of  the  cock-crow,  having 

25  risen,  likewise  pray  ;  because  at  this  hour,  cock-crow, 
the  children  of  Esrael  denied  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
in  whom  by  faith  we  know  how  to  trust  as  the  eternal 
light,  and  while  we  hope  for  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead.     All  of  you  of  the  Faithful  therefore  doing  all 

30  this,  and  looking  forward  and  reminding  one  another, 
teach    ye    this    wisdom    to    the    catechumens,    having 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  18$ 


first  built  up  (their  faith) ;  and  ye  shall  not  go  astray 
or  be  lost  while  ye  always  remember  Christ  And 

always  be  careful  to  seal  thy  forehead,  for  this  sign 
then  of  the  Passion  is  manifest  against  Satan,  and 
signifies  that  thou  makest  it  in  faith.  Not  for  5 
men  alone  is  it  made  manifest,  but  know  thou  that 
thou  puttest  on  a  breastplate  of  righteousness,  and  the 
adversary  sees  what  is  in  the  heart,  the  rational  strength 
of  the  inner  man,  for  he  was  sealed  inwardly  and 
outwardly  with  the  seal  of  the  Word.  He  trembles  10 
and  flees  away  in  haste  (chased)  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
who  indeed  is  in  the  man  that  makes  within  him  an 
abiding  place.  This  is  that  which  Muse  before  taught 
us  of  the  lamb  of  the  Pascha  (Fasika)  which  was 
slain,  and  he  commanded  to  smear  the  blood  on  the  15 
lintel  of  the  door  and  the  door-posts.  And  the  smear- 
ing declared  therefore  the  faith  which  now  we  have, 
which  dwells  in  us,  which  He  gave  us  in  the  pure  and 
perfect  Lamb.  And  for  this  cause,  if  we  have  our 
foreheads  thus  sealed  with  the  hand,  then  we  shall  30 
be  safe  from  those  who  wish  to  kill  us.  And  this 
if  ye  learn  with  thanksgiving  and  with  right  faith 
ye  will  be  indeed  strengthened,  and  He  will  give  you 
eternal  life.  This  is  the  ordinance  for  you  that  ye 
may  keep  it,  ye  who  have  sense,  if  ye  heard  and  kept  35 
all,  He  ^  who  keeps  the  teaching  of  the  Apostles  will 
not  be  hindered  by  any  heretics.  Those  are  the 
perverse  who  went  astray  and  corrupted  the  teaching  of 
the  Apostles.     And  if  men  come  to  them   they  teach 

^  Reading  the  variant  of  ^,  etc. 


1 86  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


them  in  this  manner :  and  these  heretics  increased, 
and  of  course  they  who  listened  to  them  are  not 
willing  to  learn  the  commandment  of  the  Aposdes, 
but  do  only  their  own  will,  that  which  they  chose,  and  that 
:  which  sufficed  for  them  as  suiting  their  heart. 

And  if  there  is  any  doctrine  that  we  have  diminished, 
brethren,  God  will  reveal  (it)  to  those  who  are  worthy, 
while  he  steers  the  holy  Church  into  quiet  and  a  harbour. 

lo  Statute  49.  Concerning  the  gift  and  the  office.  If  any- 
one has  obtained  a  gift  and  office  he  shall  not  glory  over 
anyone.  Our  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  (is)  he  who 
gave  us  this  great  mystery  of  the  religion  of  God,  calling 
the   Jews  and  Gentiles  that  they  might  know  the  one 

«5  God  and  Father  in  truth.  As  he  said  himself  in  the 
Gospel  when  giving  thanks  for  the  salvation  of  those  who 
believe  on  him :  I  have  manifested  thy  Name  to  the 
men  :  the  work  which  thou  gavest  me  I  have  finished. 
And  concerning  himself  he  said  to  the  Father :   Holy 

»  Father,  the  world  indeed  knoweth  thee  not,  but  I  know 
thee,  and  these  also  know  thee.  Since  then  we  have  all 
been  thus  made  perfect,  he  said  concerning  the  Spirit  of 
grace  which  should  be  given  from  him  :  This  sign,  then, 
to  them  who  believe  (is)  that  which  shall  be  done  in  my 

25  Name.  They  shall  cast  out  demons,  and  they  shall  speak 
with  tongues,  and  they  shall  take  serpents  with  their 
hands,  and  if  they  drink  any  deadly  thing  it  shall  not 
affect  them,  and  upon  the  sick  they  shall  lay  their  hand 
and  they  shall  recover.^ 

^  Dillmann,  Lex.y  col.  221. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  1 87 

And  this  grace,  then,  was  first  given  to  us,  the  Apostles, 
that  in  his  name  we  might  preach  the  Gospel  to  all 
creation ;  and  next,  to  those  who  believed  by  us,  as  is 
seemly  that  they  should  be  given  to  them ;  not  for  the 
sake  of  benefiting  those  who  work,  but  for  the  sake  of  s 
unbelievers,  to  make  them  believe  :  that  those  who  by  the 
Son  did  not  believe  in  him,  the  power  of  the  signs  might 
put  to  shame.  For  signs  are  liot  for  the  faithful  but  for 
unbelieving,  for  Jews  and  Gentiles.  Casting  out  demons 
is  no  gain  for  us,  but  is  done  by  the  working  of  our  Lord  lo 
Christ  To  those  who  believe  this  grace  shall  be  gfiven, 
as  the  Lord  himself  teaches  and  shows  us  when  he  said : 
Rejoice  not  because  the  demons  submit  to  you,  but 
rejoice  because  your  names  are  written  in  the  heavens. 
Since  the  power  is  his,  and  ours  the  faith  and  diligence,  15 
it  is  clear  that  we  work  by  him. 

It  is  not  necessary  therefore  that  a  believer  should  cast 
out  demons,  and  raise  the  dead,  and  speak  with  tongues, 
but  he  who  gave  the  g^ce  (gave  it)  for  that    which 
is  seemly,  for  salvation  of  unbelievers.      Though  most  «> 
men  are  put  to  shame,  not  by  the  demonstration  of  the 
word,  but  by  the  working  of  the  signs  which  is  connected 
with  salvation,  yet  all  the  wicked  are  not  put  to  shame 
by  a  plague.     And  God  himself  testified  to  this,  as  he 
said  in  the  Law :   With  other  tongues  I  will  speak   to  ^5 
this  people  and  with  other  lips,  and  they  will  not  believe. 
For  neither  did  the  Egyptians  believe  God,  when  Moses 
the  prophet  worked  so  many  signs  and  miracles,  nor  did 
the  Jews,  through  their  malice,  believe  him,  though  our 
Lord  Christ  for  the  Jews  like  Moses  healed  all  infirmity  30 
and  all  sickness  among  them.     Nor  again  did  it  put  those 


1 88  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


to  shame,  nor  did  they  believe  in  it,  when  the  rod  became 
transformed  as  a  serpent,  nor  the  hand  when  it  was  made 
white,  nor  the  river  when  it  became  blood,  neither  by 
this  again  did  they  believe  him :  nor  again  were  these 
5  satisfied  when  the  blind  saw  and  the  lame  ran  and  the 
dead  rose. 

And  moreover  lyanes  and  lyanbares  opposed  that  one, 
and  this  also  Hana  and  Kayafa  insulted.  But  this  one 
was  not  sufficient  for  them,  and  they  ijit,  he)  were  not  put 

lo  to  shame  when  he  did  signs  and  wonders,  but  only  those 
of  good  character  with  whom  God  is  well  pleased,  and  he 
only  exercises  power  for  them  as  a  wise  ordainer,  not 
according  to  the  power  of  a  man,  but  his  own  will. 
This  therefore  we  say  that  they  who  received  such  a  grace 

15  may  not  boast  over  those  who  received  not  the  grace. 
I  speak  therefore  about  a  grace  accompanied  by  a  sign, 
for  there  is  no  man  who  believed  in  Christ  the  Son  of 
God,  who  does  not  receive  a  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
For  indeed  he  who  has  been  transformed  from  the  religion 

20  of  many  evil  gods  and  believed  in  God  the  Father  and  in 
Christ  his  Son ;  this  (in  itself)  is  a  grace  from  God.  If 
he  believed  in  God  and  cast  away  the  unbelief  of  the 
Jews,  and  confesses  (that)  according  to  the  will  of  God  who 
was  before  the  world,  the  only  Son  in  the  last  days  was 

25  bom  of  a  virgin  without  intercourse  of  man,  and  lived 
with  men  without  sin,  fulfilling  all  the  righteousness  of  the 
Law,  and  that  by  the  will  of  God  he  was  crucified  and 
was  buried  and  rose  the  third  day,  and  after  the  resurrec- 
tion from  the  dead  (for  forty  days)  having  been  with  the 

30  Apostles,  and  having  made  an  end  of  all  his  ordinance 
(to    them),    he    ascended    in    their    presence    to    him 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  1 89 

who  sent  him,  God  the  Father.  To  know  this  in  truth 
then,  not  vaguely  but  as  certain,  he  received  a  grace  from 
God.  So  also  he  who  has  been  transformed  from  all 
heresy. 

Let  not  therefore  any  who  do  a  sign  and  miracle  5 
despise  any  of  the  believers  to  whom  a  working  was  not 
imparted.  His  own  are  the  graces  of  God  which  are  given 
through  Christ.  Thou  indeed  hast  received  this,  and 
any  of  thy  neighbours  that ;  either  the  word  of  wisdom, 
or  knowledge,  or  discerning  of  spirits,  or  the  word  of  10 
prescient  instruction,  or  endurance,  or  lawful  continence. 

Because  Moses  the  man  of  God,  in  Egypt,  when  he 
worked  signs  did  not  magnify  himself  above  the  people 
Esrael,    and   though   he   was   named   god   he    did   not 
magnify  himself  nor   boasted   over  his  prophet  Aaron.   15 
Neither  did   (the   son)   of  Newe    lyasu   when  he  was 
leading  the  people  after  him,  and  while  he  fought  with 
(the  people  of)  the  lyabusewon,  and  made  the  sun  to 
stand  towards  Gabaon  and  the  moon  towards  the  valley 
of  Ailon,  because  the   day   was   not  sufficient  for  the  20 
victory,  he  did  not  magnify  himself  above  Fenehas  and 
above  Kaleb.     Nor  did  Samuel,  though  he  wrought  so 
many  signs,  contemn  David  the  beloved  of  God,  both 
being  prophets,  the  one  chief  priest  and  the  other  king. 
And  the  seven  thousand  who  were  in  Esrael,  the  holy  ones  25 
who  would  not  worship  Ba'al  in  bowing  the  knee,  Elyas 
only  amongst  them  and  his  assistant  Eleseos  were  workers 
of  a  miracle.    Neither  did  Elyassa  despise  Abdeyu  keep- 
ing the  law  and  fearing  God,  and  he  did  no  signs.     And 
Elesewon  did   not   neglect  his  assistant  when  he  was  30 
afraid  of  the  enemy,  but  attended  to  him.     And  Daniel 


190  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

again,  the  wise,  who  was  twice  saved  from  the  mouth  of  the 
lions;  and  the  three  children  who  went  forth  from  the 
furnace  of  fire  did  not  despise  the  others  who  were 
another  people,  because  they  knew  that  by  their  own 
5  power  they  did  not  overcome  the  trial,  but  by  the 
strength  of  God  they  both  did  a  sign,  and  they  were 
saved  from  the  trouble. 

Therefore  let  none  of  you  magnify  himself  above  his 
brother,  if  he  is  a  prophet  or  worker  of  a  miracle.     If* 

lo  indeed  it  was  granted  that  there  should  not  be  any  who 
believed  not,  superfluous  then  (would  be)  all  working 
of  signs.  For  the  fearing  of  God  is  a  matter  of  faith, 
and  the  doing  of  a  sign  is  of  him  whose  power  worked. 
As   regards   the   first   indeed   we   looked  to   ourselves, 

15  and  in  the  second  God  works,  concerning  which  we 
have  already  spoken. 

Statute  50.  Therefore  also  let  not  the  king  despise 
any  of  those  who  are  below  him,  the  magistrates,  nor  the 

ao  officers  who  obey  him.     For  if  there  were  not  subjects, 

magistrates  would   be   useless,  and   if   there   were   not 

magistrates,  the  kingdom  would  not  exist  for  the  king. 

And  let  not  the   bishops   magnify  themselves   above 

the    deacons,    nor    the    presbyters    again     above     the 

25  people  who  are  below  them,  because  of  them  consists* 
the  constitution  of  the  assembly ;  nor  shall  they  say : 
The  bishops  and  presbyters  are  taken  out  of  the 
people.  And  to  be  Christians  is  of  ourselves,  but  (to 
be)  Aposde  or  bishop  or  whatever  other  (order)  there 

^  Reading  the  variant  of  ^.  '  See  Dillmann,  Lex^  col.  454. 


TRANSLATION   OF   THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  I9I 


may  be  is  not  of  ourselves  but  of  God  who  gives  grace. 
As  much  as  this  then  we  ourselves  say  concerning  those 
who  have  graces  imparted  to  them,  and  this  further  we 
say,  going  on  in  speaking. 


S 


Statute   51.    That   not   everyone   who   prophesies   is 
righteous,  nor  everyone  who  casts  out  demons  is  holy.    " 
Because    Bala'am    even,   the   son   of  Bl'or,   prophesied 
by  divination,  (being)   wicked,   and  ]^ayafas  with  false 
name  of  Chief  Priest  prophesied.      And  Satan  ^  even  lo 
foretold,  and  the  demons  who  are  with  him,  but  not  on 
account  of  this  have  they  so  much  as  a  spark  of  fear  of 
God,  in  ignorance  they  are  trusting  to  the  will  of  the 
malice   of    their  thoughts.       It   is  clear  then   that  the 
impious  if  they  prophesy  do  not  reveal  their  wickedness  15 
in  their  prophesying. 

Nor  do   those  who  cast  out  demons  (belong)  to  the 
righteous   by   their   casting   them  out.     They  lead  one 
another  astray  :  like  the  teaching  of  laughter,  (they  who 
do  it)  and  they  who  consort  with  them  go  to  ruin.     And  «> 
a  lawless  king  was  not  a  king,  but  is  a  tyrant 

Statute   52.    And   the   bishop  who   is   persuaded   by 
error  or  by  evil  thought  is  not  a  bishop,  but  one  with  a 
false   name.     And   he  was   not   ordained   by  God,  but  ^5 
by  man.       Like  Ananyas  and  Samyas   in    Israel ;   and 
Sedekyas  and  Akiya,  who  were  false  prophets  in  Babilon. 

And   Bala'am   indeed   the  diviner  was  punished  with 
punishment  for  corrupting  the  people  of  Israel  with  Be'el 

1  'Saytan.' 

13 


192  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

Fegor ;  and  Kayafa  at  last  was  a  self-murderer ;  and 
the  sons  of  Askeva  also,  devising  to  expel  demons,  having 
been  wounded  by  them,  fled  away  suffering  pains.  And 
the  kings  of  Esrael  and  of  Juda  when  they  all  sinned  were 
5  punished  with  punishment.  It  is  clear  then  that  bishops 
and  presbyters  with  false  names  shall  not  escape  from  the 
punishment  of  God,  and  therefore  it  is  said  to  them : 
Now,  O  ye  priests  who  disgrace  my  Name,  I  will  deliver 
you  to  the  slaughter,  as  Sadeka  and  Akiya  whom  the 

lo  king  of  Babilon  roasted,  as  said  Eremyas  the  prophet. 

This  then   we    say,   and    we   do    not    despise    true 

prophecy,    because   we    know   that    for    prophecies    the 

mind  of  God  was  upon  righteous   men,  working  (with 

them).      But   we   are    removing    the    audacity   of    the 

1 5  boastful ;  and  we  are  bringing  this  near,  (that)  in  the  case 
of  those  who  are  such  God  removes  their  grace.  For 
God  resisteth  the  boastful,  and  giveth  grace  to  the 
humble.  Silas  and  Agabos  amongst  ourselves,  when  they 
prophesied,  therefore  did  not  make  themselves  equal  to 

ao  the  Apostles  nor  overstepped  their  own  measure,  though 
they  were  lovers  of  God.  And  women  have  prophesied  : 
first,  the  sister  of  Muse  and  sister  of  Aron,  Maryam,  and 
after  this,  Dobira,  and  after  her,  Ela,  Aster,  and  Yudit : 
the  one  was  with  Yusyes  and  the   other  with    Daryus. 

2$  And  the  Mother  of  our  Lord  prophesied,  and  Elesabet 
also  who  was  of  her  family,  and  Hana,  and  amongst  our- 
selves also  the  daughters  of  Filepos ;  but  these  did  not 
magnify  themselves  above  men,  but  they  kept  their  own 
measure.      Therefore   amongst  you  also,  whether  they 

30  are  men  or  women,  and  they  obtained  any  such  g^ace, 
let  them  humble  themselves,  that  God  may  delight  in 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  I93 


them,  for  he  indeed  said :  To  whom  shall  I  look  except 
to  the  humble  and  gentle  and  quiet  one,  and  who 
trembleth  at  my  word. 

But  keep  yourselves  from  the  religion  of  demons  and 
from  gods,  and  from  dead  things  keep,  and  from  blood  and   5 
things  strangled,  and  further,  a  bone  shall  not  be  broken. 

But   concerning  Apostles  and  Prophets  according  to 
the  ordinance  of  the  Gospel  thus  do  ye.     Every  apostle 
who  comes  to  you  shall  not  remain  except  one  day  or 
the  next ;  and  if  he  has  need,  the  third  also ;  and  if  he  10 
stayed  longer  he  is  a  false  prophet. 

And  every  prophet  who  speaks  in  the  spirit  shall  be 
proved,  and  he  shall  be  examined  that  there  may  be  no 
sin  (in  him).  And  everyone  who  speaks  in  the  spirit 
is  a  prophet :  if  he  lives  the  life  of  God,  he  is  a  true  15 
prophet :  by  his  life  hitherto  shall  be  known  every  false 
prophet,  or  a  (true)  prophet 

And  every  prophet  who  orders  a  table  in  the  spirit 
shall  not  eat  of  it :  otherwise  he  is  a  false  prophet 

And  every  prophet  then  who  teaches,  but  does  not  the  » 
truth,  is  a  false  prophet. 

And  every  prophet  proved  in  truth,  who  acts  in  the 
assembly  of  men  and  acts  unlawfully,  shall  not  be  judged 
by  you,  for  his  judgment  is  from  God  ;  because  thus  did 
the  ancient  prophets.  25 

And  he  who  says  in  the  spirit.  Give  to  me  gold  or 
anything  else,  ye  shall  not  listen  to  him.  And  if  he 
speaks  for  another,  give  to  him;  there  is  no  one  who 
shall  examine  him. 

And  ye  shall  receive  everyone  who  comes  to  you  in  ^ 
the  name  of  our  Lord,  and  then  having  proved  him  ye 


194  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


shall  know,  for  ye  have  wisdom,  and  so  (to  speak)  on  the 
right  hand  and  on  the  left.  If  he  is  a  passer-by,  help  him 
as  much  as  ye  can,  and  let  him  not  remain  with  you  beyond 
the  next  day  and  the  third  day.  And  if  he  had  need  and 
5  wished,  he  may  remain  with  you,  if  he  has  a  trade  to 
work  at ;  but  if  he  works  not  he  shall  not  be  supported, 
and  if  he  has  no  trade  and  works  not,  according  to  your 
wisdom  devise  for  him  that  he  shall  not  remain  with  you 
idle.     And  if  he  is  unwilling  to  do  thus,  he  is  a  seller  of 

'o  the  name  of  Christ,  and  ye  shall  beware  of  such.  Every 
true  prophet  then  who  wishes  to  remain  with  you  is 
worthy  of  sustenance,  then  support  him  ;  and  therefore  all 
first-fruits  of  the  wine-press  and  the  threshing-floor,  of 
oxen,  of  sheep,  give  the  first-fruits  of  it  to  the  prophets, 

'5  because  they  are  your  Chief  Priests.  And  if  ye  have  not 
a  prophet,  give  to  the  poor.  And  if  thou  makest  bread, 
give  the  first-fruit  of  it  according  to  the  commandment. 
And  likewise  an  earthenware  vessel  of  wine  or  of  oil,  and 
of  honey,  having  opened  it,  having  taken  the  first-fruit  of 

^  it,  give  it  to  the  poor.  And  gold  and  raiment  and  every- 
thing, having  taken  the  first-fruit  of  it,  which  thou 
wishedst,  give  it  according  to  the  commandment  of  the 
Lord. 

Your  fast  also  shall  not  be  as  the  hypocrites,  because 

^5  they  fast  on  the  second  day  of  the  week,  and  on  the 
fifth.  But  ye,  fast  on  the  fourth  and  the  sixth  {lit.  the 
evening).  And  ye  shall  not  pray  as  the  hypocrites, 
but  as  the  Lord  commanded  in  the  Gospel. 

And  in  your  churches,  ye  presbyters  and  deacons,  and 

3^  all  the  congregation  (on)  the  sabbaths,  make  a  place  for 
the  brethren,  having  ordered  it  with  all  diligence  and  care. 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  I95 

If  one  is  found  sitting  out  of  his  order  he  shall  be  rebuked, 
because  he  has  spoiled  the  holy  Church,  the  dwelling  of 
God.  And  it  is  like  as  we  see  the  animals  which  speak 
not,  oxen  and  horses  and  goats  and  sheep  according  to  the 
existing  kinds,  if  they  are  awake,  they  ruminate,  and  then  s 
do  not  separate  themselves  one  from  another  (of  their 
own  kinds),  thus  also  in  the  church  the  youths  shall  sit  by 
themselves,  if  there  is  room,  and  if  there  is  not  room  they 
shall  stand.  The  elders  shall  sit  by  themselves,  and  if 
they  have  children  let  them  hold  them  in  their  arms.  lo 
Further,  the  virgins  also  shall  sit  by  themselves ;  if  there 
is  not  sufficient  room,  they  shall  stand  in  front  of  the 
other  women.  Those  who  have  children  with  them  and 
are  married  shall  sit  by  themselves.  Also  the  widows 
(of  the  church)  and  the  (other)  widows  shall  sit  by  15 
themselves. 

If  brothers  or  sisters  of  (other)  districts  should  come 
in,  the  deacon  having  come  shall  make  inquiry.  If  one 
has  a  husband  or  is  a  widow,  he  shall  cause  them  to 
enter  and  make  them  sit  in  separate  places.  30 

The  presbyters  also  shall  sit  in  their  own  several 
places.  And  if  another  presbyter  should  come  of  the 
(other)  districts,  they  shall  receive  him  into  the  place 
which  is  seemly  for  him. 

And  if  any  other  man  or  woman  comes  in  lay  dress,  25 
either  a  man  of  the  district  or  from  other  districts,  being 
brethren,  thou,  presbyter,  while  thou  speakest  the  word 
which  is  concerning  God,  or  while  thou  hearest  or 
readest,  thou  shalt  not  respect  persons,  nor  leave  thy 
ministering  to  command  places  for  them,  but  remain  30 
quiet,  for  the  brethren  shall  receive  them,  and  if  they 


196  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

have  no  plax:e  (for  them)  the  lover  of  brothers  or  of 
sisters,^  having  risen,  will  leave  place  for  them. 

If  (there  are)  youths,  while  the  elder  men  remain  sitting, 
having  risen  up,  they  shall  leave  their  places.  Thou, 
5  deacon,  hast  thou  observed  among  those  who  sit  a  young 
man  or  a  virgin,  having  risen  up,  cause  to  sit  down  that 
man  or  that  woman  who  left  (a  place),  then  having  made 
her  rise  up  outside  the  church,  cause  her  to  stand  at  the 
door,  that  others  may  learn  a  lesson  and  leave  place  for 

10  their  elders.  Desire  to  make  large  churches  {lit. 
houses). 

And  if  a  poor  man  or  woman  either  of  the  district  or  of 
the  (other)  districts  should  come  in  and  there  is  no  place 
for  them,  thou,  presbyter,  make  place  for  such  with  all 

15  thy  heart,  even  if  thou  wilt  sit  on  the  ground,  that  there 
should  not  be  respecting  the  person  of  man  but  of 
God. 

And  if  then  we  have  omitted  anything,  our  brethren, 
God  will  reveal  (it)  to  those  who  are  worthy,  while  he 

90  steers  the  holy  Church  into  quiet  and  a  harbour.  And  this 
word  shall  not  be  hidden  concerning  the  gifts  •  which  God 
gave  to  the  youths  as  they  wished,  and  as  they  acquire 
the  similitude  of  those  who  dwell  in  falsehood,  and  are 
moved  because  of  alien  spirits.      And  God  appointed 

25  impious  men  to  be  such  as  either  prophesied  or  did  signs. 

And  now  the  word  will  guide  us  to  that  which  is  better 

for  the  ordinance  of  the  Church :   that  ye  indeed,  the 

bishops  whom  we  ordained  and  sent  from  ourselves  by 

the  commandment  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ — if  ye  know 


^  Reading  the  Tariant  of  ^,  etc.  ^  Lit  *  women.' 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  1 97 

this  ordinance  from  us — that  ye  might  do  all  and  not 
neglect  anything,  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  commanded, 
as  the  ordinance  which  we  gave  to  you.  And  ye  know 
that  he  who  heard  from  us  is  he  who  heard  from  Christ, 
and  he  who  heard  from  Christ  heard  from  God  the  S 
Father,  to  whom  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 

Statute  53.  Concerning  the  ordination  of  Bishops  and 
the  ordinance  of  the  Oblation  (Kuerban). 

It  is  seemly  that  the  bishops  should  be  ordained,  as  we  lo 
said  before,  and  we  command  all  the  people  in  common, 
that  he  may  be  a  man  choice  and  honest  and  holy  in 
everything,  who  has  been  chosen  from  the  people. 

When  they  have  named  ^  (him)  and  are  content  (with 
him)  all  the  people  shall  assemble ;  the  presbyters,  and  15 
the  deacons,  and  the  bishops  (also),  who  shall  assemble 
on  the  day  of  the  sabbath.  And  he  who  is  greatest 
shall  ask  of  the  presbyters  and  deacons  who  are  among 
them,  saying :  Is  this  one  he  who  pleased  you  that  he 
should  be  your  chief?  If  they  say  altogether :  Yes,  he  to 
shall  ask  them  again  and  say  to  them  again  :  Is  this  one 
worthy  of  the  honourable  office,  and  has  he  done  rightly 
with  all  honesty,  and  has  he  virtue  before  {lit.  from)  God, 
and  did  he  observe  justice  with  man  ?  Is  he  able  to  order 
the  men  of  his  own  house  well,  and  has  he  conducted  his  25 
life  in  truth  ?  Has  nothing  been  found  against  him  ? 
And  if  all  of  them  should  answer  together  and  say  :  Yes, 
thus  (it  is)  in  truth  and  not  in  partiality,  and  God  the 
Father  and  Christ  his  Son  and  Holy  Spirit,  the  Spirit  of 

^  Lit  '  ordained,'  but  by  transposing  two  letters  it  can  mean  *  named.' 


198  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

righteousness,  the  Paraklltos,  (being)  judge  of  all ;  he  shall 
ask  them  again  even  a  third  time,  and  say :  Is  this  one 
worthy  in  truth  and  in  right  of  this  office ;  from  the  mouth 
of  two  or  {lit.  and)  three  every  word  shall  be  established. 
5  And  if  they  say  three  times  :  Yes,  he  is  worthy,  they  shall 
all  spread  forth  their  hands,  and  if  they  do  thus  with  one 
consent,  there  shall  be  silence,  and  one  great  one  of  the 
great  bishops  shall  rise  up,  and  two  other  bishops  with  him, 
with  the  rest  of  the  bishops  all  standing,  and  the  presbyters 

10  also  at  the  altar,  praying  quietly,  and  the  deacons  bearing 
the  holy  Gospel  spread  open  upon  the  head  of  him  who 
is  to  be  ordained.^  And  the  bishops  shall  sit  down  upon 
seats  and  they  shall  say :  He  is  worthy  of  it*  And  then 
all  shall  salute  him  with  the  kiss  of  the  Lord,  and  they  shall 

15  read  the  Holy  Scriptures.  And  when  they  have  finished 
the  reading  from  the  Gospel,  the  bishop  who  was  sealed ' 
shall  salute  {lit  kiss)  all  the  Church  and  say :  May  the 
grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  love  of  God,  and 
the  fellowship  of  the  Holy  Spirit  be  with  you  all.     And 

30  all  shall  say :  With  thy  spirit.  When  he  has  finished 
saying,  then  all  the  people  shall  say  the  words  of  joy,  and 
when  it  is  finished,  then  he  shall  give  them  instruction  and 
speak,  (and  the  deacon)  shall  go  up  on  a  high  place,  and 
cry  and  say  :  Let  not  any  stand  here  except  the  Faithful. 

25  Likewise  when  the  bishop  has  finished  all  the  prayer  which 
it  is  proper  for  him  to  say  for  the  sick  (and)  the  rest,  the 
deacon  shall  say  to  them :  Kiss  one  another  with  a  holy 

^  The  construction  of  the  sentences  indicates  the  omission  of  a 
reference  to  the  prayer. 
^  This  sentence  is  over  an  erasure. 
'  Ut  '  has  sealed,' but  without  object. 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  I99 

kiss.  And  all  the  priests  shall  kiss  the  bishop :  and  of 
the  lay  people,  man  shall  kiss  man,  and  woman  shall 
kiss  woman  :  and  the  young  children  shall  stand  just 
below  the  bema,  and  another  deacon  shall  stand  with 
them,  that  they  may  not  quarrel  with  one  another ;  and  s 
other  deacons  shall  go  to  guard  the  men  and  women, 
that  there  may  be  no  disturbance  among  them,  and  that 
they  may  not  beckon  one  to  another,  nor  look  about,  nor 
go  to  sleep.  The  subdeacons  shall  stand  at  the  door  of 
the  women,  and  other  deacons  shall  stand  at  the  door  of  lo 
the  men ;  that  no  one  may  go  out,  and  that  they  let  not 
the  door  be  opened  at  the  time  of  the  holy  Oblation 
(^uerban),  nor  enter  the  doors  of  the  Faithful, 

And  the  subdeacon  shall  bring  water  to  the  priests,  that 
they  may  wash  their  hands  as  a  likeness  of  those  who  15 
are  holy  in  their  souls,  and  (that)  we  lifted  (them)  up 
to   God.     And  the  deacons  shall  close  the  gates,  and 
no  other  shall  come  in,  and  he  shall  say :  Let  none  of 
the  catechumens  stand  here,  or  be  here  at  all,  lest  they 
should  hear  the  word  and  partake  of  the  Mystery,  and  ao 
let  there  not  stand  any  except  the  Faithful,  nor  let  any 
of  the  heretics  stand  here.     O  ye  women,  guard  lest  your 
children  should  run  about  here  and  there,  or  be  dis- 
orderly, or  lest  their  days  should  be  few.     And  let  not 
any  bear  malice  in  his  heart  against  another,  nor  any  25 
stand  here  who  is  not  worthy  of  God :  and  they  shall 
stand  in  fear  and  trembling,  that  they  may  be  worthy  of 
this  work.     And  after  this  the  deacon  shall  bring  the 
bread  of  the  sacrifice  to  the  bishop  into  the  house  of  the 
sanctuary,  and  the  presbyters  shall  stand  on  the  left  hand,  3° 
as  the  likeness   of  the  Apostles  who  stood  with  their 


200  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

Teacher.  The  deacons  shall  stand  on  either  side  at  the 
altar,  and  they  shall  hold  the  flabella  made  of  anything 
of  beautiful  appearance,  or  of  feathers  of  peacock,  or  of 
cotton  fabric  of  beautiful  appearance,  that  they  may  drive 
5  away  little  flying  creatures,  lest  any  of  them  should  fall 
into  the  cup.  And  thus  the  chief  priest  shall  pray  over 
the  sacrifice,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  descend  and  dwell 
upon  them ;  upon  the  bread  that  it  may  become  the 
Body  of  Christ,  and  upon  the  cup  that  it  may  become 

lo  the  Blood  of  Christ. 

And  then  the  bishop  shall  say  the  coming  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  when  he  has  finished  the  prayer  which  is 
proper  to  be  said  thus,  the  bishop  himself  shall  first 
communicate,  and  after  him  the  presbyters,  and  after- 

15  wards  the  deacons,  and  afterwards  likewise  the  sub- 
deacons,  and  after  them  the  readers,  and  after  them 
all  the  people  shall  receive. 

The  bishop  shall  administer,  saying :  This  (is)  the 
bread  which  came  down  from  the  heavens,  this  is  the 

*>  Body  of  Christ.  And  he  who  receives  shall  say  :  Amen. 
And  then  the  deacon  shall  administer  the  cup  and  say  : 
This  is  the  Blood  of  Christ,  and  this  is  the  cup  of  life. 
And  he  who  receives  shall  say :  Amen  and  Amen. 
They   shall    sing    psalms  until   all    have    received    the 

25  Oblation,  and  when  all  the  people  have  received,  after- 
wards they  shall  administer  to  the  women.  And  after 
the  singers  have  finished  singing  the  psalms,  then  the 
deacon  shall  chant,  saying :  We  have  received  of  the 
precious   Body  which  is  the  Body^  of  Christ,  and  we 

^  Reading  the  variant  of  r.,  etc. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  20I 

thank  him  that  he  makes  us  worthy  to  partake  of  the 
precious  and  holy  Mystery.  After  this  the  bishop  shall 
give  thanks  and  pray  for  those  who  have  eaten  the 
Body  of  Christ  and  for  those  who  have  drunk  of  the 
Blood  of  Christ  And  when  he  has  finished  praying,  the  s 
deacon  shall  say :  Bow  your  head  before  God,  that  he 
may  bless  you.  And  when  further  he  has  done  that 
with  which  they  are  blessed,  the  deacon  shall  say :  Go 
away  in  peace.  And  as  for  the  fragments,  if  any  are 
left,  the  presbyters  and  deacons  shall  take  care  that  lo 
nothing  is  left  of  the  Oblation,  and  they  shall  take  great 
care  that  not  much  should  be  left,  lest  they  be  guilty  of 
great  error  and  sin,  like  the  sons  of  Aaron  and  the 
children  of  Ela  whom  the  Holy  Spirit  destroyed,  because 
they  profaned  the  sacrifice  of  God ;  how  much  more  they  «5 
who  profane  the  Body  of  Christ  and  his  precious  Blood, 
and  esteem  it  temporal  food  of  flesh,  whereas  it  is 
spiritual  to  those  who  receive  it  in  purity.  And  this 
we  command  you,  bishops,  presbyters,  and  deacons, 
concerning  the  service  of  the  holy  Mystery.  «> 

Statute  54.  Concerning  the  ordination  of  Presbyters 
and  Deacons.  Concerning  Subdeacons,  and  concerning 
Deaconesses  and  Subdeaconesses  and  female  Readers. 

And  thou,  bishop,  ordain  the  presbyter,  and  lay  hand  25 
upon  his  head,  while  the  presbyters  and  all  the  deacons 
stand  by.    And  pray  and  ordain.    Again,  for  the  deacons, 
lay  hand  also  upon  them,  while  the   presbyters  and  all 
the  deacons  stand  by. 

Concerning  the  Deaconesses  and  Subdeaconesses  and  30 
female  Readers,  we  have  already  spoken  concerning  them. 


202  STATUTES   OF  THE  APOSTLES 

Statute  55.  Concerning  those  who  confessed.  The 
confessor  shall  not  be  ordained.  This  is  a  thing  ^  of  his 
own  will.  He  is  worthy  of  great  honour,  for  he  confessed 
God,  and  he  confessed  before  peoples  and  kings.     If  he 

5  had  a  call  for  this  he  shall  be  ordained  bishop ;  or  as 
presbyter  let  him  be  ordained :  and  likewise  this  ordina- 
tion is  because  of  his  confession.  If  he  did  not  finish 
(his  course),  but  turned  back  and  denied,  he  shall  be 
deposed ;  *   because   not   only   did   he  deny  Christ,  but 

lo  became  an  enemy  as  one  of  the  unbelievers. 

Statute  56.  Concerning  the  Virgins  and  Widows. 
And  he  shall  not  lay  hand  upon  virgins,  because  this 
thing  is  not  a  commandment  from  God,  for  it  is  concerned 

15  with  the  character  of  a  man  ;  and  it  is  not  that  (the  virgin) 
despises  marriage,  but  that  he  may  have  time  for  the 
service  of  God.  And  concerning  Widows.  He  shall 
not  lay  hand  upon  a  widow,  but  if  she  lives  alone,  and 
her  husband  has  been  dead  many  years,  being  a  widow 

ao  of  long  time,  and  if  she  has  lived  industriously,  and  if 
no  accusation  is  found  against  her,  and  if  she  was  able 
to  order  properly  the  men  of  her  own  house  like  Yudit, 
and  if  she  loved  all  good  things  like  Yudit,  then  she  shall 
be  put  (lit.  ordained)  into  the  Order  of  Widows.     And 

25  if  her  husband  was  dead  a  short  time,  and  not  long,  she 
shall  not  be  trusted  nor  put  into  the  Order  of  Widows, 
but  shall  remain  a  long  time,  with  good  works,  with 
fasting  and  prayer,  keeping  apart,  that  she  may  subdue 

^  Lit  *  commandment.'    The  Arabic  word  means  both  *  thing '  and 
'  commandment' 
^  The  passage  is  corrupt. 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  203 

herself  patiently.     The  horse  indeed  and  the  mule  are 
not  controlled  except  by  a  strong  rein. 

Concerning  male  Virgins.  They  shall  not  ordain  male 
virgins,  because  this  thing  is  from  the  will  of  the  heart 
alone  by  the  grace  of  God  and  by  the  love  of  Christ  s 
Jesus;  for  when  the  Holy  Spirit  makes  abode  with  a 
man,  he  obtains  grace  and  healing,  being  known 
by  the  grace  which  he  has,  which  will  be  known  to 
all  men.  And  if  he  had  a  call  for  this  work  (of 
the  ministry),  that  he  should  be  ordained  bishop  or  lo 
presbyter  or  deacon,  they  shall  lay  hand  upon  him 
\lit.  them). 

Statute  57.  Concerning  that  it  is  seemly  that  the  bishop 
who  is  with  you  should  be  ordained  by  bishops.  15 

It  is  seemly  that  a  bishop  should  be  ordained  by 
three  bishops  or  by  two.  If  one  bishop  alone  laid  hand 
upon  htm,  he  shall  be  deposed,  and  he  also  who  ordained 
him.  If  it  was  because  of  the  ferocity  of  men  (that 
it  was  done)  by  a  bishop  alone,  because  it  was  not  w 
possible  to  gather  an  assembly  on  account  of  the 
ferocity  of  men,  and  not  through  pride  and  unbelief :  if 
it  was  thus,  he  shall  take  authority  from  many  bishops, 
and  it  shall  be  proper  for  him,  and  it  shall  be  by  their 
commandment,  and  he  shall  not  be  deposed,  nor  he  who  35 
ordained  him. 

Statute  58.  The  bishop  shall  bless,  and  they  shall  not 
bless  him.     And  (the  bishop)  shall  bless  the  first-fruits 
himself.     And  he  shall  ordain  men.    And  he  shall  offer  30 
the    Oblation,   and    he    shall    administer    the    Eulogia 


204  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

(awlogiya)   and   take   it   from   a  bishop,  never   from   a 
presbyter. 

The   bishop   shall   depose  all   the  ordained   (clergy) 
whom  it  is  right  to  depose,  except  a  bishop,  for  he  alone 
5  is  not  able  to  do  that 

The  presbyter  shall  bless  and  shall  be  blessed,  and  he 
shall  take  the  Blessing  (barakat)  from  the  bishop  and 
from  a  presbyter  like  himself,  and  he  administers  to  a 
presbyter  like  himself.  He  shall  ordain,^  but  shall  not 
lo  depose.  Further,  he  shall  inhibit  those  who  sin,  if  they 
are  worthy  of  such  punishment 

The  deacon  shall  not  bless  nor  give  the  Blessing. 
He  shall  take  the  Blessing  from  the  bishop  or  from  the 
presbyter.  He  shall  not  baptise  or  offer  (the  Oblation), 
15  but  when  the  bishop  has  offered,  or  the  presbyter  is  alone, 
then  he  administers  to  the  people,  not  as  (one  of)  the 
priests,  but  as  minister  of  the  priests. 

Statute  59.  And  of  the  different  ordained  (clergy),  the 
20  presbyters  shall  not  do  the  work  of  the  deacons,  nor 
anything  which  is  not  theirs  {lit.  his). 

The  deaconesses  shall  not  bless,  and  they  shall  not 
do  any  work  which  the  presbyters  and  deacons  do,  but 
they  shall  keep  the  gates  of  the  church.  Except  this 
25  there  is  no  other  work  which  they  do,  except  the 
ministering  to  the  presbyters  when  they  baptise  the 
women,  for  this  is  that  which  is  proper  for  them. 

The  deacon  shall  inhibit  the  subdeacon  and  the  readers 
and  the  singers  and  the  deaconesses.      Thus  indeed  it 

^  Perhaps  referring  to  co-operation  with  the  bishops,  or  to  minor  orders. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  20$ 


is  suitable  for  him,  if  the  presbyter  is  not  present.  It  is 
not  suitable  for  the  subdeacons  to  inhibit  either  the 
readers  or  the  server  of  the  Scripture  and  the  deaconesses, 
neither  those  in  orders  nor  the  (lay)  people,  because  they 
are  the  servants  of  the  deacons.  5 

Statute  6a  Concerning  the  first-fruits  and  tithes.  All 
the  first-fruits  [and  tithes]  they  shall  bring  to  the  bishops 
and  presbyters  and  deacons  for  their  support.  But  all 
the  tithes  they  shall  bring  for  the  support  of  the  rest  of  lo 
those  in  orders,  and  for  the  virgins  and  the  widows,  for 
those  are  afflicted  by  poverty,  because  the  first-fruits  are 
for  the  priests  and  their  ministers. 

Statute  6i.  Concerning  that  which  is  left  of  the  15 
Oblations.  The  Eulogia  which  is  left  of  the  Mystery 
besides  {lit  from)  that  which  they  offered,  the  deacons 
shall  distribute  among  the  priests,  with  the  knowledge  of 
the  bishop  or  presbyter.  Four  parts  shall  be  given  to 
the  bishop,  and  three  shall  be  given  to  the  presbyter,  20 
and  to  the  deacon  two  parts,  and  to  the  others,  to  the 
subdeacon  and  to  the  reader  and  to  the  singers  and  to 
the  deaconesses,  one  part. 

This  then  is  good  and  acceptable  before  God ;  every- 
one shall  perform  his  ordinance.     And  there  is  not  in  the  25 
church   one  who   did  a  sign,  except  he  performed  the 
ordinance  in  the  good  and  honourable  (manner)  in  which 
it  should  be  done.^ 

Statute  62.  Concerning  him  who  desires  to  partake  of 


^  The  passage  is  probably  comipt. 


206  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

the  Holy  Mystery.  He  who  desires  to  partake  of  the 
mysteries  of  holiness,  which  are  of  the  service  of  God, 
shall  be  brought  by  the  deacons  to  the  bishop,  or  by 
the  presbyters :  and  they  shall  examine  them  as  to 
5  what  was  the  cause  by  which  they  were  called  to  stand 
and  hear  for  the  first  time  the  word  of  God,  And 
they  who  bring  them  shall  bear  testimony  to  them. 
And  they  shall  examine  them  thoroughly  with  firmness 
concerning  their  works. 

lO 

Statute  63.  Concerning  trades  and  occupations.  Let 
them  examine  them  with  firmness  concerning  their  works 
and  the  life  of  their  men,  whether  they  are  slaves 
or  free.     And  if  there  is  one  who  is  a  slave,  let  them 

15  examine  his  master  whether  he  can  bear  testimony  to 
him  concerning  his  work.  If  he  can  bear  good  testimony 
he  shall  be  received,  and  if  he  cannot  bear  testimony  to 
him  he  shall  be  sent  away,  that  he  may  make  himself 
worthy  of  testimony  being  borne  to  him  by  his  master, 

30  and  if  he  should  bear  testimony  he  shall  be  received.  If 
there  is  a  slave  and  a  handmaid,  let  them  be  taught  to  live 
according  to  the  will  of  their  masters,  that  the  word  of 
God  should  not  be  blasphemed. 

If  there  is  one  who  has  wife  or  husband,  they  shall 

25  be  taught  not  to  commit  adultery  and  to  abstain  (from 
others). 

If  there  is  one  who  is  not  married,  they  shall  be 
taught  not  to  commit  adultery,  but  to  be  married  accord- 
ing to  law.     If  his  master  is  a  believer,  and  if  he  knows 

30  that  his  slave  or  his  handmaid  commits  adultery,  he  shall 
give  them  in  marriage  according  to  law,  and  if  he  does 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  207 

not  give  in  marriage  according  to  law  that  servant  and 
that  handmaid,  that  master  of  slaves  shall  be  rejected 
from  the  church,  because  he  made  them  impure. 

If  there  is  a  man  who  has  a  devil,  let  him  be  taught 
that  he  should  be  cured,  and  that  he  should  not  come  into    5 
the  church  to  partake  of  the  Mystery  until  he  is  purified. 
If  he  was  at  the  point  of  death,  they  may  bring  him  to 
receive  the  Oblation. 

If  there  is  a  man  who  eats  of  the  house  of  the  heretics 
and  the  adulterers  and  drinks  with  them,  let  him  leave  10 
off  and  remove  from  the  place  of  the  unclean  and  wicked, 
or  he  shall  be  rejected. 

A  harlot,  if  she  wishes  to  come  in,  shall  leave  this  habit 
or  be  rejected. 

If  there   is   a   man   who   makes   idols,   if  he   wishes  15 
to   come   in,    he   shall   leave   his   former  works   or    be 
rejected. 

If  there  is  a  man  or  woman  and  they  come  from 
another  people,  if  they  wish  to  come  into  our  law,  they 
shall  leave  their  former  work  or  be  rejected.  20 

If  there  is  a  man  or  woman  of  the  people  of  the  games, 
or  providers  (of  the  games),  or  painter,  or  drunkard,  or 
diviner  with  earth  and  ashes,  and  fruit  of  trees,  and 
anything  else  with  which  heathen  sorcerers  work,  they 
shall  not  do  it.  Or  he  who  plays  the  harp,  or  he  who  25 
sings  to  an  instrument,  or  one  who  teaches  singing,  or 
who  guides  to  fornication  and  the  games,  let  them  leave 
their  works  or  be  rejected. 

Or  the  circus-men  who  play  in  the  circus ;  and  in  like 

manner   if  there  is  a  witch,  or  woman  who  guides  to  30 

fornication,  or  makes  sport,  or  a  piper,  or  a  dancer,  or 

14 


208  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

I 

a  singer,  or  teacher  of  this  kind,  she  shall  leave  off  or  be 
rejected. 

Or  one  who  inspires  men  with  wickedness  and  hatred, 
or  slanderers,  or  one  of  those  who  do  the  like  of  any  of 

5  those  things,  they  shall  leave  off  and  repudiate  and  be 
converted  and  repent  They  shall  walk  in  the  way  of  the 
believers,  or  they  shall  not  be  accepted. 

If  there  is  a  man  of  the  army,  and  if  he  wishes  to  come 
in  and  know  (the  Faith),  and  if  he  came  into  our  law,  let 

lo  him  leave  his  robbery  and  violence  and  calumny  and 
transgression  and  folly,  and  he  shall  be  content  with  his 
pay,  and  if  he  left  that  occupation  he  shall  be  received, 
otherwise  he  shall  be  rejected. 

If  there  is  a  man  who  married  a  believing  woman  and 

15  did  wickedly  with  his  body  or  adultery,  or  is  a  soothsayer 
and  an  interpreter  of  unlucky  hours  and  of  good  days, 
wishing  to  turn  the  hearts  of  men  by  this,  and  to  corrupt 
their  thoughts  and  their  heart,  and  seduce  them  from  the 
way  of  God.      Or  a  shameless  man,  or  a  magician,  or  a 

20  charmer,  or  one  who  calls  together  spirits,  or  a  star-gazer, 
or  a  fascinator,  or  lascivious,  or  drunkard,  or  who  is  evil 
in  deed  and  word,  or  who  speaks  with  a  sign  and  his  face 
to  lead  astray,  or  who  divines  by  a  bird,  or  who  seals 
his  hands  and  feet  with  a  needle,  who  makes  little  marks 

25  with  black  and  red,  and  wrote  nonsense  upon  himself, 
or  (who  divines)  with  beans,  (or  divines)  about  a  noise 
which  he  hears  or  words  of  men,  that  might  be  signs 
for  him,  or  (divines)  by  what  he  sees  or  hears,  or  in 
suspicion  he  will  not  do  what  is  known  to  be  good. 

3c  Because  all  this  is  of  the  profane  and  fraudulent  and 
impious.     And   they   have  writings,  and   they  are   like 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  209 


those  who  know  concerning  life  and  death,  and  they  shall 
not  be  received  into  our  law,  until  they  have  examined 
them  and  proved  them  concerning  their  occupations,  if 
they  repented  of  their  conduct ;  and  if  they  turned  and 
left  (the  occupations)  they  shall  be  accepted,  otherwise  5 
they  shall  be  rejected. 

Statute  64.  If  there  is  a  concubine  of  an  unbeliever, 
if  she  kept  herself  to  him  alone  she  shall  be  received,  and 
if  she  took  another  she  shall  be  repudiated.  10 

And  if  there  is  a  man  who  became  like  us,  and  if  he 
comes  into  our  law,  having  a  concubine  or  a  handmaid, 
he  shall  keep  himself,  and  refrain  from  her,  because  he 
is  a  Christian,  and  he  shall  marry  according  to  law,  as 
we  have  commanded.  If  he  loves  her  he  shall  first  15 
write  for  her  a  writing  of  manumission,  and  afterwards 
let  him  marry  her.  If  she  is  free  he  shall  marry  her 
according  to  law,  and  if  he  does  not  do  thus  he  shall  be 
rejected. 

And  if  there  is  a  man  among  us,  and  he  did  wickedly,  20 
or  who  persuades  with  the   fables  of  the  heathen,  and 
who  does  like  them,  let  him  leave  off  and  turn  himself, 
otherwise  he  shall  be  rejected. 

And  he  who  requests  of  the  believers  in  Christ  that 
he  may  be  in  the  number  of  those  who  do  virtuously,  25 
and  devote  themselves  in  quietness  and  purity,  shall 
prove  himself  in  virtue  three  years.  If  he  was  a  man 
who  has  spiritual  gift  and  goodness  and  purity,  he  shall 
be  received  (sooner),  because  this  thing  shall  not  be 
quickly  (or  slowly)  in  its  time,  but  it  shall  be  (a  matter)  30 
of  good  mind  and  devotion  and  prudence. 


2IO  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


And  if  there  is  a  layman  who  teaches  men  aright,  he 
shall  be  quiet  in  word  and  virtuous  in  his  body.  He 
shall  not  boast,  but  be  correct  in  his  speecL  Then  he 
shall  teach  men,  and  afterwards  he  shall  be  teacher  of 
5  all  of  them  by  God.  The  prophet  says  :  They  shall  be 
all  taught  by  God. 

Statute  65.  Concerning  the  washing  of  their  hands 
at  the  time  of  prayer.     Every  believing  man  and  woman 

10  at  daybreak,  having  risen  from  sleep,  before  they  do  any 
work,  shall  wash  their  hands  and  pray.  And  if  there  is 
the  word  of  exhortation,  they  shall  prefer  above  (every) 
thing  the  good  word  of  religion. 

Believing  men  and  women  shall  keep  their  servants 

15  in  fairness  of  service,  as  we  have  already  ordered  in 
the  Scripture,  and  we  instructed  concerning  honest 
slaves. 

Statute    66.    Concerning    the    resting    on    both    the 
20  sabbaths.     Every  believing   man  and  woman  shall  rest 
on  the  sabbath  and  First  day. 

They  shall  be  kindly  disposed  towards  their  servants, 
as  we  have  already  taught.  And  we  also  commanded 
thus  in  our  Epistle.  Ye  and  your  slaves  and  your 
25  servants,  do  your  works  five  days.  And  on  the  sabbath 
and  First  day  ye  shall  not  do  any  work  in  them ;  but 
they  shall  have  opportunity  for  (going  to)  church,  and 
for  instruction  in  religion  of  God,  and  the  teaching  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  which  gives  inheritance  of  the  kingdom  of 
30  the  heavens  in  the  world  which  is  to  come,  and  which 
in  the  present  world  keeps  them  in  much  honour  and 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  211 

blessings,  on  them  who  fear  God,  and  those  who  honour 
his  sabbaths  and  rest  on  them. 

For  on  the  sabbath  day  God  rested  from  all  his  work, 
when  he  had  made  and  finished  the  heaven  and  all  that 
is  in  it,  and  the  earth  and  all  that  is  in  it,  the  night  and  s 
the  day,  the  sun  and  the  moon  and  the  stars,  and  the 
times  and  the  quantities;  when  he  had  gathered  the 
waters  into  their  receptacles.  And  having  done  all  this 
on  all  the  days  and  finished  his  work,  God  rested  on  the 
seventh  day,  and  named  it  the  Sabbath,  and  hallowed  it,  lo 
and  magnified  it  above  all  the  days  and  blessed  it. 

And  see  and  understand  that  it  is  a  memorial  of  his 
glory  and  a  memorial  of  his  work,  and  he  made  it  a 
rest.  And  he  said :  God  rested  from  all  his  work. 
He  revealed  it,  that  he  might  grant  to  us,  that  we  also  is 
should  honour  his  sabbath  and  say  that  when  he  had 
created  all  creation  and  finished,  he  rested  on  it,  (even) 
on  the  seventh  day,  and  made  it  the  sabbath  holy  and 
blessed  and  honourable  and  pure.  And  therefore  he  said 
in  the  (book  of  the)  Law  which  (is  about)  the  creation  :  ao 
And  God  blessed  the  seventh  day  which  is  the  sabbath, 
and  he  hallowed  it,  because  on  it  he  rested  from  all  his 
work  which  God  began  to  do. 

And  see  that  as  sacred  to  God  the  rest  was  named 
Sabbath.  Hear  and  learn  the  honour  of  the  sabbaths,  as 
that  the  sabbath  was  not  first  honoured  by  men,  but  by 
God,  its  maker  and  creator,  was  it  honoured.  And  he 
honoured  it  and  blessed  it,  and  it  was  instituted  as  a 
rest  for  man  and  beast,  and  chiefly  for  a  memorial  of 
his  glory  and  his  work,  that  he  might  be  known  that  he  30 
is  the  maker  and  creator  of  aU.     And  he  said :  Keep  my 


212  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

sabbath,  because  it  is  my  sign  between  me  and  you 
and  your  children,  that  ye  may  know  that  I  am  he  who 
sanctifieth  you. 

Then  the  First  day  is  the  day  of  the  Resurrection  of 

5  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  the  First  (day)  was  named 
sabbath,  and  both  were  named  sabbaths.  And  in  the 
prophets  also  he  plainly  declares  that  both  are  sabbaths, 
and  says  :  Honour  my  sabbaths  and  continue  in  my  law 
and   in  my  statutes.      Thus   said   God  to   those   who 

xo  gather  to  him  from  other  people  and  serve  him  and  love 
the  Name  of  God :  Verily  those  become  to  me  servants 
and  handmaids.  And  all  of  those  who  honour  my 
sabbaths,  and  profane  them  not,  and  continue  in  my 
ordinances,  I  will  bring  to  my  holy  mountain,  and  make 

15  them  rejoice  in  my  house  of  prayer ;  and  my  sacrifices  and 
my  Oblations  from  them  shall  be  acceptable  and  pleasing, 
my  house  also  shall  be  named  the  house  of  prayer  for 
all  peoples,  saith  God.  And  if  they  keep  my  command- 
ments and  my  sabbaths,  and  choose  that  which  I  wish, 

20  and  continue  in  my  ordinances,  I  will  give  them  the 
house  of  my  sanctuary,  and  in  my  court  a  place  which 
he  nameth,  and  which  is  better  than  sons  and  daughters^ 
and  I  will  give  them  a  name  which  is  for  ever,  and  which 
shall  not  pass  away  nor  perish. 

2$  Attend  and  understand  when  he  said.  My  sabbaths, 
he  said  (it)  of  both  days.  When  he  said :  Those  who 
gathered  together  from  another  people,  he  said  (it)  of 
the  Christian  people  and  not  concerning  Esrael  alone. 
And  therefore  observe  both  for  our   Lord   Christ   and 

30  honour  both  with  great  care.  And  having  fulfilled  all  the 
law,  ye  shall  find  honour  and  glories  and  blessings  which 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  213 


God  has  prepared  for  them  that  love  him  in  this  world 
and  in  that  also  which  is  to  come. 

Statute  67.  And   further,  they  shall   not  do  work  in 
the  week  (sabu'a)  of  the   Pascha   (Fasika).      The  first    5 
week  (samun),  the  great  one  which  is  of  the  Passion,  in 
which   our   Lord   was  crucified ;  and  that  which  comes 
after  it,  the  week  (samun)  of  Fasika,  which  is  the  feast  of 
the    Resurrection   of  our  Lord  and  our  Saviour.     And 
the  first  week  (samun)  because  our  Lord  and  our  God  10 
was  crucified  in  it ;  and  the  second  week  (samun)  because 
he  rose  in  it  from  the  dead.      They  shall  not  do  any 
work  on  those  days,  and  they  shall  know  that  he  died 
and  rose  again  from  the  dead.     And  further,  they  shall 
not  do  work  on  the  day  of  the   feast  of  the   fortieth,  15 
which  is  the  day  of  the  feast  of  the  Ascension  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  he  made  an  end  on   it      And 
further,  they  shall  not  do  work  on  the  day  of  the  feast  of 
the  fiftieth,  because  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Paraklltos,  was 
manifested,  he  who  came  down  upon  the  believers  in  our  20 
Lord  Christ.     And  further,  they  shall  not  do  work  on 
the  day  of  the  Nativity,  which  is  of  the  Birth  of  our  Lord 
Christ,  because  the  grace  of  God  was  given  quickly  to 
men,  when  God  was  born,  the  Word,  who  is  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  of  our  Lady  Mary,  the   Saviour  of  the  25 
world.     And  further,  they  shall  not  do  work  on  the  feast 
of  the  day  of  the  Epifanya,  because  on  that  day  the 
Divinity  of  our  Lord  Christ  was  shown,  and  the  Father 
bore  testimony  to  his  Son  in  the  baptismal  place,  and 
the  Holy  Spirit  descended  upon  him  like  the  form  of  a  30 
dove,  and  he  was  shown  before  all  the  people ;  and  those 


214  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

who  Stood  by  bore  testimony  to  him,  saying  :  This  is 
God  in  truth,  the  Son  of  God  in  truth.  And  further, 
they  shall  not  do  work  on  the  day  of  the  feast  of  the 
Apostles,  because  they  are  those  who  became  teachers 

5  of  you  to  know  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  made  you 
worthy  to  partake  of  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  And 
further,  ye  shall  not  do  work  on  the  day  of  Estifanos, 
the  chief  deacon  and  the  first  of  martyrs,  and  (the  days 
of)  the  other  righteous  and  holy  martyrs,  all  those  who 

lo  loved  Christ  our  Lord  more  than  their  lives,  and  preferred 
him,  honour  them  as  much  as  ye  can. 

Statute  68.  Concerning  the  times  of  prayers.     When 
ye  rise  at  daybreak,  pray.     And  pray  at  the  third  hour, 

IS  and  pray  at  the  sixth  hour,  and  pray  at  the  ninth  hour, 
and  pray  in  the  evening,  and  pray  at  the  time  of  sleep, 
and  pray  at  the  time  of  midnight  and  at  cock-crow. 

At  daybreak  let  us  give  thanks  because  God  causes 
the  light  to  shine  upon  us,  having  turned  away  for  us  the 

ao  night,  and  brought  the  day.  And  also  at  the  third  hour, 
because  in  this  hour  Pilatos  delivered  up  our  Lord.  And 
at  the  sixth  hour  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  crucified. 
And  at  the  ninth  hour  he  gave  up  his  spirit,  and  the 
world  was  disturbed,   and   when  they  pierced  his  side 

35  blood  and  water  came  forth  from  him.  And  when  they 
crucified  our  Lord  all  creation  was  afraid  and  trembled 
before  him  concerning  that  which  the  impious  Jews  did, 
and  they  could  not  look  upon  the  mocking  of  the  Lord. 
And   also  at   the  time  of  evening  let   us  give  thanks 

30  because  he  has  given  rest  to  us  at  night  from  the  toil 
of  the  day.      And  also   at  cock-crow,  because  at  that 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  21$ 

hour  he  announces  the  coming  of  the  day  to  do  the  work 
of  the  day. 

Statute  69.  And  if  ye  cannot  go  to  the  church 
because  of  unbelievers,  thou,  bishop,  make  prayer  in  5 
thy  house,  that  the  servants  of  God  mingle  not  with  the 
assembly  of  the  impious ;  because  it  is  not  the  place  which 
sanctifies  the  man,  but  the  man  sanctifies  the  place.  And 
if  the  impious  seize  the  place,  flee  from  it,  because  they 
pollute  it  As  the  pure  man  sanctifies  the  church,  so  it  10 
is  defiled  by  the  unclean. 

And  if  ye  cannot  assemble  together  in  a  house  or  in  the 
church,  each  one  shall  sing  psalms  where  he  is  by  himself, 
and  shall  read  the  Scripture  and  pray.  If  there  are  two 
and  three  they  shall  pray,  because  our  Lord  said  :  Where  15 
there  are  two  and  three  gathered  together  in  my  Name, 
there  am  I  in  their  midst. 

And  the  believers  shall  not  pray  with  a  catechumen 
in  the  (same)  house,  because  it  is  not  right  that  he  who 
partakes  of  the  holy  Mystery  should  be  defiled.  20 

The  servants  of  God  shall  not  pray  with  the  heretics, 
nor  in  the  house  (of  any) — Who  would  join  light  with 
darkness,  and  believers  with  doubters  ? 

Believing  men  or  women,  if  they  live  with  slaves,  shall 
be  excommunicated  and  go  out  of  the  church.  25 

Statute   70.    Concerning  the  memorial  of  those  who 
have  fallen  asleep.     The  third  day  shall  be  observed  with 
psalms  and  prayers,  because  of  the  resurrection  of  our 
Lord  the  third  day.     Further,  they  shall  observe  seven  3^ 
days  for  a  memorial  of  the  living  and  the  dead.     And 


2l6  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

further,  they  shall  observe  the  completion  of  a  month  in 
likeness  of  the  old  ordinance,  even  as  the  people  mourned 
for  Moses  thirty  days.  And  further,  they  shall  observe 
the  completion  of  forty  days  ;  and  they  shall  observe  half 

5  a  year.     And  further,  they  shall  observe  the  completion 
of  a  year  in  likeness  of  their  memorial. 

And  they  shall  give  to  the  poor  of  the  goods  of  those 
who  die  as  propitiation  for  their  soul,  for  their  memorial. 
This  we  say  only  concerning  the  servants  of  God.     As 

lo  for  the  wicked  indeed,  if  they  gave  the  riches  of  all  the 
world  to  the  poor  there  would  be  no  profit  to  them  :  for 
if  being  alive  he  was  an  enemy  of  God,  the  thing  (lit.  his 
word)  is  clear  that  he  was  his  enemy  when  he  went  out 
of  the  world.     He  finds  no  mercy,  because  there  is  no 

15  respect  of  persons  with  him  (sc.  God),  for  God  is 
righteous  and  loves  righteousness,  and  lo !  the  man  (is 
judged)  from  his  work,  and  lo !  the  man  who  is  good — 
they  say  his  work  is  also  (good). 

And  if  ye  are  invited,  eat  moderately  and  in  the  fear  of 

20  God,  because  it  is  seemly  to  pray  for  those  who  departed 
from  this  world. 

And  ye  presbyters  and  deacons  who  are  in  our  Lord 
Christ,  it  is  seemly  that  ye  should  be  temperate  at  all 
times,  ye  and  others  also,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  do  what 

25  the  Scripture  says :  The  strong  and  angry  shall  not 
drink  wine,  lest  they  should  be  drunken  and  should  for- 
get wisdom,  and  not  be  able  to  judge  rightly.  Because 
as  administrators  under  God  the  almighty  and  the  only 
Son  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  are  the  presbyters  and  the 

30  deacons,  and  the  powers  of  the  church. 

And  we  say  this,  not  forbidding  them  to  drink  wine, 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  217 

because  we  cannot  despise  what  God  has  created  for  the 
joy  of  man,  but  that  they  should  not  drink  for  drunken- 
ness. And  the  Scriptures  do  not  say ;  They  shall  not 
drink  wine,  but  they  say :  They  shall  not  drink  wine  for 
drunkenness.  And  again  he  says :  Drunkenness  causeth  $ 
thorns  to  spring  up  in  the  hand  of  a  man.  This  which 
we  say  is  not  for  the  priests  alone,  but  for  all  Christian 
people,  who  are  named  with  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who  spoke  concerning  them  and  said :  To  whom 
(shall  be)  sorrow  and  indignation  and  blackness  of  eyes  lo 
and  fighting  and  breaking  of  bones — to  whom  shall  they 
be  except  to  those  who  exceed  in  drinking  wine,  and 
to  those  who  ask  and  go  where  there  is  drinking. 

Statute  71.  Concerning  those  who  are  persecuted  for  15 
the  Faith.  And  those  who  flee  from  city  to  city  for  the 
Faith  and  in  remembrance  of  the  word  of  our  Lord  :  and 
they  know  that  the  spirit  is  willing  but  the  flesh  is  weak, 
and  they  flee  from  place  to  place,  and  they  patiently  endure 
being  spoiled  of  their  goods  that  they  might  keep  the  «> 
name  of  Christ  and  not  deny  him ;  help  them  and  give 
them  all  that  they  desire,  and  fulfil  the  commandment  of 
God,  our  Lord. 

And  all  this  we  command  you  in  common.  And  every- 
one shall  stay  in  the  Order  which  was  given  to  him,  and  as 
shall  not  step  out  of  the  commandment  which  they 
ordained  for  him.  And  this  commandment  is  not  our 
own,  but  that  of  God  the  Father,  for  he  said :  He  who 
heard  you  heard  me,  and  he  who  heard  me  heard  him 
who  sent  me.  And  he  who  rejected  you  rejected  me,  y> 
and  he  who  rejected  me  rejected  him  who  sent  me. 


2l8  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

Do  not  those  created  things  which  have  no  soul  keep 
the  commandment  which  was  given  to  them,  day  and 
night,  sun  and  moon  and  stars  and  winds  and  changes  of 
moons  and  weeks  and  hours  and  days  ?  and  they  perform 

5  the  work  which  was  ordained  to  them  :  as  it  was  spoken  at 
the  beginning.  And  he  said  :  He  gave  them  command- 
ment and  they  do  not  transgp-ess.  And  concerning  the 
sea  he  said :  I  have  placed  for  it  an  ordinance,  and  I  have 
placed  against  it  a  bar  and  a  gate,  and  I  said :  Thus  far 

lo  come,  and  thou  shalt  not  pass  beyond.  How  much  more 
ought  ye  not  to  be  moved  at  all  in  that  which  is  ordained 
to  you  according  to  the  will  of  God.  And  there  are 
some  who  make  this  as  nothing,  and  confuse  ordina- 
tions, and  (yet)  offices  which  have  been  assigned  to  each 

IS  shall  not  be  confused,  and  ye  shall  not  seize  for  your 
own  selves  an  ordination  which  was  not  given  to  you,  and 
ye  shall  not  pass  beyond  by  force  to  possess  that  which 
is  not  yours,  but  belongs  to  others,  over  which  ye  have 
no  authority. 

«>  Because  of  this  (offence)  ye  provoke  God  like  the 
children  of  Kore  and  king  'Ozyan  who  grasped  the 
priestly  work  without  the  will  of  God :  the  former 
indeed  were  burnt  with  fire,  and  of  the  latter  his  face  was 
changed  by  leprosy.     For  they  provoked  God,  Jesus 

35  Christ,  who  commanded  that  it  should  be  thus,  and  they 
caused  to  be  pained  the  heart  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  they 
rejected  his  testimony,  and  despised  him,  and  they  fear 
not  his  judgpnent  which  is  prepared  for  them  who  do  this 
thing,  and  the  carelessness  which  they  commit  with  regard 

30  to  the  Oblation,  and  the  bread  of  the  Blessing,  whenever 
they  are  offered  by  those  who  are   not  worthy,  who 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  219 


think  to  do  the  honourable  work  of  the  priesthood,  which 
is  in  the  likeness  of  the  great  Chief  Priest,  Christ ;  and 
there  are  some  who  make  this  (work)  to  be  foolishness. 
And  we  indeed  desired  to  teach  them  this,  but  hence- 
forth we  speak  of  Moses,  the  servant  of  God,  with  whom  s 
God  spoke  face  to  face,  as  one  speaks  with  his  neighbour ; 
who  said  :  I  know  thee  above  all  men,  with  whom  Gkxl 
spoke  face  to  face,  (not)  with  signs  and  miracles  and  visions 
and  angels  and  interpretations — this  in  the  day  on  which 
he  commanded  the  holy  Law.  And  he  ordained  this  lo 
ordinance,  and  as  was  proper  that  they  should  fulfil  it,  con- 
cerning the  ordination  of  the  priesthood,  and  what  was 
suitable  for  the  priests,  and  what  was  suitable  for  the 
levites  :  and  he  separated  each  as  was  proper  for  him  and 
as  was  right  for  his  service  ;  that  which  the  chief  priests  15 
were  commanded  to  do  and  which  was  not  proper  to  be 
done  by  the  priests,  and  not  by  the  decree  of  the  law  to 
be  done ;  and  that  which  the  priests  were  commanded, 
the  levites  could  not  approach  (to  do) ;  but  each  one 
should  keep  to  the  service  of  God  which  he  received,  » 
and  should  not  step  out  of  it.  And  when  anyone 
transgressed  and  stepped  out  of  his  service  which  he 
received,  he  should  be  condemned  to  death. 

And  this  is  abundantly  plain  to  us  from  what  happened 
to  Saol,  when  he  thought  to  offer  sacrifice  of  his  own  25 
will,  before  that  the  prophet  and  chief  priest  Samuel 
came,  and  caused  to  come  upon  himself  sin  and  a  curse, 
for  ever.  The  prophet  was  not  afraid  because  of  the 
anointing  with  which  he  anointed  him  to  be  king. 

And  God  has  made  known  to  us  by  the  declaration  of  30 
the  great  thing  which  happened  to  king  'Ozyan.    Not  long 


220  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

tarried  the  vengeance  for  the  perverseness  with  which  he 
acted,  and  made  him  an  alien  from  his  kingdom,  because 
of  the  ordination  of  the  priesthood  to  which  he  aspired. 

5  Statute  72.  Concerning  the  Order  of  the  Priesthood. 
Each  one  of  you  knows  what  we  have  ordained  for  you, 
and  further  ye  know  that  there  are  some  whom  we  name 
bishops,  and  others  whom  we  name  presbyters,  and 
others  are  named  deacons.     With  prayer  we  laid  hand 

10  upon  them,  and  we  appointed  to  each  an  Order  according 
to  its  different  name.  And  among  us  there  is  no  one 
who  desires  a  filling  of  our  hand,  nor  will  he  receive 
from  us  that  which  he  wishes  for  of  priesthood,  as  the 
priests  of  the  oxen  of  lyurebe  am,  which  were  made  as  an 

15  abomination  to  God. 

Unless  there  had  been  a  special  Order  for  each  accord- 
ing to  law,  one  name  would  have  sufficed  for  all  the  world  ; 
but  having  been  taught  by  God  a  guidance  for  all  func- 
tions, we  have  separated  for  the  bishops  the  ordination 

20  of  the  priesthood,  for  the  presbyters  the  priesthood,  for 
the  deacons  the  service^  ....  that  the  work  of  the 
service  might  be  completed  withal.  It  is  not  seemly  for 
the  deacons  to  offer  the  Oblation,  or  to  baptise,  or  to 
give   the   Eulogia    to    small    or    to    great.     And    the 

25  presbyter  shall  not  ordain  anyone,  because  he  was  not 
worthy  (of  anything)  beside  his  Order.  For  God  is  not 
a  God  of  confusion,  so  that  the  inferiors  may  not  grasp 
(at  office)  with  audacity.  What  work  then  will  be  com- 
pleted by  the  imperfect }    And  they  make  a  new  law  to 

*  'The  service  of  that  to  which  man  comes,'  probably  confusion  from 
the  Arabic  *  insan,'  *  man,'  being  read  for  *  etnain,'  *  two.' 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  221 

their  own  destruction,  and  do  not  know  that  it  is  a  small 
thing  which  is  in  their  power  {lit.  with  them) ;  and  they 
kick  with  their  feet  in  the  net  And  if  thus,  they  do  not 
oppose  us,  but  they  oppose  the  Bishop  of  all  the  world, 
the  Son  of  God,  the  Chief  Priest  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  j 
A  chief  priest,  priests,  and  levites  were  ordained  by 
Moses,  the  lover  of  God,  and  we  the  twelve  Apostles 
were  ordained  by  our  Lord  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ, 
and  we  ordained  for  us  Klementos  and  Ya'ekob  and 
others  with  them,  that  we  might  send '  each  one  of  them,  lo 
and  further,  we  all  of  us  ordained  withal  presbyters  and 
deacons.  And  the  first  Presbyter,  the  only  true  Chief 
Priest,  is  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  did  not  grasp  for 
himself  the  honour,  but  the  Father  ordained  him.  And 
as  he  is  the  Chief  Priest  for  us,  so  he  offered  spiritual  15 
sacrifice  to  God  the  Father  before  he  was  crucified,  and 
he  commanded  us  to  do  likewise.  And  there  were  others 
with  us  who  believe  in  him,  but  he  does  not  grant  to  all 
who  believe  in  him  to  be  priests,  nor  to  obtain  the 
Order  of  ordination  of  priesthood  like  us.  And  after  his  20 
Ascension  we  offered  according  to  the  ordinance  of  the 
holy  bloodless  Oblation.  And  we  ordained  bishops  and 
presbyters  and  deacons  in  number  seven,  and  amongst 
them  Estifanos,  the  first  martyr,  who  was  not  the  least  of 
us  in  his  love  of  God :  but  he  showed  his  service  of  God  aj 
by  faith  and  love  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  so  much  that 
he  gave  his  life  up  for  his  sake ;  and  the  wicked  Jews,  the 
murderers  of  the  Lord,  stoned  him  with  stones  for  his 
name  and  killed  him.     But  he  was  a  man  of  such  fervent 

*  This  reading  is  probably  the  corrected  Ethiopic,  which  translated  th« 
unpointed  Arabic  'send'  instead  of  *  describe.' 


222  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

spirit  that  he  saw  our  Lord  Christ  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  and  he  saw  the  open  gates  of  the  heavens.  And  it 
is  nowhere  found  that  he  did  what  was  not  suitable  for 
him  as  deacon,  that  he  offered  sacrifice  or  laid  hand  upon 
5  anyone,  but  he  kept  to  his  Order  of  deacon  unto  the  end. 
For  thus  it  was  proper  for  the  martyr  of  our  Lord  Christ 
to  fulfil  the  duties  of  his  Order. 

And  if  there  are  any  who  blame  Filepos  the  deacon 
and    Hananya   the    faithful    brother    because   the   one 

lo  baptised  the  eunuch  and  the  other  baptised  even  me, 
Pawlos,  they  are  deluded  as  to  what  we  say  ;  for  we 
say  that  no  one  should  take  by  force  the  ordination  of 
priesthood,  but  he  obtained  it  from  God,  as  Malkasedek 
and  Ya'ekob;   or  from  the  chief  priest,  as  Aron  from 

IS  Muse ;  therefore  that  Filepos  and  Hananya  themselves 
took  not  ordination  from  themselves,  but  from  our  Lord 
Christ.  They  believed  in  the  Chief  Priest  of  God,  with 
whom  there  is  none  to  be  compared. 

PRAYER  OF   EARLY   MORNING 
20 

And  again  we  beseech  the  almighty  God,  the  Father 
of  our  Lord  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  while  thank- 
ing him  because  he  has  kept  us  throughout  the  night, 
and  brought  us  from  darkness  into  light,  from  corruption 
25  into  that  which  is  incorruptible,  and  from  ignorance  into 
the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  that  throughout  the  day  also 
he  may  cause  us  to  be  in  all  peace  and  health,  and  pro- 
tect his  people  with  the  power  of  his  angels,  who  has 
authority  over  all  work  of  blessing,  the  Lord  our  God. 

^  *  The  Father,  etc.*  is  put  afterwards  for  the  usual  form,  *  the  Father  of 
the  Lord,  etc' 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  223 


The  deacon  shall  say  :  Pray. 

O  Lord  the  almighty,  do  thou  cause  us  to  be  in  all 
peace  and  health  throughout  the  day,  for  thou  hast  kept 
us  throughout  the  night  Thou,  Lord,  the  almighty,  send 
to  us  thine  angel  the  good  guide.  And  have  mercy  upon  5 
us  according  to  the  greatness  of  thy  mercy,  and  accord- 
ing to  the  multitude  of  thy  clemency  blot  out  our  wicked- 
ness. And  none  of  us  is  an  alien  and  a  backslider,  put  us 
not  away  from  thy  favour,  because  of  thy  name  which 
was  named  over  us.  Be  forgiving  to  us  and  forsake  us  10 
not.  Grant  us  to  obtain  favour  before  thee  and  before 
Christ  thy  Son,  through,  etc. 


PRAYER  FOR  THE   SICK 


15 


And  again  we  beseech  the  almighty  God,  the  Father, 
etc.,  for  the  sick  brethren,  that  he  may  remove  all  sick- 
ness and  all  suffering  from  them.  Having  taken  away 
the  spirit  of  disease,  may  he  who  has  authority  for  all 
healing  give  to  them  life,  the  Lord  our  God.  20 

The  deacon  shall  say  :  Pray  for  the  sick. 

God  the  almighty,  the  Father,  etc.,  we  pray  thee  and 
we  beseech  thee  for  the  sick  brethren.     Grant  to  them 
life.     Take  away  the  spirit  of  sickness.     Cause  to  pass 
away  from  them  all  disease  and  all  suffering.     Speedily  35 
let  thy  mercy  find  us,  O  Lord. 

The  deacon  shall  say  :  Let  us  all  say. 

The  people  shall  say  :  Have  mercy  upon  us. 

Physician  of  the  soul  and  physician  of  the  body,  thou 

art  the  overseer  of  all  flesh,  and  of  those  who  are  troubled  50 

with    unclean    spirits;     deliver    every    tormented    and 

IS 


224  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

oppressed  soul,  give  health  and  give  rest,  drive  away  all 
disease  from  this  house,  and  from  those  who  call  upon 
thy  holy  and  blessed  name.  Having  healed  the  disease 
of  all  of  our  souls,  grant  perfect  soundness,  through,  etc. 

5 

PRAYER   FOR   THOSE   WHO   MAKE   A 

JOURNEY 

And  again  we  beseech  the  almighty  God,  the  Father, 
JO  etc,  for  those  our  brethren  who  make  a  journey,  and  also 
for  those  who  are  about  to  make  a  journey,  whether 
by  sea,  or  by  rivers,  or  by  the  deeps,  or  by  road,  in 
whatever  journey  they  may  travel,  that  he  may  bring  all 
into  the  safe  harbour,  the  almighty  Lord  our  God. 
IS      The  deacon  shall  say  :  Pray. 

Lord  our  God  the  almighty,  we   pray  thee  and   we 
beseech  thee  for  our  brethren  who  make  a  journey,  and 
also  for  those  who  are  about  to  make  a  journey  abroad ; 
direct  (them)  as  fellow  (traveller)  though  we  are  many. 
20  Speedily  let  thy  mercy  find  us,  O  Lord. 
The  deacon  shall  say  :  Let  us  all  say. 
The  people  shall  say  :  O  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
Bring  them  into  the  safe  harbour.     Restore  them  to 
their  people  with  joy  and   with   peace,   rejoicing   and 
25  causing  to  rejoice,  through,  etc 

PRAYER   FOR   RAINS 

And  again  we  beseech  the  almighty  God,  the  Father, 
30  etc,  for  rains,  that  he  may  send  his  rain  into  the  place 
where  it  is  needed,  the  almighty  Lord  our  God. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  225 

The  deacon  shall  say  :  Pray. 

Lord  our  God  the  almighty,  we  pray  thee  and  we 
beseech  thee,  send  thy  rains  into  the  place  where  they 
are  needed.  Make  to  rejoice  the  face  of  the  earth,  and 
water  its  furrows.  Bring  the  sowing  and  the  harvest,  5 
and  bless  the  circle  of  the  year  with  thy  goodness. 
Speedily  let  thy  mercy  find  us,  O  Lord. 

The  deacon  shall  say  :  Let  us  all  say. 

The  people  shall  say :  O  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

For  the  poor  of  thy  people,  and  for  all  those  who  hope  10 
in  thee,  work  with  us  according  to   thy  clemency,  and 
nourish  our  mind  with  the  doctrine  of  the  Godhead,  and 
with  understanding  which  is  from  thee,  through,  etc. 

PRAYER  FOR  THE  FRUIT  OF  THE  EARTH  15 

And  again  we  beseech  the  almighty  God,  the  Father 
etc.,  for  the  fruit  of  the  earth,  that  he  may  increase  the 
fruit  of  the  earth,  and  that  he  may  be  pleased  to  bring 
the  sowing  and  the  harvest.     May  he  grant  rich  favour,  20 
the  Lord  our  God. 

The  deacon  shall  say  :  Pray  for  the  fruit  of  the  earth. 

Lord  our  God  the  almighty,  we   pray  thee  and  we 
beseech  thee,  increase  the  fruit  of  the  earth,  and   be 
pleased  (and)  bring  the  sowing  and  the  harvest,  which  25 
is  from  thy  goodness.      Speedily  let  thy  mercy  find  us, 
O  Lord. 

The  deacon  shall  say  :  Let  us  all  say. 

The  people  shall  say :  O  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 

For  the  poor  of  thy  people  and  for  all  who  call  upon  30 
thy  holy  and  blessed  name,  through,  etc. 


226  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


PRAYER  FOR  THE   WATERS   OF   THE 

RIVERS 

5  And  again  we'  beseech  the  almighty  God,  the  Father, 
etc,  for  the  waters  of  the  rivers,  that  he  may  cause 
(them)  to  rise  up  to  their  (proper)  measure.  Make  to 
rejoice  the  face  of  the  earth.  May  he  bring  the  sowing 
and  the  harvest  May  he  grant  rich  favour,  the  Lord 
lo  our  God. 

The  deacon  shall  say :   Pray  for  the  waters  of  the 
rivers. 

God  the  almighty,  we  pray  thee  and  we  beseech  thee, 
cause  to  rise  the  waters  of  the  rivers  up  to  their  (proper) 
15  measure.  Make  to  rejoice  the  face  of  the  earth,  and 
water  its  furrows.  Multiply  food,  and  bless  the  circle  of 
the  year  with  thy  goodness.  Speedily  let  thy  mercy  find 
us,  O  Lord. 

The  deacon  shall  say  :  Let  us  all  say. 
ao      The  people  shall  say  :  O  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
For  the  poor  of  thy  people,  and  for  all  who  call  upon 
thy  holy  and  blessed  name,  through,  etc. 

PRAYER  FOR  THE   KING 

as 

And  again  we  beseech  the  almighty  God,  the  Father, 
etc.,  for  the  lover  of  God,  our  king,  lyasu,  that  he  should 
keep  his  kingdom  without  trouble,  in  peace  and  righteous- 
ness, the  almighty  Lord  our  God. 
30      The  deacon  shall  say  :  Pray  for  the  king. 

Lord  our  God  the  almighty,  we  pray  thee  and  we 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  22/ 

beseech  thee  for  the  king  of  this  land,  the  lover  of  God, 
our  king,  lyasu,  and  grant  to  him  what  is  useful  for  him. 
Cause  to  submit  his  enemy,  the  peoples  who  are  against 
his  wall&  And  speak  in  his  heart  for  thy  holy  Church. 
Speedily  let  thy  mercy  find  us,  O  Lord.  5 

The  deacon  shall  say :  Let  us  all  say. 

The  people  shall  say  :  O  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  him. 

Grant  him  without  error  to  keep  (his)  understanding 
concerning  the  faith  in  the  excellence  of  thy  Godhead, 
through,  etc.  lo 

PRAYER  FOR  THOSE  WHO  OFFER  AN 

OFFERING 

And  again  we  beseech  the  almighty  God,  the  Father,  is 
etc.,  for  those  who  offer  an  offering  in  the  holy,  one, 
catholic  {lit.  which  is  over  all)  Church,  a  scurrifice,  first* 
fruits,  tithes,  a  thanksgiving,  a  memorial,  whether  much 
or  little,  secret  and  open.     And  as  for  those  who  have 
nothing  and  wish  to  give,  (though)  they  have  nothing  to  to 
give,  accept  their  desire,  and  having  accepted  the  longing 
of  every  one  of  them,  grant  to  them  the  heavenly  Spirit 
And  as  for  those  who  have  somewhat  and  do  not  wish  to 
give,  soften  their  heart  to  do  good,  thou  (lit.  he)  who 
hast  authority  for  all  work  of  blessing,  the   Lord  our  sj 
God. 

The  deacon  shall  say :  Pray  for  those  who  offer  an 
offering. 

God  the  almighty,  we  pray  thee  and  we  beseech  thee 
for  those  who  offer  an  offering  to  the  holy,  one,  catholic  50 
Church,  to  the  honour  of  thy  name,  an  offering  and  a 


228  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


thanksgiving  of  first-fruits  and  of  tithes,  of  much  and  of 
little,  of  secret  and  of  open.  And  as  for  those  who  have 
nothing  (yet)  who  wish  to  give,  accept  their  desire  as  the 
offering  of  Abel :  and  as  the  Hebrew  woman  who  offered 

5  the  two  mites,  and  as  the  sacrifice  of  the  forefathers. 
And  thus  accept  into  the  heavenly  altar.  Repay  them 
with  a  reward  of  blessing,  heavenly  in  return  for  earthly, 
and  much  in  return  for  little,  and  open  in  return  for 
secret,  and  life  everlasting  in  Christ  in  return  for  food 

lo  and  drink,  through,  etc 

PRAYER  FOR  THE   CATECHUMENS 

And  again  we  beseech  the  almighty  God,  the  Father, 

15  etc.,  as  regards  his  servants  the  catechumens,  that  he 

may  impart    to    them    in    due    time    the   washing   of 

r^eneration  for  the   forgiveness  of  sin,  the  almighty 

Lord  our  God. 

The  deacon  shall  say :  Pray  for  the  catechumens, 
ao      God  the  Lord  almighty,  the  Father,  etc.,  we  pray  thee 
and  we  beseech  thee,  have  mercy  upon  thy  servants  the 
catechumens.      Be  kind,  (and)  remove  from  them  all  the 
remains  of  the  idols.     Impose  upon  their  hearts  thy  law 
and  thy  commandment,  and  thy  righteousness  and  thine 
35  ordinance.     Speedily  let  thy  mercy  find  us. 
The  deacon  shall  say  :  Let  us  all  say. 
The  people  shall  say  :  O  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us. 
In   proper  time  (impart   to    them)    the   washing    of 
regeneration  for  the  forgiveness  of  sin.     Make  them  the 
30  shrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  through  our  Lord  and  our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  through  whom,  etc. 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  229 


PRAYER  FOR  THOSE  WHO  HAVE  FALLEN 

ASLEEP 

And  again  we  beseech  the  almighty  God,  the  Father, 
etc.,  Lord  of  the  living,  Life  of  the   dead,  and    Hope    5 
of  the  desperate,   Helper  of  the  afflicted,   Cleanser  of 
sinners,  who  hast  abolished  death  and  burst  the  bonds 
of  Satan   (Sayetan).      Thou   hast  granted   life   to  the 
race  of  men,  thee  we  pray  and  beseech,  who  wilt  not  die 
for  ever  and  ever,  with  whom  is  the  treasure  of  life,  for  10 
those  who  have  fallen  asleep  and  rested  in  the  faith ;  the 
forefathers,    the     bishops,     (papasat),     presbyters     and 
deacons,   and   readers   (anaguenestis),   and   monks,  and 
virgins,  and  widows  (of  the  order),  infants,  widows  and 
orphans  {lit.  offspring  of  the  dead)  ;  and  for  the  soul  of  15 
thy  servant  N(egale)  and  for  the  soul  of  all  those  who  are 
there  in  that  place,  whom  thou  calledst  from  among  thy 
people  in  righteousness  and  in  uprightness.     Give  rest  to 
their  soul  in  the  place  of  pasturage  by  the  water  of  rest, 
in  the  bosom  of  Abreham,  Yeshak,  and  Ya'ekob,  in  the  20 
garden  of  joy,  among  the  guides  of  light,  thine  angels, 
having  united  (them)  with  thy  holy  ones.     And  raise  up 
their  body  in  the  day  which  thou  hast  appointed,  accord- 
ing   to    thy    holy    unlying    promise    of    thy    heavenly 
kingdom ;   for  there  is  no   death   to   thy  servants,   but  25 
rather  a  passing,  and  although  one  has  sinned,  and  the 
law  of  man  was  hidden  from  them,  be  indulgent;    for 
thou,  God,  art  good  and  the  lover  of  man ;    for  there  is 
none  pure  from  uncleanness  before  thee,  even  though  he 
lived  one  hour  upon  the  earth.     Do  thou  grant  passings  30 
to  their  soul  freely,  without  hindrance.     Send  the  Spirit 


230  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


of  the  Comforter,  and  who  gives  consolation  to  their 
people.  Comfort  them,  cause  them  to  rejoice  in  Christ, 
through,  etc. 

PRAYER  FOR   PEACE 

5 

And  again  we  beseech  the  almighty  God,  the  Father, 
etc,  for  the  peace  of  the  holy,  one,  catholic  Church,  that 
he  may  grant  much  peace  upon  all  rulers  {lit.  shepherds) 
and  peoples  and  upon  all  flocks,  he  who  has  authority 

lo  for  all  peace,  the  Lord  our  God. 

The  deacon  shall  say :  Pray  for  peace. 
Lord  our  God  the  almighty,  we  pray  thee  and  we  be- 
seech tliee  for  the  peace  of  the  holy,  one,  catholic  Church. 
King  of  peace,  give  to  us  peace,  because  thou  gavest  to 

IS  us  everything.  Possess  us,  God,  and  reward  us,  for 
beside  thee  there  is  no  other  whom  we  know.  And  thy 
holy  name  we  name  and  we  invoke.  Do  thou  impart  thy 
heavenly  peace  upon  us  all.  Preserve  (our)  life  {lit.  soul) 
and  our  condition  of  this  world  peacefully.     Give  peace 

ao  to  the  king  of  this  land,  and  through  thy  holy  name  give 
counsel  to  the  rulers  of  the  neighbouring  peoples.  Guard 
our  coming  in  and  our  going  out  in  peace,  that  living  in 
a  quiet  and  tranquil  life  we  may  be  found  in  all  piety,  in 
the  fear  of  God  and  virtue  in  Christ,  through,  etc. 


25 


PRAYER  FOR   THE   CONGREGATION 


And  again  we  beseech  the  almighty  God,  the  Father, 
etc.,  for  the  congregation,  this  as  well  as  all  our  congre- 
30  gations,  that  he  may  grant  that  it  may  be  according  to 
his  holy  will,  the  almighty  Lord  our  God. 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  23 1 


The  deacon  shall  say  :  Pray  for  our  congregation. 

God  the  almighty,  we  pray  thee  and  we  beseech  thee 
for  this  our  congregation  as  well  as  all  our  congregations. 
Grant  that  it  may  be  according  to  thy  holy  will,  where 
we  do  this  service  of  our  congregation  and  other  congre-  s 
gations  also.  And  make  it  a  house  of  prayer  and  a 
house  of  blessing.  Vouchsafe  to  bestow  upon  us,  and 
upon  those  who  (come)  after  us,  the  everlasting  salvation. 
Rise  up,  O  Lord,  and  let  all  thine  enemies  be  scattered, 
and  let  all  flee  away  from  before  thy  face  who  hate  lo 
thy  holy  and  blessed  name,  and  make  thy  people  ten 
thousand  of  ten  thousands  and  ten  thousand  times  ten 
thousand,  through,  etc 

PRAYER  FOR  THE   PAPAS  '^ 

And  again  we  beseech  the  almighty  God,  the  Father, 
etc.,  for  the  blessed  and  holy  Papas,  Aba  N(egale),  that 
thou  wilt  in  keeping  keep  him  for  us  during  many  years 
and  during  times  of  peace,  while  he  fulfils  the  priesthood  ao 
which  has  been  entrusted  to  him  by  thee.  May  the 
Lord  our  God  grant  rich  favour. 

The  deacon  shall  say  :  Pray  for  Papas  N. 

Lord  our  God  the  almighty,  we  pray  thee  and  we 
beseech  thee  for  the  blessed  Papas  N.  In  keeping  keep  25 
him  for  us  during  many  years,  during  times  of  peace, 
while  he  fulfils  the  priesthood  which  was  entrusted  to 
him  by  thee,  together  with  all  the  bishops,  presbyters, 
and  deacons,  and  with  all  the  fulness  of  the  holy,  one, 
catholic  Church.  And  the  prayer  which  they  make  for  y> 
us  and  for  all  thy  people  hear  (it),  and  accept  them  ;  and 


232  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

open  to  them  the  treasury  of  thy  clemency  ;  and  further, 
pour  down  upon  him  abundantly  thy  grace  of  thy  Holy 
Spirit,  thy  heavenly  blessing,  that  he  may  bless  thy 
people ;  and  moreover,  cause  to  submit  every  enemy, 
visible  or  invisible,  and  bruise  (them)  under  his  feet ;  and 
himself  indeed  keep  for  thy  Church  in  glory,  through 
thine  only  Son,  through  whom  to  thee  with  him  and  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  (be)  glory  and  might,  now  and  ever  and 
for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT 

The  statutes  of  the  apostles. 
The  second 

In  the  name  of  God,  one  in  essence  (and)  threefold 
in  eternal  Persons,  glory  to  him  for  ever,  and  upon  us  5 
his  mercy.  These  are  the  Canons  of  our  Fathers,  the 
Apostles,  which  they  ordered  for  the  establishment  of 
the  Church  by  the  hand  of  Clement.  The  first  chapter, 
the  introduction  of  the  Canon  of  the  Apostles,  and  the 
mention  of  the  names  of  some  of  them.  All  hail,  O  sons,  10 
in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

The  first  chapter:  Said  John  and  Matthew  and  Peter 
and   Philip   and   Simon  and  James  and  Nathaniel  and 
Thomas  and  Kayfas  and  Andrew  and  Bartholomew  and 
Jude  and  James  by  the  command  of  our  Master  Jesus  15 
Christ  and  our  Saviour. 

When  we  were  assembled  together  he  commanded 
and  said  :    Verily  ye   have   not  divided  the  countries 
among   you,  but   (now)  let  each  of  you  take  his  place 
according  to  your  number.     Define  ^   the   rank  of  the  20 
bishops    and    the    seats    of    the    presbyters    and     the 

^  'Define,'  the  unpointed  Arabic,  agreeing  with  the  Coptic.  Eth. 
probably  translated  the  wrongly  pointed  Arabic  MS.  Paris,  25 1, 
corrected  the  pointing  from  '  take '  or  '  begin '  to  '  define.' 

233 


234  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

administration  ^  of  the  deacons,  and  the  intelligence  of 
the  readers  (agnustisin),  and  the  widows  without  fault, 
and  the  works  upon  and  by  which  it  is  proper 
to  strengthen  the  foundations  of  the  Church;  that 
S  ye  may  know  the  pattern  of  that  which  is  in  the 
heavens :  and  that  they  may  be  kept  from  all  defile- 
ment, and  know  that  they  indeed  will  answer  at  the 
day  of  judgment  for  that  which  they  have  heard, 
and  have  not  kept. 

lo  He  commanded  us  to  send  these  words  into  all  the 
world ;  and  it  is  proper  for  us  all  to  be  according  as  the 
Lord  has  revealed  to  each  by  the  will  of  God  the  Father 
through  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  we  remember  his  words  and 
command  this,  by  way  of  remembrance  and  instruction, 

15  my  brethren. 

The  second  chapter :  Concerning  the  reproof  of  him 
who  says  what  is  not '  proper,  and  concerning  the  love  of 
God  and  the  love  of  thy  neighbour. 

Said  John :  O  men,  O  brethren,  we  know  that  we  shall 

ao  answer  for  everything  which  has  been  offered  to  us  :  and 
let  no  one  accept  the  person  of  him  who  is  with  him,  but 
if  one  of  those  who  are  with  him  should  happen  to  say 
what  is  not  proper,  then  let  him  reprove  him  that  what 
he  says  is  not  good.     And  cause  John  to  speak  first. 

35  And  John  said :  Verily  (there  are)  two  places,  the 
place  of  life  and  the  place  of  death,  and  between  {lit.  in) 
these  two  places  difference.  The  place  of  life  is  this, 
that  thou  shouldst  love  the  Lord  thy  God  who  created 
thee  with  all  thy  heart,  and  shouldst  glorify   him   who 

^  Idt.  '  meditation,'  mistaking '  t^mil '  for  '  ta'imil.' 
^  *  Not,*  Paris,  251,  om.  Vat. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  235 

saved  thee  from  death.  This  is  the  first  commandment ; 
and  the  second  is  this,  that  thou  shouldst  love  thy  com* 
panion  as  thyself.  On  this  are  hung  all  the  law  and 
the  prophets. 

The  third  chapter:   Concerning  a  thing  which  thou    5 
hatest — thou  shalt  not  do  it  to  another. 

Said  Matthew :  All  that  thou  wishest  not  should 
come  to  thee,  do  not  thou  it  to  another.  This  is  the 
same  as  that  all  that  thou  hatest,  do  it  not  (to  another). 
And  thou,  O  brother  Peter,  teach  them  with  these  words.  10 

The  fourth :  Concerning  the  commandments. 

Said  Peter  :  Thou  shalt  not  kill.    Thou  shalt  not  commit 
adultery.    Thou  shalt  not  dishonour  a  young  boy.    Thou    ^**^*^ 
shalt  not  steal.     Thou  shalt  not  be  a  soothsayer.     Thou 
shalt  not  be  a  star-gazer.     Thou  shalt  not  be  a  sorcerer.  15 
Thou  shalt  not  cause  abortion,  nor  after  (the  child)  is  bom 
shalt  thou  kill  it.     Thou  shalt  not  covet  anything  of  thy 
companion.     Thou  shalt  not  hate  any  man.     Thou  shalt 
not  bear  false  witness.     Thou  shalt  not  say  evil  of  any- 
one    Thou  shalt  not  think  about  contriving  wickedness.  30 
Thou  shalt  not  be  of  double  heart,  nor  double  tongue. 
Surely  to  be   double-tongued   is   a  deadly  snare.     Nor 
shall   thy  words  be  vain  or  false.     Nor  shalt  thou  be 
a  lover   of  the   greater   portion,  nor   rapacious,   nor  a 
hypocrite,  nor  one  of  evil  heart,  nor  proud,  nor  deviser  35 
of  evil  counsel  against  thy  neighbour,  nor  hate  any  man, 
but  reprove  some,  and  on  others  have  pity,  and  pray 
for  others,  and  love  others  more  than  thyself. 

The  fifth :  It  warns,  and  forbids  anger  and  envy  and 
obstinacy.  50 

Said  Andrew :  O  my  son,  fly  from  all  wickedness  and 


236  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

hate  all  evil.     Thou  shalt  not  be  angry,  for  anger  leads 
to  killing ;  because  anger  is  an  evil  demon. ^     Thou  shalt 
not  be  envious  or  obstinate  or  a  lover  of  fighting,  for  by 
this  thou  shalt  gain  evils. 
5       The  sixth :  Thou  shalt  not  be  lustful. 

Said  Philip  :  Thou  shalt  not  be  lustful,  for  lust  leads  to 
adultery  and  leads  the  man  by  compulsion  ;  because  lust 
is  a  female  demon ;  because  when  the  demon  of  anger 
is  united  with  that  of  (sensual)  pleasure,  it  is  perdition 

10  to  him  who  receives  them  both ;  and  the  place  of  the 
unclean  spirit  is  the  sin  of  the  soul.  When  he  finds  a 
little  entrance,  then  he  enlarges  the  place  and  takes  with 
him  all  the  unclean  spirits,  and  they  enter  into  that  soul 
and  allow  not  that   man   to  rise  at  all  to  behold  the 

15  right  Let  your  anger  put  a  limit  to  it(self).  Break  it 
off  and  put  an  end  to  it,  lest  it  cast  you  into  a  deed  of 
very  great  evil.  Anger  and  (sensual)  pleasure  are  evil  ; 
if  they  remain  for  much  time  they  become  demons,  and 
when  they  prevail  over  the  man  they  set  fire  to  his  soul, 

20  and  when  they  have  brought  him  to  deeds  of  iniquity  they 
mock  him  and  rejoice  over  the  perdition  of  the  soul  of 
that  man. 

The  seventh:  Thou  shalt  not  be  (one)  of  the  evil- 
speakers. 

25       Said  Simon  :  O  my  son,  thou  shalt  not  be  (one)  of  the 

evil-speakers,  nor  lofty  of  eye,  for  by  this  will  be  adultery. 

The  eighth:    Thou  shalt  not  interpret   {lit.    say  by) 

prodigies  and  star-gazing,  or  by  magic  and  other  things. 

Said   James:    O   my  son,   thou    shalt   not   interpret 


^  MSS.  read  'sultSn,'  probably  for  'sliayan'«  demon. 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  237 

prodigies,  for  this  leads  to  idolatry,  nor  be  a  magician 
or  a  master  of  hours  and  chooser  of  days  nor  star-gazer, 
nor  shalt  thou  desire  earnestly  to  be  acquainted  with 
them,  for  in  all  this  is  idolatry. 

The  ninth:  Thou  shalt  not  be  a  liar  nor  a  lover  of  5 
gold  or  vainglory. 

Said  Nathaniel :  O  my  son,  be  not  a  liar,  because  lying 
leads  to  theft ;  nor  be  a  lover  of  gold  or  vainglory,  for 
by  all  this  thou  shalt  be  drawn  to  theft  O  my  son,  do  not 
murmur,  because  grumbling  leads  the  man  to  blasphem- 10 
ing.  Be  not  overbearing  nor  thinker  of  evil,  for  in  all 
this  is  unbelief  Be  gentle,  for  the  gentle  will  inherit  the 
kingdom  of  the  heavens.  Be  kind,  merciful,  peaceable, 
with  heart  pure  from  all  evil  and  without  sin,  gentle, 
meek,  virtuous,  observant,  trembling  at  the  words  which  15 
thou  hast  heard.  Do  not  exalt  thyself  only,  nor  put 
thyself  with  the  lofty  ones,  but  be  a  companion  of  the 
righteous  and  humble,  and  all  that  happens  to  thee 
receive  with  thankfulness,  and  know  that  there  will  be 
nothing  except  (ordained)  by  the  Lord.  30 

The  tenth :  Him  who  says  to  thee  the  words  of  God 
and  became  life  to  thee,  thou  shalt  honour  and  support 
with  thy  toil  {/it.  sweat). 

Said  Thomas :  O  my  son,  him  who  says  to  thee  the 
words  of  God,  and  became  to  thee  the  cause  of  life,  and  35 
gave  to  thee  the  seal  of  dominion,  love  as  the  apple  of 
thine  eye,  remember  him  day  and  night  and  honour  him 
like  the  Lord,  for  the  place  in  which  is  remembered  the 
Lordship,  the  Lord  is  there ;  ask  of  him  ^  {/tt.  his  face) 

^  '  Ask  of  his  face,'  prob.  the  Coptic  idiom  for  '  visit' 


238  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

every  day,  him  and  the  rest  of  the  holy  ones,  and  thou 
shalt  rest  on  their  words.  He  who  is  associated  with  the 
holy  ones  will  become  holy.  Honour  him  as  (lies  in)  thy 
power  and  with  thy  toil  {/it.  sweat)  and  the  labour  of 

s  thy  hands.  I  f  the  Lord  has  made  thee  worthy  to  receive 
from  him  spiritual^  food  and  eternal  life,  then  it  is  most 
proper  for  thee  to  give  to  him  food  perishable  and 
temporal — The  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire.  Thou 
shalt  not  muzzle  the  bull  in  the  threshing-floor.     No 

10  man  planteth  {/t/.  soweth)  a  vine  and  eateth  not  of  the 
fruit  thereof 

TAe    eleventh:    Thou   shalt   not  cause    division,   but 
reunite  the  separated. 

Said  Ka(a :  Thou  shalt  not  cause  division,  but  reunite 

IS  the  separated  in  peace,  and  judge  with  justice.  Thou 
shalt  not  accept  the  person  of  the  sinner  for  sin,  because 
riches  have  no  power  with  God ;  and  do  not  respect  rank. 
Thou  shalt  not  make  double*  the  writing,  but  (act)  with  him 
equally  in  all  things.     Thou  shalt  not  be  of  double  heart 

ao  in  thy  prayer,  and  think  whether  he  will  fulfil  to  thee  what 
thou  desirest  or  not  Thou  shalt  not  think  when  thou 
stretchest  forth  thy  hand  (to  receive  and)  when  thou  hast 
finished  [and]  hast  drawn  it  back  to  thee.  If  there  was 
anjrthing  in  thy  hand  and  thou  hast  given  it,  thou  shalt 

25  seek  deliverance  from  thy  misdeeds.  Thou  shalt  not 
be  of  double  heart,  for  if  thou  hast  given,  (it  is)  thy 
acquisition :  know  who  it  is  who  will  repay  thee.  Thou 
shalt  not  turn  away  him  who  asks,  but  share  with  the 


^  MS.  adds  'and  bodily';  b  om. 

^  The  word  can  mean  '  intercede '  or  '  aid,'  but  the  passage  is  corrupt 


TRANSLATION   OF   THE  ARABIC  TEXT  239 

needy  in  all  things.  Thou  shalt  not  say,  Surely  they 
are  mine  alone  those  which  are  mine.  If  ye  are  sharers 
one  with  another  in  what  is  imperishable,  how  (much 
more)  in  perishable  ? 

The  twelfth :  The  exhortation  to  giving  alms.  5 

Said  Bartholomew :  I  beseech  you,  O  my  brethren, 
while  time  remains  to  you,  and  ye  are  yourselves  able 
to  do  good  to  others  {/it.  them),  do  not  be  slack  in  giving ; 
while  anything  remains  to  you  ye  shall  give  it.  For  the 
day  of  the  Lord  is  near,  and  all  that  will  be  seen  in  it  and  10 
the  wicked  will  perish  ;  and  the  Lord  will  come,  and 
his  reward  with  him.  Be  lawgivers  to  yourselves,  be 
teachers  of  yourselves,  as  God  taught  you,  and  keep 
that  which  I  said,  and  add  not  to  them,  nor  diminish 
from  them.  15 

Said  Peter :  O  brethren,  the  Scriptures  teach  them 
concerning  the  rest  of  the  commandments.  As  for  us, 
we  speak  to  them  what  we  were  commanded.  They 
said  with  one  accord :   Let  Peter  speak. 

The   thirteenth :    Concerning   the  ordination   of    the  20 
Bishop. 

Said  Peter  :  If  it  is  a  place  with  few  people  in  it  of  the 
Faithful,  and  the  assembly  not  large  enough  to  elect  a 
bishop,  being  not  more  than  twelve  men,^  then  let  them 
write  to  the  churches  of  the  neighbourhood,  the  place  25 
(in)  which  there  are  many  of  the  Faithful,  to  bring  three 
of  the  Faithful,  trustworthy  men,  chosen  from  that  place ; 
and  they  shall  test  carefully  as  to  which  is  worthy  of  the 

^  IaL  'the  assembly  increased  not  to  cause  to  make  the  vote  for  the 
bishop  unto  the  limit  of  twelve  men,'  reading  '  tadhkirah,'  voting-ticket,  for 
'  tazkirah,'  purity. 

16 


240  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

work,  if  he  has  a  life  of  good  repute  among  the  peoples, 
and  without  sin  or  anger,  a  lover  of  the  poor,  and  kind, 
not  a  drunkard,  nor  adulterer,  nor  lover  of  the  greater 
portion,  not  a  railer,  nor  a  hypocrite  and  the  like  of  that 
5  And  it  is  good  that  he  have  no  wife,  but  if  he  has  been 
married  to  one  wife  before  he  becomes  bishop,  let  him 
live  with  her;  and  he  shall  have  a  share  of  all  sound 
doctrine  and  be  able  to  expound  the  Scriptures ;  and  if 
he  knows  not  how  to  write,^  then  he  shall  be  humble  and 

lo  abound  in  love  to  all  men,  that  he  may  not  be  judged 
about  anything  and  so  be  convicted. 

Said  John  :  The  bishop  who  is  ordained,  if  he  knows 
how  to  keep  himself  and  (has)  the  love  of  God  and  of 
those  who  are  with  him,  let  him  appoint  two  presbyters, 

15  having  tested  them. 

They  all  said :  Not  two,  but  three,  because  they  are 
four  and  twenty  elders,  twelve  on  the  right  hand  and 
twelve  on  the  left  hand. 

Said  John  :    It  is  good  that  ye  have  reminded  me, 

20  O  brethren.  Those  who  are  on  the  right  hand  take 
the  cups  from  the  archangels,  they  offer  them  to  the 
Lord ;  and  those  who  are  on  the  left  hand  are  over 
the  multitude  of  the  angels.  It  is  proper  that  the 
presbyters   should  be  in  the  form    of  elders,  and   past 

35  the  time  of  intercourse  with  wife,  and  they  shall  share 
in  the  Mysteries  with  the  bishop,  and  help  him  in 
everything,  and  gather  to  (him)  loving  (him)  as  their 
shepherd.  And  the  presbyters  who  are  on  the  right 
hand  shall  be  occupied  with  those  who  toil  at  the  altar : 

^  Probably  for  *  the  Scriptures,'  the  pointing  being  wrong. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  Z41 

let  them  be  worthy  of  the  honour,  and  they  shall  reject 
him  who  is  worthy  to  be  rejected.  And  the  presbyters 
who  are  on  the  left  hand  shall  be  occupied  with  the 
assembly,  that  they  may  be  quiet  and  not  make  disturb- 
ance, but  being  controlled  with  all  control,  may  be  $ 
obedient  with  all  obedience. 

The  fourteenth :    Concerning  the  ordination  of  the 
Readers  (agnustisin). 

Said  James :  Let  the  reader  (agnustis)  be  appointed 
after  he  has  been  first  tested.  And  he  shall  not  be  of  lo 
many  words,  nor  a  drunkard,  nor  speak  in  mockery ;  he 
shall  have  a  life  of  good  repute,  (and  be)  a  lover  of  virtue, 
and  quick  of  going  to  the  place  of  assembly,  one  who 
remembers  in  it  the  judgment,  and  he  shall  be  obedient 
and  read  well,  and  know  that  the  duty  of  the  reader  is  to  is 
do  what  he  reads,  he  who  fills  the  hearing  of  others.  Is 
it  not  proper  for  him  that  he  should  know  what  he  says  ? 
Is  not  it  written  :  This  is  a  sin  in  him  before  God  ? 

The  fifteenth :    Concerning   the    ordination    of   the 
Deacons.  ao 

Said  Matthew :  Let  them  be  tested  in  all  service,  and 
the  assembly  shall  bear  testimony  to  them  that  they  live 
with  one  wife  and  bring  up  their  children  in  purity,  and 
they  shall  be  kind  and  meek,  and  not  grumblers,  nor 
double-tongued,  nor  wrathful,  for  anger  irritates  the  25 
wise  man ;  and  they  shall  not  accept  the  person  of 
the  rich,  nor  oppress  the  poor,  nor  drink  much  wine, 
and  they  shall  work  hard  for  the  Mysteries,  the  hidden, 
the  beautiful,  the  cheering.  And  they  shall  oblige 
him  of  the  brethren  who  has  anything,  to  comfort  30 
him  who  has   not,  and   to  be  sharers  with  them  also  ^^ 


242  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

in   giving,  and   they   shall   honour   the   assembly  with 

all  honours  and  modesty  and  fear,  and  they  shall  keep 

themselves  with  all  firmness.      Some  they  shall  teach, 

others  they  shall  question,  and  for  others  they  shall  pray. 

5  Those  who  are  rejected  they  shall  expel  at  once,  and 

they  shall  know  that  the  adversaries,  the  rejected,  the 

insulters  are  nothing  but  your  adversaries. 

The  sixteenth  :  Concerning  the  Widows. 

Said   Kaia :  Let  three  widows   be  appointed  ;  they^ 

lo  shall  devote  themselves  to  prayer,  and  attend  to  all  (who) 
are  in  afflictions,  and  (who)  wish  to  tell  them  what  it  is ; 
and  let  the  other  (widow)  be  appointed  with  the  women 
who  are  afflicted  with  sicknesses,  that  they  may  attend 
to  them  in  the  best  way,  sitting  up  at  night ;   and  they 

15  shall  inform  the  presbyters  what  is  the  matter.  She 
shall  not  be  a  lover  of  gain,  nor  a  drunkard,  lest  she 
should  neglect,  and  not  keep  watch  in  the  service  of 
the  night.  And  if  anyone  (of  the  widows)  wished  to 
do  good  works,  let  her  do  it  in  the  kindliness  of  her 

30  heart,  because  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  has  been  first 
announced  (to  her). 

The  seventeenth:  Concerning  the  Deacons,  they  shall 
be  doers  of  good  works. 

Said   Andrew :  The   deacons  shall  be  doers  of  good 

35  works  by  night  and  day  in  every  place,  and  shall  not 
exalt  themselves  above  the  weak  nor  accept  the  person 
of  the  rich,  but  they  shall  take  knowledge  of  the  feeble 
and  give  to  them  of  what  is  over,  and  oblige  them 
who  have  anything  to  gather  for  them  good  things,  and 

1  *  Two '  omitted. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  243 

fulfil  the  words  of  our  Teacher :  Verily  ye  saw  me 
hungry  and  ye  fed  me.  And  they  who  minister  a  good 
(ministry)  without  fault  shall  surely  gain  for  themselves 
the  place  of  the  pasture. 

The  eighteenth :  The  statute  of  the  Layman.  % 

Said  Philip :  Let  the  layman  hear  the  commands 
which  are  said  to  him,  with  cheerfulness.  Let  them  obey 
those  who  devote  themselves  to  the  altar,  and  let  each 
one  please  God  in  what  they  have  given  him  (to  do) 
and  defined  for  him.  And  ye  shall  not  learn  to  be  lo 
quarrelsome  with  one  another  because  of  what  ye  are 
commanded  to  do ;  but  let  each  labour  in  what  is 
put  him  (to  do)  by  God,  and  let  not  anyone  make 
to  stumble  his  companion  in  what  he  labours;  neither 
do  the  angels  transgress  what  is  defined  for  them  15 
(to  do). 

The  nineteenth  :  It  reminds  that  the  Oblation  (is)  the 
Body  of  Christ,  and  what  comes  after  it 

Said  Andrew :    We   have  already  defined   this  con- 
cerning the  Oblation,  which  is  the  Body  of  Christ  and  w 
his  Blood,  and  we  are  explaining  it  carefully. 

Said  John :   Ye  have  forgotten,  O  brethren,  that  at 
the  time   in  which  the  Teacher  asked   for  bread  and 
wine  and  blessed  them  and  said :  This  is  my  Body  and 
this  is  my  Blood,  he  did  not  command  that  they  should  *i 
be  regarded  as  material.' 

Said  Martha   concerning  Mary :    Look   at  her,  and 
she  laughs. 

Said  Mary :    Not  because  of  (this)  that  I  laughed. 

'  The  leading  of  i. 


344  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

The  Teacher  said  :  *  It  is  good  (that)  the  sick  should  be 

healed  by  the  strong/ 

The  twenty:   It   is  not  proper  for   women   to   pray 

when  they  are   standing   up ;   and   that   they  have   no 
5  ministry  except  ministering  to  the  needy ;  charity,  and 

what  comes  after  it 

Said  Kaia :  Certain  have  said  that  it  is  not  proper  for 

women   to  pray  when   they  are   standing  up,  but  they 

should  prostrate  themselves  upon  the  ground, 
lo      Said  James :   How  can  we  find  for  the  women  any 

ministry   except   this    ministry  only,   that  they  should 

help  the  needy? 

Said  Philip :  O  brethren,  concerning  the  charity  which 

he  does,  surely  (in  doing  it)  he  gathers  for  himself  a 
15  good  treasure,  and  one  which  he  gathers  for  himself  in 

the  heavenly  kingdom.     Surely  it  is  reckoned  with  God 

that  it  is  a  good  work  lasting  for  ever. 

Said  Peter :   O  brethren,  we  are  not  lords  over  any- 
one with  compulsion,  but  we  assure  you  from  the  Lord, 
ao  we  ask  you  to  hear  and  keep  the  statutes  and  not  to 

add  to  them  or  diminish  from  them,  in  the  name  of 

our  Master  Jesus  Christ,  to  whom  be  glory  unto  ages 

of  ages.     Amin. 

And  after  they  all  finished,  each  one  saying  his  word 
25  in  the  first  section,  this  is  that  which  comes  next. 

The  twenty-first:    Concerning  the  ordination  of  the 

Bishops  at  the  beginning  of  the  Kiddas.      The  bishop 

shall  be  ordained,  as  we  have  already  said.      He  shall 

be  chosen  from  all  the  assembly,  without  fault     When 
30  they  have  made  mention  of  him  and  are  satisfied  with 

him   all  the   people  shall  assemble  together,  and   the 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  245 

presbyters  and  the  deacons,  on  Sunday.^  And  all  the 
bishops  shall  walk  one  with  another  joyfully,  and  they 
shall  lay  their  hands  upon  him ;  and  the  people  standing 
up  in  silence  together  shall  pray  in  their  hearts  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  may  descend  upon  him,  and  they  shall  5' 
ask  one  of  the  bishops,  and  while  everyone  stands,  he 
shall  lay  his  hand  upon  him  who  is  ordained  bishop, 
and  shall  pray  over  him  thus.  And  when  he  has 
become  bishop  everyone  shall  salute  him  and  shall 
kiss  his  mouth.  And  the  deacons  shall  bring  to  him  10 
the  Oblations :  then  having  placed  his  hand  upon  the 
Oblation,  with  all  the  presbyters  he  shall  say  and  give 
thanks  thus ;  The  Lord  (be)  with  you.  And  the  whole 
people  shall  say :  And  with  thy  spirit  he  shall  be. 

And  he  shall  say :  Where  are  your  hearts?    And  all  15 
the  people  shall  say :   They  are  with  the  Lord.     And  he 
shall  say :  Give  thanks  to  the  Lord.     And  the  people 
shall  say  :   Worthy  and  it  is  meet  thus.     And  he  shall 
say  what  comes  after  this  in  the  rule  of  the  Kiddas. 

The  twenty-second:  Concerning  the  ordination  of  the  m 
Presbyter. 

When  the  bishop  desires  to  ordain  the  presbyter  he 
shall  lay  his  hand  upon  his  head ;  and  all  the  priests 
touched  him  and  (the  bishop)  prays  over  him  according 
to  the  pattern  which  we  have  said  concerning  the  bishop.  25 

The  twenty-third :  Concerning  the  ordination  of  the 
Deacons. 

When  the  bishop  desires  to  appoint  a  deacon,  he  shall 
choose  him  as  we  have  said  before.     The  bishop  alone 

^  Lit.  '  the  day  of  the  one.' 


246  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


shall  lay  his  hand  upon  him.  Why  have  we  said  that 
the  bishop  alone  (is)  he  who  shall  lay  his  hand  upon 
him?  The  reason  of  this  is  that  he  is  not  appointed 
for  the  priesthood,  but  he  is  one  of  the  assistants  of 

5  this  work,  that  he  should  perform  his  commands  with 
which  he  is  commanded  by  him.  And  he  is  not 
ordained  to  be  a  teacher  of  all  the  clergy,^  but  to  be 
one  who  will  give  attention  to  what  is  proper  (to  be 
done)  and  will   give   the   bishop  information   about  it. 

10  And  he  is  not  appointed  to  acquire  the  spirit  of  great- 

'  ness  in  which  the  presbyters  share,  but  to  give  attention, 
and  to  be  worthy  of  the  bishop  s  trust,  and  to  be  diligent 
about  what  is  proper,  because  the  bishop  alone  is  he 
who  lays  his  hand  upon  him.      As  for  the  presbyters, 

15  the  bishop  and  all  the  presbyters  share  with  him  in 
placing  their  hands  upon  him.  It  is  the  one  spirit  which 
comes  down  upon  him.  And  the  presbyter  is  only  he 
who  acquires  the  position  of  the  clergy,  he  has  not 
authority  ;  so  because  of  that  he  does  not  appoint  clergy, 

JO  the  presbyter  is  only  ordained,  and  the  clergy  (in  general) 
ordain  him. 

The  twenty-fourth:  Concerning  the  Confessors  who 
were  punished  for  the  name  of  Christ,  that  they  have 
the  rank  of  the  deacon  and  the  presbyter. 

25  If  the  confessor  has  been  in  bonds  for  the  name  of 
the  Lord,  hand  shall  not  be  laid  for  the  ministry 
which  belongs  to  the  deacon  or  the  presbyter,  for 
he  has  the  honour  of  the  presbyterate  by  his  con- 
fession.     If  he  is  appointed  bishop,  the  hand  shall  be 

1  'Akliros.' 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  247 

laid  Upon  him.  If  as  confessor  he  was  not  brought 
before  the  authorities  and  was  not  punished  with  bonds 
or  prison  and  was  not  put  to  suffering,  but  he  only  came 
to  be  ridiculed  and  was  punished  with  punishment  in 
his^  house,  and  yet  he  confessed,  he  is  worthy  of  all  s 
the  rank  (takQs)  of  the  priesthood,  the  hand  shall  be 
laid  upon  him,  and  he  shall  be  made  (priest).  And 
the  bishop  shall  give  thanks  as  we  have  said  before, 
and  it  is  obligatory  that  he  should  mention  what  we 
have  said  before,  reading  clearly  and  carefully  and  lo 
giving  thanks  to  God ;  and  that  according  to  his  power 
each  one  shall  pray.  If  anyone  is  able  to  pray  fluently 
and  (it  is)  a  grand  and  elevated  prayer,  and  he  is  a 
good  man,  and  if  he  offers  prayer  and  says  the  words 
of  praise  as  he  can,  no  one  shall  prevent  him  from  15 
offering  prayer  if  he  is  correct  and  right  (in  faith). 

The  twenty-fifth :  Concerning  the  appointment  of  the 
widows. 

When  (a  widow)  is  appointed  she  shall  not  be  signed, 
but  shall  be  made  by  the  name.  If  her  husband  has  30 
been  dead  a  long  time  let  her  be  appointed.  If  her 
husband  has  lately  died  she  shall  not  be  trusted,  but  if 
she  had  become  aged  let  her  be  tested  for  a  time,  for 
solicitations  grow  old  in  htm  who  makes  place  for  them 
in  him.  Let  the  widow  be  appointed  with  the  word  35 
alone,  and  let  her  be  joined  to  the  rest  of  the  widows, 
and  hand  shall  not  be  placed  upon  her,  because  she 
does  not  offer  the  Oblations  nor  have  any  ministry. 
Signing  is  for  the   clergy  because  of  (their)  ministry, 

>ZiV. 'the.' 


248  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

and   for   the   widow   (her  appointment    is)    because   of 
prayer,  this  (being  the  duty)  of  everyone. 

The  twenty-sixth:  Concerning  the  Virgins  and  the 
Subdeacons,  and  concerning  the  grace  of  healing. 

5  The  Reader  (agnustis)  is  he  who  is  appointed  by 
the  bishop  giving  to  him  the  Book,  and  hand  shall 
not  be  laid  upon  him. 

Hand  shall  not  be  placed  upon  a  virgin,  but  her 
inmost  thought  alone  causes  her  to  be  a  virgin. 

10  Hand  shall  not  be  placed  on  a  subdeacon,  but  a 
name^  shall  be  put  upon  them  that  they  may  follow 
the  deacons. 

Concerning  the  grace  of  healing.  If  anyone  says,  I 
have  acquired  a  grace  of  healing  by  revelation,  hand  shall 

15  not  be  placed  on  him,  because  the  deed  shall  make 
evident  whether  he  is  speaking  the  truth. 

714^  twenty-seventh  :  Concerning  the  new  persons  who 
begin  to  come  in  to  the  Faith ;  and  the  occupations 
which  it  is  proper  they  should  give  up  who  come  in  as 

90  new  to  hear  the  words. 

They  shall  bring  them  first  to  the  teachers  before  all 
the  people  come  in.  And  they  shall  ask  for  what  reason 
they  seek  the  FaitL  Those  who  bring  them  to  hear 
shall  bear  testimony  to  them.     He  shall  ask  about  their 

35  life  as  to  what  it  is — if  they  have  wives ;  or  are  slaves. 
If  anyone  is  a  slave  of  a  believer,  if  he  permitted 
him,  then  let  him  hear,  and  if  his  master  does  not  bear 
testimony  to  him,  let  him  be  sent  away.  If  he  is  an 
idolater,  let  it  be  known  if  he  was  pleasing  his  master, 

1 'Hand,' a. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  249 

lest  scandal  should  occur.  If  anyone  have  a  wife,  or  a 
woman  have  a.  husband,  let  them  be  taught,  the  man 
to  be  contented  with  his  wife,  and  the  woman  contented 
with  her  husband.  And  if  any  man  was  not  living  with 
a  wife,  let  him  be  taught  not  to  commit  adultery,  but  to  5 
be  married  according  to  the  law,  or  remain  as  is  becoming 
for  him.  And  if  anyone  had  a  demon,*  then  let  him  not 
hear  the  words  of  the  teacher. 

Concerning  occupations,  and  what  there  is  of  crafts 
besides  the  occupations.     The  occupations  which  belong  10 
to  those   whom   they   cause  to  come    to    the   instruc- 
tion.     If  anyone   is  a  pander,   let  him   desist  or  be 
sent  away.      And  if  anyone  is  a  maker  of  idols  or  a 
painter,  let  him  be  taught  not  to  make  idols,  and  if  he 
be  not  willing  to  desist,  let  him  be  sent  away.      And  15 
if  anyone  is  present  at  the  place  of  amusement,*  let  him 
desist  or  then  be  sent  away.     If  anyone  teaches  children, 
it  is  well  that  he  desist     But  if  he  has  no  other  trade, 
let  him  be  forgiven.     He  who  goes  to  the  festivals  of 
idols,  let   him  desist  or  be  sent  away.      (IQ  one  is  a  30 
maker  *  of  potions,  or  teaches  making  potions,  or  teaches 
combating  and  fighting  and  weapons  of  war,  let  him 
desist  or  be  sent  away.      (If)  anyone  is  a  priest  of 
idols  or  guardian   of  idols,  let  him  desist  or   be  sent 
away.     (If  anyone  is  a)   soldier  of  authority,   let   him  35 
not  kill,  and  if  he  is  ordered  to  kill,  let  him  not  do  it — if 
he  desisted  (well) — if  not,  let  him  be  sent  away. 

TAe  twenty-eighth  z    Concerning  persons  in   red,   or 
him  of  the   Faithful  who   becomes  a  soldier  or  star- 

'  Ut.  'Satan.'        *  lAt.  'siesta.'        *  'Abannachoi'-'phannakot.' 


250  STATUTES   OF  THE  APOSTLES 

gazer  or  sorcerer,  or  other  than  that,  let   him   be  sent 
away. 

(If  there  be  one  who  has)  authority  over  the  sword, 
or  a  chief  of  the  city  and  clad  in  red,  let  him  desist 

5  or  be  sent  away.  If  a  catechumen  or  believer  wish 
to  become  a  soldier,  let  both  be  sent  away.  Surely 
they  both  have  removed  far  from  God.  An  adulteress, 
or  a  man  without  salvation,  or  a  man  who  does  what  it 
is  not  proper  to  mention,  let  them  be  sent  away,  because 

10  they  are  polluted.  Verily,  a  sorcerer  shall  not  be  brought 
into  the  ranks  of  the  Faithful.  The  star-gazer  and 
master  of  the  astrolabe,  or  soothsayer,  or  agitator  of 
the  multitude,  or  one  who  sells  clothes  from  the  diggers  of 
the  graves,  or  the  maker  of  phylacteries,  let  them  desist 

15  or  be  sent  away. 

The  twenty-ninth:  Concerning  the  concubine,  and  if 
we  have  omitted  anything,  decide  as  is  proper. 

If  the   concubine  of  the   man   be   his   slave,  if  she 
brought   up  her   children  and   kept   to  him   alone,   let 

20  her  hear,  and  if  otherwise,  let  her  be  sent  away.  He 
who  has  a  concubine,  let  him  desist  and  be  married 
according  to  law,  and  if  he  will  not  (do  so)  let  him  be 
sent  away. 

If  we  have  omitted  anything,   decide  as   is  proper, 

25  because  we  all  have  the  Spirit  of  God. 

The  thirty:  Concerning  the  time  for  hearing  the  words 
after  their  occupations. 

Let  the  catechumens  remain  three  years  hearing  the 
words.     If  there   is  a  scholar  and  with  good  thought, 

30  decide  about  him  not  by  the  time,  but  his  work  alone  (is) 
that  by  which  it  shall  be  decided  for  him. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT         25 1 

The  thirty 'first :  Concerning  the  prayer  of  him  who 
hears  the  words  and  the  kiss. 

When  the  teacher  has  finished  the  instruction,  let 
the  catechumens  pray  by  themselves  and  separated  from 
the  Faithful.  And  let  the  women  stand  in  a  place  in  ; 
the  church  by  themselves,  the  Faithful  women  and  the 
female  catechumens.  And  when  they  have  finished  the 
prayer,  the  female  catechumens  shall  not  give  the  salu- 
tation, because  their  kiss  is  not  yet  pure,  but  let  the 
Faithful  women  kiss  one  another ;  the  men  shall  kiss  the  lo 
men,  and  the  women  shall  kiss  the  women,  and  the  men 
shall  not  kiss  the  women.  And  all  the  women  shall  veil 
their  heads  with  their  balalin  ^  or  their  mantles,  and  not 
with  linen  only,  because  this  is  not  suitable  for  them. 

The  thirty-second :    Concerning   the  laying  the  hand  15 
upon  the  catechumens  after  the  prayer. 

When  the  teacher  lays  the  hand  upon  the  cate- 
chumens, let  him  pray  and  then  dismiss  them.  If  it  was 
one  of  the  ecclesiastics  who  taught,  or  a  layman,  let 
him  do  the  same.  If  (one)  was  apprehended  for  the  ao 
name  of  the  Lord,  he  shall  not  be  doubtful  about  his 
testimony.  If  he  was  overpowered  and  slain  before 
obtaining  the  pardon  of  his  misdeeds  he  shall  be  justified, 
because  he  was  baptised  in  his  blood. 

The  thirty-third :  Concerning  him  who  is  baptised.        35 

When  one  has  been  chosen,  or  one  who  is  prepared  for 
Baptism,  let  him  be  examined  concerning  his  life,  whether 
he  lived  in  chastity,  while  they  are  catechumens;  and 
whether  they  reverenced  the  widows,  or  visited  the  sick, 

1  Probably  for 'pftUiunu' 


252  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

or  fulfilled  every  good  thing.  So  if  those  who  bring  them 
bear  testimony  that  they  have  done  thus,  let  them  hear  the 
Gospel,  from  the  day  in  which  they  were  brought,  and  let 
the  hand  be  laid  on  them  every  day  and  exorcise  them. 

5  And  when  the  day  draws  nigh  in  which  they  are  to  be 
baptised,  let  the  bishop  bind  by  oath  every  one  of  them, 
that  he  may  know  that  they  are  pure.  And  if  there  was 
one  who  is  not  pure,  let  him  put  him  aside,  because  he  has 
not  heard  the  words  with  faith,  for  it  is  not  possible  that 

lo  an  alien  should  ever  be  baptised. 

They  shall  instruct  those  who  are  to  be  baptised  that 
they  should  go  to  the  bath  and  pray  on  the  fifth  of  the 
week.  And  if  there  was  among  them  a  menstruous 
woman,  let  her  be  put  aside,  and  she  shall  be  baptised 

15  another  day.  And  they  who  wish  to  be  baptised  shall 
fast  on  Friday  (jumah),  and  the  bishop  shall  assemble  those 
who  are  to  be  baptised  on  the  day  of  the  sabbath  in  one 
place,  and  shall  command  them  all  to  pray  and  prostrate 
themselves.    And  having  laid  his  hand  upon  them,  let  him 

20  exorcise  every  alien  spirit,  that  they  may  flee  away  from 
them  and  never  return  to  them  henceforth  :  and  when  he 
has  finished  binding  them  by  oath,  let  him  breathe  in  their 
faces,  and  having  signed  their  foreheads  and  their  ears  and 
their  noses,  let  him  make  them  stand  up,  and  let  them 

25  keep  watch  all  their  night,  and  let  them  read  to  them 
and  admonish  them.  And  he  who  is  to  be  baptised  shall 
not  bring  in  with  him  any  vessel  (to  the  water),  but  every- 
one shall  give  thanks,  and  it  is  proper  for  him  who  is 
worthy  to  bring  his  Oblation  (K urban). ^ 


^  This  is  the  probable  meaning,  though  a"*  and  b  add  *  at  the  hour.' 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  253 

The  thirty-fourth:  Concerning  the  ordinance  of 
Baptism  and  the  instruction  of  the  Faith,  and  the  con- 
fession at  the  baptistery,  and  the  Kiddas,  and  concerning 
the  milk  and  honey. 

At  the  time  of  cock-crow,  let  him  pray  first  over  the    s 
water  ;  and  let  the  water  be  either  running  through  the 
tank  or  running  (down)  upon  it      And  let  it  be  thus 
unless  there  was  urgent  necessity.     If  there  was  urgent 
necessity,  he  shall  pour  in  water  which  is  found.     Let 
them   undress,  and   they  shall   begin   by   baptising  the  lo 
little  children  first.     And  he  who  can  speak  for  himself 
and  take  oath  shall  speak,  and  for  them  who  cannot  let 
their  parents  speak,  or  one  of  the  family.     Afterwards 
they  shall  baptise  the  grown  men,  and  the  women  last : 
and  they  shall  unloose  their  hair  and   lay  aside   their  ^5 
ornaments  of  gold  which  they  wear,  and  let  no  one  go 
down  to  the  water  having  any  alien  thing. 

And  at  the  time  when  they  are  baptised  the  bishop 
shall  give  thanks  over  the  oil  ^  which  he  put  in  a  vessel, 
and  we  call  it  oil  of  Eucharistia.  And  he  shall  take  other  *> 
oil  and  adjure  over  it,  and  call  it  oil  of  Exorcism.  And 
there  shall  be  the  deacon  carrying  the  oil  of  adjuration, 
and  he  shall  stand  on  the  left  hand  of  the  presbyter,  and 
another  deacon  shall  take  the  oil  of  thanksgiving  and 
shall  stand  on  the  right  hand,  and  when  the  presbyter  ^5 
has  taken  every  one  of  those  who  are  to  be  baptised,  he 
shall  bid  him  revile  and  say  :  I  revile  thee,  O  Eblis,  and 
all  thy  service  and  all  thy  impure  works.  And  when  he 
has  professed  this,  he  shall  anoint  with  the  oil  of  adjuration, 

^  Added  in  margin. 


254  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

saying  :  Let  every  foul  spirit  remove  far  from  them,  and 
thus  he  shall  give  him  to  the  bishop,  naked.  And  the 
bishop  is  standing  at  the  water  of  the  baptistery,  then  the 
deacon  shall  walk  with  him  to  the  water  and  say  to  him 
5  and  instruct  him :  Dost  thou  believe  in  one  God,  the 
Father  Almighty,  and  his  only  Son  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord 
and  our  Saviour,  and  his  Holy  Spirit,  the  Giver  of  Life 
to  all  creation,  the  Trinity  of  one  coequal  Godhead,  one 
Lordship,  one  Kingdom,  and  one  Faith,  one  Baptism  in 

lo  the  universal  Church,  Life  eternal,  Amin  ?  And  he  who 
is  to  be  baptised  shall  say  also  like  this :  Verily  I  believe. 
And  thus  he  who  baptises  shall  leave  his  hand  upon  him 
who  receives  (baptism)  and  dip  him  three  times.  And  he 
shall  declare  this  every  time,  and  afterwards  he  shall  say  to 

15  him:  Dost  thou  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  our  Lord,  the  only 
Son  of  God  the  Father,  that  he  became  man  by  an  incom- 
prehensible miracle  from  the  Holy  Spirit  and  from  Mary 
the  Virgin  without  seed  of  man,  and  was  crucified  in  the 
time  of  Pilate  the  Pontian,  and  died  by  his  own  will  to 

20  save  us  withal,  and  rose  from  the  dead  on  the  third  day 
and  released  the  captives  and  ascended  into  the  heavens 
and  sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,  and  he 
shall  come  to  judge  the  living  and  the  dead  at  his  appear- 
ing and  his  kingdom  ?     Dost  thou  believe  in  the  Spirit, 

25  the  holy,  the  good,  the  sanctifier  in  the  holy  Church,  and 
dost  thou  believe  in  the  resurrection  of  the  body  which 
shall  happen  to  everyone,  and  the  kingdom  of  the 
heavens  and  eternal  judgment?  And  he  shall  answer  for 
all  those  things,  saying :  Verily  I  believe  in  this.    And  after 

30  that,  when  he  comes  up  from  the  water,  let  the  presbyter 
anoint  him  with  the  ointment  which  is  of  the  Eucharistia, 


TRANSLATION   OF   THE  ARABIC  TEXT  255 


saying:  Verily  I  anoint  thee  with  the  holy  ointment 
And  after  that  they  shall  put  on  their  clothes.  Then 
they  shall  enter  the  church,  and  the  bishop  shall  lay  his 
hand  on  them,  and  pray  and  say :  O  Lord,  O  God,  who 
hast  made  these  worthy  of  the  laver  of  the  second  birth  5 
and  pardon  of  sins,  make  them  worthy  of  being  filled  with 
the  Holy  Spirit  and  send  upon  them  thy  grace  that  they 
may  serve  thee  according  to  thy  Will.     Glory  to  thee, 

0  Father,  and  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit  in  the  holy  Church 
henceforth  and  for  ever,  Amin.     And  after  that  let  him  10 
pour  into  his  hand  some  of  the  oil  of  the  Eucharistia  and 
pour  it  on  the  head  of  every  one  of  them,  saying :  Verily 

1  anoint  thee  with  the  holy  oil  in  the  name  of  God  the 
Father  Almighty  and  Christ  Jesus  the  only  Son  and  the 
Holy  Spirit.     When  he  has  signed  every  one  of  them  on  '5 
his  forehead,   let  him  kiss  them   and    say  :  The    Lord 
(be)   with   thee.     And   he   who   was   kissed    also   shall 
answer  and  say :  The   Lord  (be)  with  thy  spirit     And 
afterwards   after    everyone   has    finished    this   he    shall 
pray  with   all    the   people.     It  is   not  (right)  that  they  ao 
should   pray  with   the    Faithful   except  after  they  have 
performed  the  acts  which  we  have  mentioned.    When  they 
have  finished  the  prayer  they  give  the  salutation  to  one 
another  with  their  mouths,  and  let  the  deacons  bring  in 
the  Oblations  to  the  bishop,  and  let  the  bishop  give  thanks  25 
over  the  bread  and  the  cup,  that  it  may  become  the  Body 
of  Christ  and  his  Blood  which  he  shed  for  us  all  who 
believe  in  him. 

As  for  the  milk  and  the  honey  mingled  together,  they 

shall  cause  them  to  drink  of  it  because  of  the  fulfilment  of  3Q 

the  promise  which  he  promised  to  our  fathers ;  saying  to 

17 


2S6  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

them :  The  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey  means  ^ 
the  Body  of  Christ  and  his  Blood  which  he  gave  to  us, 
by  which  we  are  nourished  by  him  like  little  children,  (for) 
they  who  believe  were  begotten  of  him,  and  he  made 

5  sweet  all  bitterness  of  the  heart  with  the  sweetness  of  the 
Word  With  all  this  then  let  the  bishop  make  a  covenant 
with  him  who  was  baptised :  and  when  the  bishop  has 
broken  the  bread  let  him  give  a  piece  of  it  to  everyone 
and  say :  This  is  the  heavenly  bread,  the  Body  of  Christ ; 

lo  and  let  him  who  is  communicated  answer  and  say,  Amin* 
And  if  there  are  not  presbyters  sufficient,  let  the  deacons 
take  the  cup  and  stand  in  order.  And  they  shall  receive 
the  Body  of  our  Master  Jesus  Christ,  and  this  is  ^  the  milk 
and  the  honey.     And  he  who  administers  the  cup  (shall 

IS  say)  :  This  is  the  Blood  of  our  Master  Jesus  Christ,  and 
he  who  is  communicated  shall  say,  Amin.  If  everyone  is 
well  instructed  in  this,  he  shall  do  all  good  and  what  is 
pleasing  to  God,  and  find  leisure  for  going  to  the  church, 
and  do  what  he  has  learnt,  and  make  progress  in  the 

20  service  of  God. 

This  is  what  we  openly  teach  you  concerning 
Baptism  and  the  Kiddas,  and  we  have  finished  our 
instruction  concerning  the  resurrection  of  the  body  and 
the  rest  as  it  was  written.     And  if  anything  has  been 

25  left  which  it  is  proper  to  mention,  let  the  bishop  mention 
it  to  him  alone  who  is  communicated,  and  he  shall  not 
tell  this  to  any  but  the  Faithful,  and  only  after  he  has 
first   been  communicated.     This   is   the  holy  token*  of 


^  '  This  which  is.'  *  Mistaken  for  the  Coptic  *  he  who  has.' 

'  Spelt  first  'tarkah,'  then  'tarkiyah,'  evidently  for  '  tadhkirah '  —  token 
or  certificate. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  257 

which  John  said  that  a  new  name  was  written  upon  it, 
which  no  one  knew  except  him  who  receives  the  token. 
And  these  sections  come  after  the  Baptism. 

The  thirty-Jifth :  Concerning  the  widows  and  the 
virgins,  and  (in)  what  time  should  the  bishop  fast.  s 

They  shall  do  (it)  as  we  have  mentioned  a  number  of 
times,  and  shall  pray  in  the  church.  The  presbyters 
and  the  deacons  shall  fast  at  any  time  that  they  desire, 
but  the  bishop  cannot  fast  except  on  the  day  when  all  the 
people  fast :  and  It  shall  be  when  anyone  wishes  to  bring  lo 
anything  into  the  church,  and  he  cannot  be  denied,  then 
(the  bishop)  having  broken  bread  shall  himself  taste  and 
eat  of  it  with  the  rest  of  the  Faithful  who  are  with  him, 
and  they  shall  be  communicated  from  the  hand  of  the 
bishop  with  a  piece  of  bread  before  that  every  one  of  is 
them  breaks  the  bread  which  is  before  him,  for  this  is  a 
Blessing  and  not  an  Oblation  like  the  Body  of  the  Lord. 

The  thirty-sixth :  Concerning  the  time  at  which  it  is 
proper  to  eat. 

And  it  is  not  proper  for  the  catechumens  to  eat  with  so 
the  Faithful. 

Before  that  any  drink  it  is  proper  for  everyone  to  take 
a  cup  and  give  thanks  over  it,  and  drink  and  eat,  for> 
thus  they  are  pure.  The  catechumens  shall  be  given  the 
bread  of  Blessing  and  a  cup.  35 

Concerning  that  it  is  not  proper  for  the  catechumens 
to  eat  with  the  Faithful. 

The  catechumens  shall  not  sit  at  the  feast  of  the  Lord 
with  the  Faithful,  and  he  who  eats  shall  be  mindful  of 


258  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

him  who  invited  him  at  all  times  that  he  eats,  for  because 
of  this  he  asked  them  to  come  in  under  his  roof. 

Concerning  that  it  is  proper  that  they  should  eat  with 
moderation  and  temperance  and  not  to  be  drunken. 
S  Ye  shall  eat  and  drink  orderly,  and  ye  shall  not  drink 
and  be  drunken,  lest  men  mock  you,  and  he  who  in- 
vited you  repent  himself  over  your  dissipation,  but  rather 
he  shall  be  praying  that  the  holy  ones  may  come  into  his 
house.     He  said  :  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth. 

10  If  he  give  to  you  all  portions  together,  thou  shalt 
take  thy  portion  alone,  and  if  they  invited  you  to  eat 
ye  shall  eat  with  moderation,  not  otherwise,  that  he 
who  invited  thee  may  send  thy  leavings  to  whom  he 
wished.     Are  not  they  the  leavings  of  the  holy  ones? 

15  and  he  into  whose  (house)  ye  entered  shall  rejoice. 
And  he  who  eats  shall  remember  him  who  invited 
him  at  all  times  that  he  eats  ;  for  this  reason  he  asked 
him  that  he  should  come  in  under  the  roof  of  his 
house.     And  the  invited  guests  shall  eat  separately  and 

20  without  sadness.  But  if  the  bishop  allow  anyone  to  ask 
about  a  word,  then  he  may  address  him. 

The  thirty  -  seventh :  When  the  bishop  speaks,  let 
everyone  be  silent,  and  if  the  bishop  is  not  present,  let 
the  Blessing  be  taken  from  a  presbyter  or  a  deacon.     He 

25  said  :  If  the  bishop  speaks  let  everyone  be  silent  till  he 
asks  them,  and  if  a  bishop  is  not  present,  but  the  Faithful 
and  none  beside  at  the  feast,  then  let  them  take  the 
Eulogia,  viz.  Blessing,  from  the  presbyter  if  present, 
and  if  not  present,  from  the   deacon.     And   the   cate- 

30  chumens  also  shall  receive  the  bread  of  Exorcism, 
and  if  there  were  lay  people,  one  with  another  let  them 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  259 

eat  quietly ;  and  it  is  not  proper  for  the  layman  to  make 
the  Eulogia, 

The  thirty-eighth  chapter :  Concerning  the  feast  of  the 
widows. 

If  anyone  wishes  at  any  time  to  invite  the  widows,  s 
then  let  them  invite  all  those  who  are  aged :  let  him 
satisfy  them  (with  food)  and  dismiss  them  before  that 
night  comes,  and  if  it  was  not  possible  (for  them  to  come) 
because  of  the  lot  which  they  obtained,  let  him  give  to 
them  wine  and  food  which  they  may  eat  in  their  houses  lo 
as  they  will. 

The  thirty-ninth:  Concerning  the  first-fruits  and 
the  fruits  which  they  bring  to  the  bishop,  and  he  shall 
name  them. 

Everyone   shall   hasten  to   bring  to  the   bishop  the  15 
first  of  the  fruits  of  his  crop,  and  the  bishop  also  shall 
take   them   and   bless  them,  and  he  shall  mention  the 
name  of  him  who  brought  them  to  him,  and  shall  say : 
We  thank  thee,  O  God,  and  we  bring  to  thee  the  first- 
fruit  of  the  fruits  which  thou  hast  given  us  to  receive  10 
of  them  and  hast  perfected  them  according  to  thy  word, 
and  commanded  the  earth  to  send  up  all  the  fruits  for 
the  joy  and  nourishment  of  men  and  all  living  creatures ; 
we  thank  thee,  O  God,  for  this  and  all  others  of  them 
by  which  we  are  benefited,  and  thou  hast  disposed  thy  25 
creation  with  variety  of  fruits,  through  thy  Son  Jesus 
Christ  our  Master,  by  whom  be  glory  to  thee  with  him 
and  the  Holy  Spirit  to  ages  of  ages,  Amin. 

The  Eulogia  of  the  fruits.     These  are  the  fruits  which 
are  blessed :  grapes  and   figs   and   pomegranates    and  y> 
olives   and   peaches  and  apples  and   cherries,   and   he 


260  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

does  not  bless  Egfyptian  figs  or  onions  or  leeks  or 
cucumber  nor  any  kind  of  vegetables;  and  let  them 
bring  in  also  roses,  but  other  (flowers)  they  shall  not  bring 
in,  and  they  shall  thank  God  when  they  eat  anything 
5  and  taste  it,  as  glory  to  him. 

The  fortieth  chapter :  Concerning  that  it  is  not  proper 

that  any  of  the  people  should  taste  anything  at  the  Pascha 

before  the  time  in  which  it  is  proper  for  them  to  eat 

The  fast  shall  not  be  reckoned  as  a  fast  if  a  man  was 

lo  gluttonous  before  the  time  of  the  fast  was   completed, 

except  if  anyone  was  sick,  (for  then)  he  cannot  fast  during 

the  two  days,  so  let  him  fast  on  the  day  of  the  sabbath 

because  of  the  necessity  and  it  shall  suffice,  and  let  him 

not  taste  of  anything  but  bread  and  water.     And  if  any- 

iS  one  was  out  at  sea  and  was  not  knowing  the  day  of  the 

Pascha,  let  this  one,  if  he  knew  it  not,  fast  after  the  fifty 

(days),  and  it  is  not  the  Pascha  which  he  keeps,  but  a 

likeness  (of  it),  and  the   fast   is  his   duty   by   way   of 

compensation. 

ao      The  forty-first:  Concerning  that  it  is  proper  for  the 

deacons  to  obey  the  commands  of  the  bishops. 

Let  every  one  of  the  deacons  and  subdeacons  report  to 
the  bishop  and  inform  him  who  is  sick,  that  he  may  visit 
them,  for  the  archpriest  having  visited  them,  (the  rest  of 
as  the  people)  remembered  them.^ 

The  forty-second :  Concerning  the  times  at  which  the 
prayer  is  proper. 

The  Faithful  when  they  awake  and  rise  up,  before  they 
do  any  business  shall  pray  to  the  Lord,  and  after  that 


^  Comipt  passage. 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  26 1 

shall  attend  to  their  occupations,  and  if  there  were  then  the 
words  of  instruction,  let  them  choose  them  and  go  to  hear 
the  words  of  instruction,  which  are  the  words  of  God 
which  strengthen  the  souls.  They  shall  hasten  to  go  to 
the  church,  the  place  in  which  is  the  Spirit,  bearing  fruit    5 

The  forty-third :  That  it  is  proper^  to  receive  of  the 
Eucharistia  early  at  the  time  when  it  is  allowable* 
before  that  they  taste  anything. 

Let  every  believer  make  (it)  good  conduct  to  receive 
of  the  holy  Mysteries  before  that  he  taste  anything ;  if  lo 
there  is  in  him  faith,  let  him  receive  it ;  and  if  anyone 
should  give  him  deadly  poison,  it  will  not  hurt  him. 

The  forty-fourth:  Concerning  that  it  is  proper  to 
guard  carefully  the  Mysteries,  and  it  is  not  proper  to  pour 
any  from  the  cup.  iS 

Everyone  shall  be  most  careful  not  to  let  any  but  the 
Faithful  receive  of  the  Mysteries,  nor  a  mouse  nor  other 
creature,  and  not  to  let  any  be  spilt  and  lost — ^since  it 
is  the  Body  of  Christ  and  his  Blood,  and  all  the  Faithful 
shall  eat  of  it — it  is  not  proper  to  neglect  it  20 

Concerning  that  it  is  not  proper  to  pour  any  from  the 
cup. 

When  thou  hast  blessed  the  cup  in  the  name  of  God 
and  receivest  of  it,  verily  it  is  the  Blood  of  Christ  Guard 
strictly  that  none  of  it  be  poured  away,  lest  the  alien  25 
spirits  lick  it  up  and  thou  be  one  who  hast  despised  and 
become  a  blasphemer*  of  the  Blood  of  Christ,  because 
thou  hast  despised  that  with  which  thou  wast  redeemed. 

^  Arabic  inserts  'not'  because  of  literal  translation  from  Coptic. 
'  Probably  a  mistake  for  '  when  it  is  offered.' 
s  Corrected  thus  in  margin. 


262  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

The  forty-fifth :  The  deacons  and  the  presbyters  shall 
assemble  every  day  to  the  place  of  the  bishop. 

The  presbyters  and  the  deacons  shall  assemble  every 
day  to  the  place  (in)  which  is  the  bishop  commanding  them 

5  to  go  to  it.  And  let  not  the  presbyters  and  deacons 
neglect  to  assemble  every  day,  except  sickness  prevented 
them  from  it.  When  they  have  assembled  let  them 
teach  those  who  are  in  the  churches,  and  likewise  when 
they  have  prayed  let  each  one  turn  to  his  own  business. 

lo       The  forty-sixth :  Concerning  the  cemeteries. 

No  one  of  the  people  shall  give  an  unlawful  com- 
mission (for  burying)  in  the  grave  of  the  people  in  the 
cemeteries — this  work  is  for  all  the  poor,  but  he  shall 
give  the  wages  of  the  paid  man  to  him  who  digs  and 

15  the  guard  who  is  in  that  place  who  has  the  care  of  it, 
and  the  bishop  shall  support  them  with  what  is  given  to 
the  churches. 

The  forty-seventh :  Concerning  the  times  in  which  it 
is  proper  for  prayer  and  hearing   the   instruction   and 

ao  signing  the  forehead  with  the  cross. 

Let  every  believing  man  and  woman  when  they  rise 
up  on  the  morrow,  before  they  do  necessary  (work), 
wash  their  hands  and  pray  to  God ;  then  they  shall  turn 
to  their  works.      If  they  instruct  with  the  words,  let 

25  everyone  choose  to  go  to  the  place  of  teaching,  and  this 
shall  be  fixed  in  his  heart,  that  that  which  he  hears  is 
God  speaking  by  the  mouth  of  the  teacher,  and  he  is 
abiding  in  the  church,  and  he  is  able  to  remove  the  evil 
of  every  day.     Let  him  who  fears  (God)  reckon  that  it 

30  is  great  damage  to  him  if  he  goes  not  to  the  place  in 
which  is  the  teaching,  especially  if  he  can  read.     If  the 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  263 

teacher  is  present  let  him  not  delay  (to  go  to)  the 
church,  the  place  in  which  is  the  teaching — then  indeed 
it  shall  be  given  to  the  speaker  to  say  what  is  profitable 
for  everyone,  and  he  shall  hear  what  was  not  in  his  thought, 
and  thou  shalt  gain  what  the  Holy  Spirit  gives  to  thee  s 
by  means  of  him  who  teaches,  and  thus  thy  faith  will  be 
established  upon  what  thou  hearesL  And  he  shall  say 
also  in  that  place  to  thee  what  it  is  proper  for  thee 
to  do  in  thy  house,  and  for  this  reason  let  everyone 
hasten  to  go  to  the  church,  the  place  in  which  the  Holy  lo 
Spirit  rises  (like  the  sun).  And  if  there  was  a  day  in 
which  there  is  no  teaching,  let  everyone  be  in  his  house 
and  let  him  take  a  holy  book  and  read  sufficiently  what 
he  knows  to  be  good. 

And  when  thou  art  in  thy  house  pray  at  the  third  hour  is 
and  praise  God.  And  if  thou  art  in  another  place  and 
that  time  comes,  pray  in  thy  heart  to  God,  because  Christ 
in  that  (hour)  was  stripped,  and  he  was  nailed  upon  the 
wood  And  because  of  this  in  the  old  (testament)  the  law 
commands  to  offer  the  show-bread  at  the  third  hour,  as  3o 
a  type  of  the  Body  and  Blood  of  the  holy  Christ ;  and 
the  Iamb  was  pierced,  which  was  a  type  of  the  perfect 
Lamb,  for  Christ  is  the  Shepherd,  and  he  is  the  Bread 
which  came  from  heaven. 

Pray  at  the  sixth  hour,  because  when  Christ  was  hanged  as 
upon  the  wood,  that  day  was  divided  and  it  became 
darkness.  Let  prayer  be  made  at  that  hour,  a  prayer  of 
power,  ye  shall  be  like  the  cry  which  he  prayed,  and 
all  the  land  was  darkened  for  the  unbelievers,  and  let 
them  make  also  a  great  prayer  at  the  ninth  hour  and  3° 
praises.      Let   him   teach   (that    it   is)   the   pattern   of 


264  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

how  ^  the  souls  of  the  righteous  bless  the  true  God  who 
remembered  his  holy  ones  (and)  sent  to  them  his  Son  who 
is  his  Word,  that  he  might  shine  upon  them.  Because  in 
that  hour  Christ  was  pierced  in  his  side,  and  there  came 

5  out  from  him  blood  and  water,  and  after  that  he  caused  to 
shine  on  the  others  during  the  rest  of  that  day  until  night 
And  thou,  because  of  this  also,  when  thou  finishedst  the 
day  and  thou  madest  the  beginning  of  another  day,  and 
makest  a  type   of  the   Resurrection,  pray  before  thou 

10  restest  thy  body  in  thy  bed.  And  when  thou  hast  risen 
at  midnight,  wash  thy  hand  in  water  and  pray.  And  if 
thou  hast  a  wife,  pray  ye  two  together,  and  if  she  has 
not  yet  become  a  believer,  go  aside  and  pray  alone  and 
return  to  thy  bed  again  ;  thou  who  art  bound  by  marriage 

15  do  not  omit  the  prayer.  Verily  ye  are  not  unclean. 
They  who  have  been  baptised  have  no  need  to  be 
bathed  another  time,  because  they  are  clean. 

When  thou  hast  breathed  in  thy  hand  and  signed  it 
with  the  spittle  which  goes  forth  from  thy  mouth  thou 

20  wilt  be  clean  all  over  (down)  to  thy  feet,  and  this  is  (of) 
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  drops  of  the  water  of  Baptism 
ascend  from  the  fountain  which  is  the  heart  of  the 
Faithful  (and)  purify. 

And  those  who  believe  are  bound  to  pray  at  this  hour 

25  because  the  elders  set  us  the  example.*  And  verily  all 
the  ranks  of  the  angels  ministering  with  the  souls  of  the 
righteous  ones  praise  God  at  that  hour,  and  therefore 
it  is  proper  for  the  Faithful  to  pray  at  that  hour.  The 
Lord  also  said  :  At  midnight  there  was  a  cry.  Behold  the 


^  Added  above.  '  Ut.  '  were  before  to  us  in  this.' 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  265 

bridegroom  has  come.  Go  ye  out  to  meet  him.  Then 
he  repeated  the  word  and  said :  Watch,  for  ye  know  not 
the  day  (nor)  in  what  hour  (he  will  come). 

And   having  risen   when   the  cock  crows,  pray,  for 
the  children  of  Israel  at  the  crowing  of  the  cock  denied   5 
Christ,  whom  we  know  by  faith,  watching  with  hope  for 
that  day  of  eternal  light  which  will  shine  upon  us  at  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead. 

This,  O  ye  Faithful,  when  ye  have  finished  mentioning 
and  teaching  it  amongst  yourselves,  ye  shall  do,  and  no  one  10 
will  cause  you  grief,  nor  shall  ye  ever  fall     And  ye  shall 
make  continual  remembrance  of  Christ     Sign  thy  fore- 
head in  fear.     This  is  the  outward  sign,  and  it  is  known 
(that)  Iblis  is  defeated  by  this,  when  we  do  it  in  faith : 
we   do    not    make  a  show   before  men  alone,   but  in  15 
the  knowledge  by  which  thou  art  strong  as  with  armour. 
Because  the  crafty  (enemy)  will  look  upon  the  strength 
of  the  heart  alone,  and  having  seen  the  inner  man  to  be 
rational,  and  that  he  is  signed  inwardly  and  outwardly 
with  the  sign  of  the  Word,  he   will  flee  away  swiftly  » 
followed   by  the   Holy   Spirit,  he  who  is  in   the  man 
who  makes  place  for  him  within. 

This  is  that  which  Moses  before  taught  us  of  the  lamb 
of  the  Pascha  which  was  slain,  and  he  commanded  to 
smear  with  its  blood  the  door-posts  and  the  roofs,  making  35 
known  to  us  the  faith  which  is  in  us,  for  if  we  sign  with 
the  hand  our  forehead  with  that  which  was  given  us  by 
the  perfect  Lamb,  we  shall  be  saved  from  him  who 
wishes  to  kill  us.  If  ye  do  this  with  thanksgiving  and 
right  faith  ye  will  be  edified,  and  to  you  shall  be  given  y> 
eternal  life. 


266  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

This  we  advise  you  to  keep,  ye  who  have  sense.  ^  If 
everyone  who  heard  kept  the  teaching  of  the  Apostles, 
nothing  of  the  heresies  would  be  able  to  lead  a  man  astray 
from  them.     Thus  many  heresies  increase,  because  those 

5  who  received  them  were  not  willing  to  learn  the  secret  of 
the  Apostles,  but  according  to  their  own  pleasure  do 
what  they  like  best  and  not  what  is  proper. 

And  if  we  have  omitted  anything,  O  my  brethren 
most  beloved,  God  will  reveal   it   to   everyone   who   is 

iG  worthy,  and  he  will  guide  the  Church  for  him  who  is 
worthy  into  the  quiet  harbour.  These  are  *  the  canons 
of  the  Church. 

The  forty-eighth :  Concerning  the  gifts  and  the  offices. 
When  anyone  has  obtained  a  gift,  let  him  not  glory 

15  over  anyone.  Our  God  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  gave 
to  us  this  great  mystery  of  the  service  of  God,  and  he 
calls  the  Jews  and  the  Greeks,  that  they  should  know 
God  the  Father,  the  only  true  (God),  as  he  says  himself 
in  a  place,  and  g^ves  thanks  for  the   salvation   of  him 

ao  who  believed :  I  have  manifested  thy  Name  to  the  men 
whom  thou  gavest  me,  and  I  have  finished  all  that  thou 
deliveredst  to  me.  And  he  spoke  to  the  Father  con- 
cerning us,  and  says:  O  my  holy  Father,  the  world 
knoweth  thee  not,  but  these  knew  thee.     That  which  is 

as  proper  he  says  now  to  us  all,  us  and  those  who  have 
become  perfect,  concerning  the  gift  which  he  gave  by 
his  Holy  Spirit :  And  these  signs  shall  follow  him  who 
believed  in  me  :  they  shall  cast  out  devils  ®  in  my  Name, 
and  they  shall  speak  languages  and  they  shall  take  up 

1  Ut.  'hearts.'  «  Ut.  'this  is.'  »  UL  '  Satans.' 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  267 

serpents  in  their  hands,  and  if  they  drink  deadly  poison 
it  shall  not  hurt  them,  and  they  shall  lay  their  hands 
upon  the  sick  and  they  shall  recover.  These  gifts  were 
first  given  to  us,  the  Apostles,  at  the  time  when  he  made 
us  worthy  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  all  the  land,  in  order  to  s 
give  it  to  him  who  should  believe  by  us  as  privilege  to  us 
who  do  the  signs;  nay  more,  ye  too  (shall  do  it),  whoever 
is  believing  among  you ;  that  they  who  were  not  satisfied 
by  the  words  might  be  put  to  shame  by  the  power  of  the 
miracles.  For  the  signs  are  not  for  us  the  believers,  but  "o 
they  are  for  the  unbelievers,  the  Jews  and  the  Greeks. 
And  it  is  not  for  our  gain  when  we  cast  out  devils,  but 
the  gain  is  for  him  who  is  purified  by  the  will  of  Christ, 
as  the  Lord  teaches  us  in  a  place,  explaining  the  work 
and  saying :  Rejoice  not  because  the  devils  obey  you,  'S 
but  rejoice  because  your  names  are  written  in  the 
heavens.  The  casting  out  of  devils  is  by  his  power, 
but  as  for  our  names  being  written  in  the  heavens,  this 
is  by  our  will  and  our  mind  and  our  teaching,  with 
assistance  from  him  as  the  purifier.  It  is  not  now  ao 
necessary  that  every  believer  should  cast  out  devils,  or 
raise  the  dead,  or  speak  with  languages,  but  he  who  is 
worthy  of  this  gift  shall  be  worthy  of  it  for  a  cause,  and 
it  shall  be  a  reason  for  him  who  believes,  and  produces 
it  {sc.  the  sign).  Because  they  received  not  the  declara-  25 
tion  of  the  word ;  therefore  he  sent  the  working  of 
signs,  that  perhaps  they  might  be  saved.  In  that  case 
the  unbelievers  and  hypocrites  would  not  even  be  Jishamed 
though  they  were  put  to  shame  by  the  miracles. 

And  God  testified  to  this  as  he  said  in  the  Law  :  With  3" 
tongues  and  lips  I  will  speak  unto  this  people,  and  even 


268  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

SO  they  will  not  obey  me,  said  the  Lord.  Nor  did  the 
Egfyptians  believe  when  Moses  worked  those  great 
miracles  and  those  signs  among  them.  Nor  did  the 
multitude  of  the  Jews  believe  him  who  was  greater  than 
5  Moses,  who  was  Christ,  when  he  healed  all  sicknesses 
and  infirmities  amongst  them. 

And  that  rod  also  when  (it)  was  changed  into  a  serpent 
put  them  not  to  shame,  nor  the  hand  which  became  white, 
nor  the  water  which  was   made   blood.     Neither  also 

lo  were  those  others  content  when  the  blind  saw  and  the 
lame  ran  and  the  dead  were  raised  up.  And  that  one 
was  opposed  by  Yanas  and  Yamras,  and  this  also  was 
insulted  by  Nanas  and  Kayafas.  Thus  it  is  that  miracles 
do  not  put  everyone  to  shame,  but  the  proud  alone,  and 

15  for  their  sake  God  is  pleased  (to  act)  as  a  wise  physician, 
a  steward,  so  that  mighty  works  ^  should  be  not  of  the 
power  of  man,  but  by  his  permission. 

We  say  this,  lest  those  who  obtain  a  gift  should  magnify 
themselves  above  those  who  have  not  obtained  it     We 

20  have  spoken  concerning  the  gift  of  God  such  as  is  shown 
by  signs,  because  there  is  no  man  who  believed  in  God 
by  his  holy  Son,  who  has  not  received  a  spiritual  gift 
For  the  escape  from  the  delusion  of  many  gods  and  the 
entrance  into  the  faith  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  and 

25  the  Holy  Spirit  is  a  gift  from  God  and  a  grace,  all  the 
more  because  we  have  repudiated  the  folly  of  the  Jews 
and  have  believed  in  the  will  of  the  Father  and  the  Son 
coeternal  with  the  Father  before  all  ages,  born  of  the 
immaculate  virgin  without  seed  of  man,  and  he  followed 

^  Ut,  'powers.' 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  269 

the  course  of  men  without  the  seed  of  men,  and  fulfilled 
all  the  righteousness  of  the  Law,  and  by  the  consent  of 
God  the  Father  the  Word  endured  the  cross  and  was 
tgnominiously  derided  and  died  and  v/as  buried  and  rose 
again  the  third  day,  and  after  he  had  risen  from  the  dead  5 
he  stayed  forty  days  with  the  Apostles,  and  after  he  had 
given  them  all  his  commands  he  ascended  in  their 
presence  to  him  who  sent  him,  God  the  Father.  He 
who  believed  in  this  did  not  believe  thus  merely  juid 
without  reason,'  but  by  choice  and  consent  he  received  10 
the  gift  which  is  from  God.  Thus  also  he  who  became 
free  from  all  heresy.  None  of  you  now  should  judge 
any  who  has  become  a  believer  and  who  is  not  considered 
worthy  of  signs  or  miracles,  gifts  which  are  of  God. 
Various  are  the  gifts  which  are  given  by  him  to  men,  15 
and  thou  hast  received  this.  This  one  has  received  the 
words  of  wisdom  or  knowledge,  and  another  has  received 
something  else,  and  they  know  beforehand  what  is  certain 
to  come  to  pass,  or  the  words  of  teaching,  or  endurance 
or  excellence  of  virtue.  ao 

Moses  himself  also,  the  man  of  God,  wrought  signs  in 
Egypt  and  did  not  magnify  himself  above  his  brother,  not 
even  when  he  was  called  god  did  he  not  magnify  himself 
above  his  prophet  who  was  Aaron.  Nor  did  Joshua  the 
son  of  Non,  who  led  forth  the  people  after  him,  magnify  35 
himself,  nor  was  his  heart  exalted  above  Phinehas  or  Caleb 
when  he  made  the  sun  stand  still  in  the  ravine  of  Ablum 
and  the  moon  over  AlQm  in  the  battle  with  the  AQsiyin 
because  all  the  day  did  not  suffice  him  for  the  pursuit 


270  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES     . 

Nor  did  Samuel  consider  David,  the  beloved  of  God,  to 
be  nothing  when  he  did  such  signs,  though  both  were 
prophets,  the  one  (being)  chief  of  the  prophets  and  the 
other  (being)  king. 
5  And  among  the  seven  thousand  pure  men  who  did  not 
bow  their  knee  to  Baal  the  idol,  none  of  them  was 
chosen  except  Elias  alone  and  Liyush'a  his  disciple  that 
they  should  work  signs  and  miracles,  and  Elias  did  not 
mock  Yabadias  the  steward  because  he  feared  God,  and 

lo  worked  (no)  signs. 

Nor  did  Elish*a  forget  or  neglect  his  servant  when  he 
trembled  at  the  enemy  enclosing  him  in.  Nor  did  the 
three  children  deride  their  companions  when  they  were 
saved  from  the  furnace  of  fire,  for  they  knew  that  it  was 

IS  not  by  their  own  power  that  they  were  saved  from  that 
evil,  but  by  the  power  of  God  they  worked  those  signs 
and  escaped  from  the  sufferings.  So  let  not  any  one  of 
you  magnify  himself  above  his  brother  if  he  is  a  prophet 
and  works  miracles ;  and  if  it  was  given  that  there  should 

»  (not)  be  an  unbelieving  man  in  any  place  [before  ^]  any 
sign  would  be  for  nothing.  That  a  man  should  be  a 
servant  of  God — this  (is)  from  his  good  heart.  If  he 
work  miracles,  this  is  by  the  power  of  the  Most  High, 
which  (really)  works :  [and]  the  former  is  our  (concern), 

25  the  latter  is  God's  (work),  the  same  power  which  works 
for  the  works  which  we  have  just  mentioned.* 

But  let  not  the  king  despise  the  troops  and  soldiers 
who  are  below  him. 


^  Coptic  interrogatory  word  *eshje '  mistaken  for  *ishje.* 
^  The  end  of  48  seems  confused  with  the  heading  of  49. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  27 1 

The  forty-ninth  chapter :  Let  not  the  chiefs  despise 
those  who  are  below  them,  nor  let  the  chiefs  despise 
those  who  are  over  them  as  chiefs  :  the  chiefs  would  be 
nothing  if  they  had  not  those  ^  over  whom  they  rule :  the 
kingdom  would  not  stand  if  there  were  no  troops  and  j 
soldiers. 

And  let  not  the  bishop  exalt  himself  over  the  deacons 
and  presbyters,  nor  the  presbyters  over  the  people,  because 
the  standing  of  the  Church  depends  upon  one  another.  If 
there  were  no  lay  people,  over  whom  would  be  the  bishop  lo 
and  presbyter?  It  is  of  ourselves  that  we  all  become 
Christians,  viz.  Nazarenes,  but  as  for  becoming  apostles 
and  bishops  or  anything  else,  from  this  time  it  is  not  by 
ourselves  but  by  God  who  gives  the  gifts. 

This  we  have  said  up  to  this  place,  concerning  those  15 
who  are  worthy  of  the  gifts  or  the  Orders,  and  this  further 
we  add  to  these  words.' 

The  fifty:  Everyone  who  prophesies  is  not  a 
servant  of  God,  nor  is  everyone  who  casts  out  devils 
holy,  for  Balaam  the  son  of  FaghQr  the  soothsayer  was  20 
without  goodness  and  prophesied ;  and  Kayafas,  by  name 
chief  priest,  and  having  a  false  name:  Iblls,  and  the  devils 
who  are  before  him,  said  many  things  beforehand,  and 
there  is  not  in  them  any  service  of  God  at  all.  They  please 
themselves  alone  in  ignorance  because  of  the  wickedness  25 
which  they  commit.  It  is  clear  that  when  the  hypocrites 
prophesy  they  cannot  conceal  their  hypocrisy  in  their 
prophecy,  nor  when  the  devils  cast  out  devils ;  for  they  do 
not  become  pure  (thereby),  because  when  they  do  it  they 


'  Ut.  '  him,'  *  Lit.  '  make  to  this  word.' 

iS 


272  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

lead   one  another  astray,  like  conjurers  for  merriment, 
they  lead  astray,  and  those  who  support  them  go  astray. 

The  king  if  he  becomes  a  hypocrite  is  no  longer  a 
king,  henceforth  he  is  the  opposite  (of  a  king). 
5       The  fifty- first :     Concerning  the  bishop  who  is  con- 
tented with  little  learning,  and  ignorance  and  malice. 

Every  bishop  who  is  contented  with  little  learning  or  is 
in  ignorance  or  in  malice  is  no  bishop,  but  he  bears  a 
false  name.     He  is  not  (a  bishop)  before  God  but  (only) 

lo  before  men,  like  Hananiya  and  Simanus  in  Israel,  and 
like  Sadakiya  and  Akiyab,  whom  the  king  of  Babel  slew 
and  roasted  in  iron  pitchers,  as  said  Jeremiah  the  prophet  ; 
this  he  says.  We  do  not  indeed  disparage  the  true 
prophets ;   we  know  that  the  work  in  them  and  in  the 

15  holy  ones  is  from  the  Spirit  of  God.  But  we  are  causing 
to  cease  the  hardness  of  heart  of  the  covetous,  and  we 
inform  them  this,  that  God  causes  to  cease  his  gift 
from  such  as  these,  because  God  resisteth  the  proud  and 
giveth  his  grace  to  the  humble.     Silas  and  Gayus  were 

20  two^  before  us,  but  they  did  not  magnify  themselves 
above  the  Apostles,  nor  went  out  of  their  limits,  because 
they  loved  God.  And  women  also  prophesied  in  the  old 
(testament),  Miriam  the  sister  of  Moses  and  Aaron,  and 
after  her  Dafura,  and  after  them  Audla  and  Judith,  the 

25  one  in  (the  time  of)  Adratarsis  and  the  other  in  the 
time  of  Darius,  and  in  the  new  (testament)  the  Mother 
of  the  Lord  and  Alish'a  her  cousin  and  Hannah,  and 
also  the  daughters  of  Philip,  and  these  did  not  magnify 
themselves  above  the  men,  but  kept  their  limits.     But 

^  Unpointed  Arabic  conrupted  from  *  prophets.' 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  273 

women  and  men  when  they  share  in  these  graces  shall  be 
humble.  God  being  pleased  with  it  said  :  Unto  whom 
shall  1  look  but  to  those  who  are  humble  and  tremble 
at  my  words.  First  we  sent  out  these  words  concerning 
the  gifts '  which  God  gave  to  the  men  according  to  his  ; 
will.  As  *  they  indeed  acquire  for  themselves  the  simili- 
tude of  those  who  take  to  falsehood  and  are  moved  by 
alien  spirits ;  so  God  causes  reprobate  men  to  prophesy 
and  work  signs. 

And  now  the  words  will  draw  us  on  to  come  to  the  lo 
chapter  which  is  for  the  definitions  of  the  Church,  that  ye 
who  have  become  bishops  through  us  by  the  command 
of  Christ,  having  learnt  this  arrangement  from  us,  might 
do  everything  according  to  the  commands  of  Christ,  as 
the  statute  which  he  gave  to  you,  and  know  that  he  who  is 
receives  from  us  receives  from  Christ  and  receives  from 
God  the  Father,  to  whom  (be)  glory  for  ever,  Amin. 

The  fifty-second  canon  :  Concerning  the  ordination  of 
the  Bishop  and  the  ordinance  of  the  Kiddas. 

It  is  seemly  for  a  bishop  to  be  ordained  as  we  have  a© 
already  said,  and  we  command  all  the  people :  Choose  a 
man,  virtuous,  holy  in  everything,  and  choose  him  (all) 
the  people.  When  they  have  recorded  their  consent  as 
to  this  (man),  let  all  the  people  assemble,  and  the 
presbyters  and  bishops,  and  they  shall  assemble  on  as 
Sunday,'  and  the  greatest  among  them  shall  ask  the 
presbyters  and  the  deacons  and  shall  say :   Is   this  he 

•  Lit.  '  women.' 

^  The  passage  has  been  misunderstood  in  the  Coptic;  where  the  Gie^ 
'  tupos '  has  been  mistaken  for  '  tropos.' 

*  '  The  day  of  the  one.' 


274  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


whom  ye  are  pleased  that  he  should  be  your  chief?  So 
when  they  have  said  :  Yes,  he  shall  ask  them  and  say  :  Is 
this  man  worthy  of  this  honourable  position,  and  has  he 
continued  virtuous  in  everything,  with  goodness  in  God  s 
5  sight,  and  kept  the  truth  with  man,  and  has  he  ordered 
well  the  people  of  his  house  and  established  his  character 
in  correctness,  with  nothing  found  against  him  ?  And  when 
all  have  answered  together  and  said  :  He  is  thus  in  truth 
and  not  in  hypocrisy,  God  the  Father  and  Christ  and 

ic  the  Holy  Spirit  being  Judge  of  those  things,  let  them 
ask  again  three  times:  Is  this  man  worthy  of  this  govern- 
ment ?  that  from  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  every  word 
may  be  established.  When  they  have  said  three  times  : 
He  is  worthy,  let  them  all  give  assent  with  their  hands, 

15  and  having  done  this  with  cheerful  mind,  let  there  be 
silence,^  and  let  a  great  one  from  the  great  bishops  take 
two  other  bishops  with  him,  and  all  the  rest  of 
the  bishops  and  presbyters  standing  up  at  the  altar 
shall  pray  in  silence,  and  the  deacons  shall  hold  the  holy 

20  Gospels  spread  open  upon  the  head  of  him  who  is  to  be 
ordained,  and  all  shall  pray  to  God  for  him,  and  the 
bishop  shall  pray  to  God  for  him,  and  one  of  the  bishops 
shall  offer  incense  over  the  hand  of  him  who  is  to  be 
ordained.     And  the  bishops  shall  cause  him  to  sit  upon  a 

25  seat  which  was  prepared  for  him,  and  when  they  have  all 
kissed  him  (with)  the  kiss  of  the  Lord,  let  them  read  in  the 
holy  Scriptures,  and  when  they  have  finished  what  should 
be  read  in  the  Gospel,  let  the  bishop  who  is  signed  salute 
all  the  Church  and  say  :  The  grace  *  of  our  Master  Jesus 

^  ZJt  *  quiet,'  and  again  below.  ^  Lit.  'graces.' 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  2/5 

Christ  and  the  love  of  God  and  the  fellowship  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  (be)  with  you  all.  And  all  shall  say  :  And 
with  thy  spirit.  And  when  he  has  finished  what  should 
be  said,  let  him  speak  the  words  of  consolation  to  the 
people.  And  when  he  has  finished  what  he  may  teach  j 
(them),  let  the  deacon  go  up  on  a  high  place  and  call  out 
and  say :  Let  none  stand  here  but  the  Faithful.  And 
thus  when  the  bishop  has  completed  all  the  prayers 
which  it  is  proper  for  him  to  make  for  the  sick  and  the 
rest,  let  the  deacon  say  to  them  :  Kiss  one  another  with  lo 
a  pure  kiss.  And  the  priests  shall  kiss  the  bishop, 
and  the  laymen  shall  kiss  the  laymen,  and  the  women 
shall  kiss  the  women.  And  the  young  children  shall 
stand  at  the  ambon,  and  another  deacon  shall  stand 
with  them,  lest  they  should  be  disorderly,  and  other  15 
deacons  shall  walk  about  watching  the  men  and  the 
females,  lest  there  should  be  disturbance  among  them, 
and  lest  they  should  wink  one  to  the  other  or  make 
signs,  or  go  to  sleep.  And  the  subdeacon  shall  stand  at 
the  doors  of  the  women,  and  the  deacon  shall  stand  at  the  » 
doors  of  the  men,  lest  anyone  should  go  out,  and  lest 
they  should  open  the  doors  at  the  time  of  the  pure 
Kiddas,  even  if  there  should  be  a  believer  at  the  door. 
And  let  the  subdeacon  bring  water  to  the  priests  that 
they  may  wash  their  hands  as  a  sign  of  the  purity  of  ss 
the  souls  of  those  who  lift  them  up  to  God.  And  let 
another  deacon  cry :  Let  no  catechumen  stand  here,  nor  be 
any  here  who  hears  the  words.  He  shall  not  partake  of 
the  Mysteries,  nor  any  of  the  unbelievers,  nor  any  of  the 
heretics ;  O  women,  hold  your  children,  nor  let  any  have  30 
anything  against  another  in  his  heart,  and  let  none  stand 


276  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

here  with  hypocrisy,  be  upright  with  the  Lord,  and  stand 
with  fear  and  trembling.  Prospherin.  When  this  has 
been  done  let  the  deacon  bring  the  bread  to  the  bishop  to 
the  altar,  and  let  the  presbyters  stand  on  his  right  and 
S  left,  like  disciples  standing  before  their  teacher,  and  let  the 
two  deacons  stand  on  either  side  of  the  altar  holding  the 
flabella  made  of  some  delicate  material,  or  of  peacocks' 
feather  or  delicate  silk,  and  they  shall  drive  away  the 
little  flying  creatures,  lest  any  of  them  should  fall  into 

«o  the  cup.  And  thus  let  the  arch-priest  pray  over  the 
sacrifice  and  make  supplication  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may 
descend  upon  them,  and  upon  the  bread  that  it  may 
become  the  Body  of  Christ,  and  the  cup  that  it  may 
become  the  Blood  of  Christ.     And  when  he  has  com- 

15  pleted  the  prayer  which  it  is  proper  to  say,  let  the  bishop 
first  communicate,  and  after  him  the  presbyters  and  the 
deacons  likewise,  and  the  subdeacons,  and  after  them  all 
the  people  shall  receive.  And  the  bishop  shall  administer 
and  say  :  This  is  the  Body  of  Christ,  and  he  who  receives 

ao  shall  say,  Am!n.  Then  the  deacons  shall  administer 
the  cup,  and  they  shall  say :  This  is  the  Blood  of  Christ, 
this  is  the  cup  of  life,  and  he  who  receives  shall  say, 
Amin ;  and  they  shall  sing  until  all  have  received. 
And   when  all  have  received  the  women  shall  receive, 

25  and  when  there  is  an  end  of  the  singing  with  which  they 
praise,  the  deacon  shall  cry  out  and  say  :  We  have 
received  of  the  venerable  Body  of  Christ,  and  let  us  give 
thanks  to  him  who  has  made  us  worthy  that  we  should 
partake   of  his  mysteries,  honourable   and   holy.     And 

^o  after  that  the  bishop  shall  pray  and  give  thanks  for  the 
eating   of  the    Body  of  Christ  and  the  drinking  of  his 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  277    . 

Blood,  and  when  he  has  finished  what  he  prays,  the 
deacon  shall  say  :  Bow  your  heads  before  the  Lord  that 
he  may  bless  you  ;  and  when  they  have  finished  the  being 
blessed,  let  the  deacon  say :  Go  away  in  peace.  And 
the  little  (pieces)  which  remain  over  let  the  deacons  take  s 
care  of,  lest  any  should  be  left  of  the  Oblation,  and  let 
the  priests  take  great  care  that  there  should  not  be  much 
left,  lest  it  should  be  a  great  judgment  upon  them,  like 
the  sons  of  Aaron  and  the  sons  of  Eli  whom  the  Holy 
Spirit  destroyed  because  they  despised  the  sacrifice  of  the  lo 
Lord ;  how  much  more  those  who  make  light  of  the 
Body  of  Christ  and  his  Blood,  and  think  that  it  is 
carnal  food  and  not  spiritual  which  they  receive.  This 
we  command  to  all,  O  bishops  and  presbyters  and 
deacons,  concerning  the  service  of  the  holy  Mysteries,  is 

Tke  fifty-third:  Concerning  the  ordination  of  the 
Presbyters  and  the  Deacons,  and  concerning  the 
Deaconesses  and  the  Subdeaconesses  and  the  women 
Readers. 

And   thou,  O  bishop,   ordain   the  presbyter,  lay  thy  » 
hand  upon  his  head,  and  all  the  presbyters  standing  by 
and   the  deacons,  and  pray  and  ordain  him.     And  the 
deacon  also,  ordain  him  and  put  thy  hand  upon  him,  and 
pray,  and  all  the  presbyters  and  deacons  standing  by. 

And  concerning  the  deaconesses  and  the  subdeacon-  25 
esses  and  the  women  readers  we  have  already  spoken. 

The  fifty-fourth  :  Concerning  the  confessors. 

The   confessor   shall  not  be  ordained.     This  man  is 
trustworthy  by  his  mind,  for  he  is  worthy  of  great  honour, 
for  he  confessed  the  name  of  God  and  his  Son  before  the  30 
peoples  and  kings.     If,  however,  necessity  requires  that 


2/8  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

he  should  be  ordained  bishop  or  presbyter,  let  him  be 
ordained ;  and  if  the  confessor  is  angry  with  such  an 
ordinance  because  of  his  confession,  let  him  be  excommuni- 
cated, for  he  is  not  only  (wrong  in  this),  but  also  he  has 

5  denied  the  command  of  Christ,  and  he  has  become  worse 
than  an  unbeliever. 

The  fifty-fifth :  Concerning   the  virgins  and  widows 
and  exorcists. 

Hand  shall  not  be  laid  upon  a  virgin,  for  it  is  not 

lo  the  commandment  of  the  Lord.  This  is  a  sacred  conflict, 
it  is  only  by  a  secret  resolve.  It  is  not  that  marriage 
is  depreciated,  but  that  there  may  be  leisure  for  the 
service  of  God. 

Concerning  the  widows.     Hand  shall  not  be  laid  upon 

15  a  widow.  When  (there  is)  one  whose  husband  has  been 
dead  a  long  time,  and  she  has  lived  in  chastity  and  nothing 
has  been  found  against  her  and  she  has  provided  properly 
for  the  people  of  her  house,  like  Judith  and  Hannah,  let 
him  put  such  into  the  rank  of  the  widows  ;  but  if  it  is  not 

20  a  long  time  since  her  husband  died,  she  shall  not  be 
trusted,  but  she  shall  be  proved  by  length  of  time. 
For  the  solicitation  even  grows  old  [with  the  man]  if 
it  be  not  held  back  by  a  strong  rein. 

Concerning  the  exorcist.     The  exorcist  shall  not  be 

25  ordained,  because  this  thing  is  by  voluntary  intention, 
and  it  is  by  the  gift  of  God  and  Christ  Jesus.  For  when 
the  Holy  Spirit  dwells  in  the  man  [and  him]  who  obtains 
the  grace  of  healing,  he  is  declared  by  the  grace  which 
is  in  him,  which  enlightens  men.     If  necessity  require 

30  that  he  should  become  bishop  or  presbyter  or  deacon, 
the  hand  shall  be  laid  upon  him. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  279 

The  fifty-sixtk:   Concerning    by  how    many  bishops 
it  is  proper  to  ordain  a  bishop. 

It  is  proper  for  the  bishop  that  he  should  be  ordained 
by  three  bishops  or  two.  And  if  it  was  only  one 
bishop  who  laid  hand  upon  him,  let  him  be  excommuni-  s 
cated.  And  if  it  was  done  through  urgent  necessity 
by  one,  and  it  was  not  possible  to  collect  an  assembly 
because  of  widely  extended  persecution  or  some  other 
cause,  then  let  him  be  justified  by  many  bishops,  and 
they  shall  make  it  thus  lawful  for  him,  and  he  shall  be  lo 
made  by  their  command. 

The  fifty-seventh :  The  bishop  shall  bless  and  shall  not 
be   blessed,   and   he   shall  excommunicate  him   who  is 
worthy  of  excommunication.     The  excommunication  of 
the  bishop,  that  it  cannot  be  done  by  one  bishop  only.  15 
And  the  rule  of  the  blessing. 

The  bishop  shall  bless  and  shall  not  be  blessed.  He 
shall  ordain  men  and  offer  the  Oblation;  and  the  Eulogia 
shall  be  offered  by  the  bishops  and  not  by  the  presbyters. 
The  bishop  shall  excommunicate  every  priest  who  is  20 
worthy  of  excommunication :  a  bishop  he  cannot  ex- 
communicate by  himself,  but  only  with  bishops  like  him. 

The  presbyter  shall  bless  and  shall  not  be  blessed. 
He  shall  receive  the  Eulogia  from  the  bishop  and  from 
his  fellow-presbyter,  and  he  also  shall  give  to  his  fellow-  2$ 
presbyter  and  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  men,  but  he  shall 
not  ordain  or  excommunicate,  or  put  out  him  who  is 
faulty — if  there  was  one  who  deserved  this  punishment 

The  deacon  shall  not  bless   and  shall   not  give  the 
Eulogia,  and  shall  take  (it)  from  the  bishop  and  the  pres-  30 
byter.      He  shall  not  baptise  or  offer  the  Oblation,  and 


280  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

when  the  bishop  and  presbyter  offer,  he  shall  give  the 
cup  to  the  people.  He  being  not  priest,  but  servant  to 
the  priests. 

The  fifty-eighth  :  It  is  not  proper  that  there  should  be 

S  one  of  the  priests  in  a  rank  inferior  to  the  rank  of  the 
deacon,  that  he  should  perform  any  of  the  works  of  the 
deacon. 

It  is  not  proper  that  there  should  be  one  in  a  rank 
inferior  to  the  rank  of  the  deacon,  that  he  should  perform 

10  the  work  of  the  deacon.  And  the  deaconesses  shall  not 
bless,  nor  do  anything  of  what  the  presbyters  and  the 
deacons  do.  But  they  (Jit.  she)  shall  guard  the  doors 
(and  have)  no  other  (duty).  And  they  shall  minister 
to  the  presbyters  where  they  baptise  the  women,   be- 

xs  cause  this  is  what  is  proper. 

The  fifty-ninth :  Concerning  the  first-fruits  and  tithes. 

All  firstlings  shall  be  brought  to  the  bishop  and  the 

presbyters  and  the  deacons  for  them  to  eat     And  all 

tithes  they  shall  receive  that  they  may  be  for  the  clergy 

ao  and  the  virgins  and  the  widows,  and  everyone  who  is 
poor  shall  eat  thereof.  The  first-fruits  which  are  the 
firstlings  (are)  for  the  priests  alone  and  those  who 
minister  to  them. 

The  sixtieth:  Concerning  what  is   left   over  of  the 

»5  Oblation,  what  is  not  offered  at  the  time  of  the  Mysteries. 

The  Eulogiae  which  are  left  over  from  the  Mysteries 

of  what  was  not  offered,  let  the  deacons  divide  it  among 

the  clergy,  with  the  oversight  of  the   bishop   and  the 

presbyter.     He  shall  give  to  the  bishop  four  portions, 

30  and  he  shall  give  to  the  presbyter  three  portions, 
and   the  deacon   two,  and  lastly,  the   subdeacons  and 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  28I 

readers  and  the  singers  and  the  deaconesses — he  shall 
give  to  all  of  these  one  portion.  This  is  good  (and) 
acceptable  before  God.  Everyone  shall  be  honoured 
according  to  his  rank,  and  there  is  no  church  teaching 
confusion  but  good  order.  S 

The    sixty-first :   Concerning    him    who    wishes    to 
partake  of  the  Mysteries. 

Those  who  wish  to  partake  of  the  holy  Mysteries, 
which  are  of  the  service  of  God,  let  them  be  brought  by 
the  deacons  to  the  bishop  and  presbyters,  and  they  shall  » 
ask  what  cause  induced  them  to  come  and  hear  the 
words  of  the  Lord,  and  those  who  bring  them  shall 
bear  testimony  to  them,  and  they  shall  ask  them  to 
report  of  their  occupations  with  great  earnestness. 

TAe  sixty-second:  Concerning  the  trades  and  the  works,  is 

Let  them  ask  about  their  occupations  and  manner  of 
life  with  earnestness,  whether  they  axe  slaves  or  free. 
If  anyone  is  a  slave,  let  him  ask  his  master  whether  he 
bears  testimony  to  him.  If  he  shall  not  bear  testimony 
to  him,  let  him  be  sent  away,  until  he  shall  make  himself  ao 
worthy  that  his  master  should  bear  testimony  to  him. 
If  he  bears  testimony  to  him  he  shall  be  received.  If  he 
was  servant  of  an  idolater,  let  him  be  taught  to  please  hts 
master,  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  may  not  be  blasphemed. 
If  anyone  has  a  wife,  or  a  woman  has  a  husband,  let  them  35 
be  taught  to  be  content  (with  one  another).  If  they 
were  not  married  according  to  the  law.'  If  the  master 
was  a  believer  and  he  knew  tliat  (his  slave)  was  com- 
mitting adultery  and  was  not  married  to  his  wife,  or  she 

>  The  passage  is  defectire. 


282  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

was  a  concubine  and  he  was  not  married  to  her,  let  that 
master  be  excommunicated  and  expelled. 

If  there  was  anyone  who  has  a  devil,^  let  him  be 
taught  that  he  must  be  cured,  and  not  be  brought  in  to 
5  partake  of  the  Mysteries  until  he  is  first  purified.  If  he 
is  on  the  point  of  death  he  shall  be  brought  in. 

Whatever  man  there  be  who  is  absorbed  in  the  (work 
of  the)  world,  let  him  desist  or  let  him  be  rejected. 

If  an  adulteress  desires  to  come  in,  let  her  desist  or  be 
10  sent  away.  If  there  was  anyone  who  made  idols,  and  he 
wished  to  come  in,  let  him  desist  or  be  sent  away. 

A  man  or  a  woman  who  is  (concerned)  in  a  theatre,  or 

a  chariot-driver  or  an  Olympic  contender,  or  a  chorus 

flute-player  or  a  harp-player,  or  one  who  plays  on  the 

'5  pipe,  or  a  dancer  or  a  huckster,*  let  him  desist  or  be  sent 

away. 

A  soldier  before  he  comes  in  must  be  taught  not  to 
oppress  or  accuse  falsely,  and  he  shall  be  content  with 
his  pay.  If  he  is  pleased  (to  be  so),  let  him  be  brought 
2o  in.     If  he  be  not  willing,  then  let  him  be  sent  away. 

One  who  does  infamous  crimes,  or  lies  with  male  or 
female,  or  a  magician  or  star-gazer,  or  a  diviner  or 
master  of  the  astrolabe,  or  one  who  speaks  about  the 
hours  and  the  choice  of  days,  or  a  serpent-charmer  or 
25  maker  of  phylacteries,  or  one  who  divines  with  any 
vessel,  or  interpreter  of  movements  of  limbs,  or  who 
augurs  by  birds  of  the  heaven,  or  who  watches  that 
he  may  collect  (signs)  by  the  lame  or  the  blind  or 
by  proof  of  birds  when  they  cry,  or  who  observes  the 

1  Satan. 

^  These  words  can  be  traced  in  a  comipt  transliteration  of  the  Coptic. 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  283 

words  of  men  that  they  may  be  marks  to  him — these 
shall  be  proved  by  time,  for  the  evil  is  hard  to  eradicate. 
If  they  desist  from  this  occupation  let  them  come  in, 
and  if  they  desist  not  let  them  be  sent  away. 

The  sixty-third :  Concerning  the  concubine  of  an  un-    s 
believer  or  believer,  (and)  the  prohibition  of  many  things. 

If  the  concubine  of  an  unbeliever  Is  a  slave  and  kept 
herself  to  him  alone,  let  her  come  in  ;  if  she  was  defiled 
by  others,  let  her  be  sent  away.  If  a  believer  has  a  con- 
cubine and  she  stays  with  him,  let  him  desist  from  her  if  lo 
he  is  a  Christian  and  marry  her  according  to  the  law.  If 
she  is  free,  let  him  do  with  her  according  to  the  law,  and 
if  he  is  unwilling  to  do  this,  let  him  be  sent  away. 

If   there   is  one  who    follows    the    customs  of   the 
heathen,'  or  the  fabulous  words  of  the  Jews,  let  him  is 
desist  or  be  sent  away.     One  (who)  is  mad  after  and 
gazes  at  the  theatre  or  gladiators  or  places  of  the  lions, 
if  he  desists  (let  him  come  in),  or  let  him  be  sent  away. 

Let  them  who  begin  to  be  instructed  be  instructed  three 
years.  If  a  man  has  love  and  good-will  and  he  displays  20 
upright  life,  let  him  be  accepted,  for  the  matter  is  not 
concerned  with  time,  but  it  is  only  an  affair  of  intention 
and  conduct.  If  there  is  a  layman  teaching  in  the  words, 
and  he  is  quiet  in  manner  of  life,  let  him  teach.*  For 
they  shall  be  all  taught  of  God,  said  the  prophet  25 

The  sixty-fourth:    Concerning  the  washing  of  their 
hands  with  water,  and  the  prayer. 

Every  believing  man  or  woman  when  they  rise  in  the 
morning  from  sleep,  before  they  do  any  kind  of  business, 

^  lit. '  those  who  are  not  of  the  way.'  *  Lit,  '  or  a  teacher.' 


284  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


let  them  wash  their  hands  with  water  and  pray.  And 
if  there  should  happen  to  be  the  words  or  conference  in 
teaching,  let  them  choose  for  themselves  the  words  of 
teaching  as  better  than  work. 

5  The  sixty 'fifth  :  Every  believing  man  or  woman  shall 
be  (kindly)  disposed  to  their  servants.  And  the  rest  of 
the  sabbath  and  Sunday.^ 

Let  every  believing  man  or  woman  be  disposed  to  his 
servants  with  kindness,  as  we  commanded  at  first  and 

10  have  taught  thus  in  the  Epistles.  Let  the  servants  be 
appointed  to  work  five  days,  and  on  the  sabbaths  and 
Sundays  they  shall  devote  themselves  to  the  Church, 
that  they  may  learn  the  service  of  God,  for  God  rested 
on  the  sabbath  day  when  he  completed  all  the  world. 

IS  The  Sunday  is  the  day  of  the  resurrection  of  the  Lord. 
The  sixty-sixth  :    They  shall  not  work  (in)  the  week 
of  the  Pascha.     And  the  mention  of  the  feasts. 

They  shall  not  work  also  in  the  week  of  the  great 
Pascha  and  that  which  comes  after  it,  the  first  solemnity, 

20  viz.  the  day  in  which  the  Lord  was  crucified,  and  the  other 
the  day  on  which  he  rose  from  the  dead.  And  is  there  not 
need  that  they  should  learn  that  he  died  and  rose  from  the 
dead  ?  They  shall  not  work  on  the  day  of  the  solemnity 
of  the  Ascension,  for  the  purpose  of  Christ  was  completed 

25  on  it.  They  shall  not  work  on  the  completion  of  the 
Pentecost,  for  it  was  the  manifestation  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
who  came  down  upon  those  who  believed  in  Christ.  They 
shall  not  work  also  on  the  day  of  the  Birth  of  Christ,  for 
on  it  was  given  favour  to  men.     On  that  very  day  with 

1  Lit  « the  one/ 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  285 

haste  when  the  God  the  Word  was  bom  for  us,  Jesus 
Christ,  of  Mary  the  Virgin,  (to  be)  the  salvation  of  the 
world.  They  shall  not  work  also  on  the  solemnity  of  the 
Bathing,  for  on  that  day  was  the  appearance  of  the 
Divinity  of  Christ,  and  the  Father  bore  witness  to  him  j 
in  the  Baptism,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  came  down  upon 
him  like  a  dove,'  which  bore  witness  to  him  before  those 
standing  by,  that  this  was  the  true  God.  They  shall 
not  work  also  on  the  day  of  the  Apostles,  for  they  are 
those  who  became  to  you  teachers  of  the  doctrine  of  ,o 
Christ,  and  made  you  worthy  to  partake  of  the  gift  of 
the  Holy  Spirit.  They  shall  not  work  on  the  day  of 
Stephen  the  first  martyr,  (and)  of  the  other  holy  martyrs 
who  loved  Christ  better  than  their  own  lives. 

The  sixty-seventh :  The  times  of  the  prayers.  ,j 

When  ye  rise  in  the  early  morning,  pray,  (and  pray) 
at  the  third  hour,  and  pray  at  the  sixth  hour,  and 
pray  at  the  ninth  hour,  and  pray  (in)  the  evening  and 
the  time  when  the  cock  crows.  In  the  early  morn- 
ing because  God  causes  (it)  to  shine  upon  us  and  30 
makes  the  night  pass  and  brings  us  the  day.  The 
third  hour,  being  the  hour  in  which  Pilate  gave  sentence 
upon  the  Lord.  The  sixth  hour,  and  the  Lord  was 
crucified  at  that  hour.  And  (in)  the  ninth  hour  he 
gave  up  the  spirit  and  all  the  earth  was  shaken,  and  ij 
when  his  side  was  pierced  there  came  forth  blood  and 
water,  and  when  the  Lord  was  crucified  (all)  creation 
was  afraid  and  trembled  before  him  at  what  the 
godless  Jews  did,  and  they  could  not  endure  to  look 

1  This  word  is  lost,  but  there  seems  no  room  for  more  than  one  word, 
the  next  being  the  relative  pronoun. 


286  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

upon  the  Lord  in  his  being  mocked.  At  night  ye  shall 
give  thanks  because  he  has  given  you  rest  from  toil 
of  the  day,  and  at  the  time  of  cock-crow  because  already 
at  that  hour  ye  are  told  the  news  of  the  appearing  of  the 
5  day  that  ye  may  turn  to  your  works,  and  to  the  works 
of  the  light  that  ye  may  do  them. 

The  sixty-eighth :  If  ye  cannot  go  to  the  church,  the 
bishop  shall  celebrate^  the  Kiddas  in  his  house.  It  is 
the  holy  man  that  sanctifies  the  church. 

10  If  ye  cannot  go  to  the  church  because  of  the  un- 
believers, thou,  O  bishop,  celebrate  the  Kiddas  in  thy 
house,  that  the  servants  of  God  may  not  be  gathered 
together  with  the  profane ;  and  the  church  does  not 
sanctify  the  man,  but  it  is  the  man  who  sanctifies  the 

15  church. 

If  the  profane  make  a  raid  on  the  church,  flee  away 
from  it,  for  they  have  defiled  it,  for  as  it  is  the  holy  man 
that  sanctifies  the  church,  so  also  it  is  defiled  by  the 
impure. 

20  If  it  is  not  possible  to  assemble  together  in  the  house 
or  in  the  church,  each  one  shall  sing  praise  wherever  he 
is  by  himself,  and  let  him  read  and  pray,  if  there  are 
two  or  three,  for  the  Lord  said  that  in  the  place  in 
which  two  or  three  are  gathered  in  my  name  I  am  at 

25  once  with  them  in  their  midst. 

The  Faithful  shall  not  pray  with  the  catechumens  in  a 
house.  It  is  not  right  that  he  should  partake  of  the  holy 
Mysteries  if  he  has  been  defiled  by  those  who  do  not 
partake.     The  servant  of  God   shall   not   pray   with    a 

^  Ut.  'do.' 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  287 

heretic  nor  in  his  house.  What  fellowship  has  light  with 
darkness?  If  a  believer,  man  or  woman,  has  intercourse 
with  slaves,  let  them  be  excommunicated  and  go  out  of 
the  church. 

The  sixty-ninth :  Concerning  the  days  on  which  they    S 
make  celebration  for  those  who  slept  ^ 

They  shall  keep  the  third  for  those  who  slept,  with 
psalms  and  prayers,  because  of  him  who  rose  ^ain  on 
the  third  day.  They  shall  keep  the  seventh  for  memorial 
of  the  living  and  the  dead.  They  shall  keep  also  the  fulness  lo 
of  the  month  in  likeness  of  the  ancient  (practice) :  thus 
mourned  the  people  for  Moses.  And  thus  they  shall 
also  keep  the  fulness  of  the  year  in  likeness  of  their 
memorial.  They  shall  give  to  the  poor  of  the  goods  of 
him  who  died  as  a  memorial  for  him.  This  we  say  con-  '5 
cerning  only  the  servants  of  God.  As  for  the  profane,  if 
everything  in  the  world  was  given  to  the  poor  for  him  it 
would  not  profit  him,  because  those  who  were  enemies 
of  God  in  the  world,  the  thing  is  clear  that  they  will 
remain  to  be  his  enemies  when  they  go  out  of  the  world.  " 
There  is  indeed  no  hypocrisy  with  him,  for  the  Lord  is 
righteous  and  loveth  the  righteous,  and  also,  '  Behold  the 
man  and  his  work.' 

And  if  ye  are  invited  on  a  day,  eat  orderly  and  in  the 
fear  of  God.     It  may  be  that  ye  shall  pray  for  those  »S 
who  have  been  removed  from  this  world. 

O  presbyters  and  deacons  of  Christ,  it  is  proper  that  ye 
should  be  watchful  at  all  times,  ye  yourselves  and  others 
(also),  that  ye  may  be  able  to  do  according  to  the  saying 
of  the  Scripture :    The  strong,  the  angry,  shall  not  drink  3° 
wine,  lest  they  should  drink  and  forget  wisdom,  and 

19 


388  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

not  be  able  to  judge  in  uprightness.  Because  after 
God  the  almighty  and  his  only  Son,  the  presbyters  and 
deacons  are^  the  authorities  of  the  church.  We  say 
this,  (but)  we  do  not  forbid  them  to  drink  (wine), 
{.because  we  cannot  despise  what  God  created  for 
the  joy  of  men,  but  that  they  should  not  drink  to 
be  drunken.  The  Scriptures  say  not  that  he  shall 
not  drink  wine,  but  what  is  said  is  that  he  shall 
not  drink   wine   to  be  drunken,  and  also   that   thorns 

lo  spring  up  in  the  hand  of  the  drunkard.  This  is  not 
said  only  to  the  clergy,  but  to  all  the  lay  Christian 
people,  those  who  follow  the  name  of  our  Master  Jesus 
Christ  These  are  they  concerning  whom  they  say  :  The 
woe,  but  also  trouble  and  contentions  and  sorrows  who 

IS  hath  ;  and  whose  eyes  are  darkened  ;  or  wars  and  wounds 
shall  be  to  whom  ?  Is  it  not  they  who  are  assiduous  in 
drinking  wine,  who  ask  where  is  the  place  of  drink  ?  j 

The  seventieth  chapter :  Concerning  those  who  are 
persecuted  for  the  Faith,  and  concerning  him  who  flees 

ao  from  city  to  city  because  of  the  Faith,  that  they  should 
be  assisted  withal  for  the  sake  of  the  Faith. 

He  who  flees  from  city  to  city  for  the  sake  of  the 
remembrance  of  the  words  of  the  Lord,  and  they  know 
that  the  spirit  is  ready  and   the  flesh  weak,  (and)  they 

1$  flee  from  place  to  place,  and  they  accept  the  spoiling 
of  their  goods  that  they  may  keep  the  charge  of 
the  name  of  Christ  and  not  deny  him.  Assist 
them  and  give  to  them  all  that  they  have  need  of, 
and  fulfil  the  statute  of  the  Lord  which  we  command 

1  Lit  'and.' 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  »89 

(you)  withal  Stand  each  one  in  the  Order  which  is 
given  him,  and  go  not  beyond  the  limits  which  are  its 
limits  for  him.  It  is  not  for  ourselves  but  for  God  the 
Lord,  who  says :  He  who  receiveth  you  receiveth  me, 
and  he  who  receiveth  me  receiveth  him  who  sent  me,  j 
and  he  who  despiseth  you  despiseth  me,  and  he  who 
despiseth  me  despiseth  him  who  sent  me.  If  there  are 
created  things  which  have  no  souls  (and  which)  keep 
the  order  which  is  given  them,  the  day  and  the  night, 
and  the  sun  and  the  moon  and  the  stars,  and  the  elements  lo 
and  the  changes  of  the  seasons  and  the  months  and  the 
weeks  and  the  hours,  and  these  are  slaves  to  the  necessity 
which  was  defined  for  them  as  it  is  said :  He  made  for 
them  a  limit  (which)  they  do  not  pass  over — and  the  sea  I 
have  made  for  it  a  limit,  and  I  have  made  for  it  a  barrier  15 
and  doors,  and  I  said  to  it.  Reach  as  far  as  this,  and  thou 
shalt  not  pass  beyond.  How  much  more  indeed  is  it  not 
proper  for  you  to  move  anything  which  has  been  defined 
for  you  according  to  the  will  of  God  ;  yet  there  are  some 
who  reckon  this  as  nothing,  that  they  confuse  Orders.  20 
Do  not  ye  confuse  the  ordination  according  to  which  each 
one  of  you  was  ordained  to  his  Order,  nor  take  by  force 
Orders  which  are  not  given  to  you  and  pass  beyond  your 
own  in  an  overbearing  manner  that  ye  may  possess  what 
belongs  to  another,  over  which  ye  have  no  authority.  Con-  35 
cerning  this  they  provoked  God  like  the  children  of  Korah 
and  king  'Ozya,  who  took  by  force  the  priesthood  with- 
out the  commandment  of  God.  The  former  were  burnt 
with  fire  and  the  latter  had  his  forehead  marked  with 
leprosy.  And  these  (now)  make  angry  the  Lord  Jesus,  P 
who  commanded  that   this  should  be,  and  pained  the 


290  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


heart  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  despised  his  testimony,  and 
they  make  light  in  truth  of  the  charge  laid  upon  those  who 
do  these  deeds  and  the  carelessness  which  they  commit 
in  regard  to  the  Oblations  and  the  Eucharistia,  so  that 

5  they  are  offered  by  means  of  those  by  whom  it  is  not 
proper  (to  be  done).  They  regard  the  honour  of  the 
priesthood  which  is  in  the  likeness  of  the  great  Chief 
Priesthood  of  Jesus  Christ  our  King  that  it  is  a  work  of 
sport.     And  it  is  necessary  that  we  should  teach  them 

o  this  :  for  {lit.  and)  henceforth  some  of  them  make  division 
(inciting  others  to  follow)  after  their  vanities.  We  speak 
of  Moses  the  servant  of  God,  to  whom  God  spoke  face 
to  face  as  one  who  talks  with  his  companion,  who  said 
to  him,  I  know  thee  more  than  everyone,  who  talked 

5  with  him  face  to  face,  (not)  in  signs  and  wonders  and 
dreams  and  angels  and  interpretation.  This  (was)  at 
the  time  when  he  commanded  him  the  holy  law,  and 
strictly  defined  what  was  proper  to  be  completed  by  the 
priesthood,  and  what  was  proper  to  be  (done)  by  the 

o  priests,  and  not  the  things  which  belonged  to  the  levites, 
and  he  kept  each  one  apart  for  what  was  suitable  for 
him,  and  he  arranged  the  service,  that  which  was  com- 
manded to  the  high-priest  to  do  and  was  not  suitable 
for  the  priests  to  do,  and  the  law  did  not  require  it ;   and 

\l  that  with  which  the  priests  were  commanded  the  levites 
were  not  able  to  approach,  but  each  one  should  keep  to 
his  own  service  which  he  received  and  not  go  from  it. 
And  if  anyone  transgressed  and  went  out  from  his  Order 
and  the  service  which  he  had  received  his  punishment 

P  was  death.  What  happened  to  Saul  makes  this  clear  to 
us,   especially   when   he   thought   to    offer    up    victims 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  29I 

rebelliously  against  the  prophet  and  high-priest  Samuel 
he  brought  on  himself  sin  and  curses  for  ever.  But  the 
prophet  was  not  afraid  because  of  the  anointing  with 
which  he  had  anointed  him  to  become  king.  God  has 
made  us  know  of  a  great  deed,  revealing  (what)  happened  s 
to  *Ozya,  Vengeance  did  not  wait  on  account  of  the 
opposition  which  he  made,  and  (in)  his  becoming  a 
stranger  from  his  kingdom  because  of  the  chief  priest- 
hood which  he  coveted. 

The  seventy-first  chapter:  Concerning  the  Order  of  the  10 
Priesthood  and  its  limits. 

Ye  are  not  ignorant  of  what  we  have  defined.  Ye 
are  aware  that  there  are  some  whom  we  have  named 
Bishops,  and  others  whom  we  have  named  Presbyters, 
and  others  Deacons,  with  prayer  and  laying  on  of  hand.  15 
And  we  have  made  for  each  an  Order  according  to  the 
difference  of  the  name.  There  is  none  among  us  who 
desires  the  filling  of  our  hands,  that  he  may  receive  from 
us  what  he  desires,  like  the  priests  of  the  calves  made 
by  Jeroboam,  those  which  (were)  an  abomination  before  ao 
God. 

If  there  was  not  a  law  of  difference  of  Orders,  it  would 
have  sufficed  to  perfect  all  the  world  with  one  name,  but 
since  we  have  been  taught  by  the  Lord  a  series  of 
functions  we  have  kept  apart  the  Bishops  for  the  chief  is 
priesthood,  and  the  Presbyters  for  the  priesthood,  and 
the  Deacons  for  the  service,  the  service  which  comes  to 
the  two,  that  the  works  of  the  service  may  be  perfected 
withal. 

It  is  not  proper  for  the  Deacons  to  offer  the  Oblations  jo 
or  baptise,  or  give  the  Eulogia  to  great  or  small ;  nor  for 


292  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


a  Presbyter  to  sign,  t.e.  ordain,  anyone,  because  it  is  not 
proper  to  alter  his  Order.  God  is  not  (the  author)  of 
confusion,  so  that  the  vicious  may  not  seize  for  them- 
selves with  audacity  what  belongs  to  those  who  are 
5  (properly)  chosen,  and  make  for  themselves  a  new  law  to 
their  own  destruction  in  their  ignorance.  The  thing 
bears  witness  against  them.  They  kick  with  their  feet 
against  the  goad.  Such  men  are  not  in  opposition  to  us, 
but  they  are  in  opposition  to  the  Bishop  of  all  the  earth, 

10  the  Son  of  God,  the  great  Priest  Jesus  Christ  our  Master. 
Constituted  by  Moses,  the  lover  of  God,  were  chief 
priests,  priests,  and  levites,  and  constituted  also  were 
thirteen  Apostles  by  the  Saviour,  and  by  the  Apostles 
we  have  been  constituted,  Clement  and  James  and  the 

15  rest  withal,  not  that  we  should  describe  every  one  of 
them.  And  we  have  also  all  of  us  constituted  withal 
presbyters  and  deacons  and  readers.  The  first  and 
only  true  Chief  Priest  is  Christ,  he  who  did  not  carry 
off    this   honour    for    himself,    but    (it   was    from)   the 

20  Father  who  appointed  him.  He  when  he  became 
Chief  Priest  for  our  sake  offered  up  the  spiritual 
Sacrifice  to  God  the  Father  before  he  was  crucified. 
And  he  commanded  us  alone  to  do  this,  and  there  were 
others  with  us  who  believed  in   him.     But   it  was   not 

25  given  to  everyone  who  believes  in  him  to  be  priest,  nor 
to  be  worthy  of  the  Order  of  chief  priest  After  that  he 
ascended  we  offered  by  his  command  the  holy  Oblation 
without  blood,  and  we  have  appointed  bishops  and 
presbyters  and  deacons,  in  number,  seven,  among  them 

30  Stephen  the  holy  martyr  ;  he  was  not  less  than  us  in  the 
love  of  God,  but  he  displayed  his  service  of  God  in  faith 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  393 

and  the  love  which  he  haxl  for  Christ  Jesus  our  Master 
to  such  a  degree  that  he  even  gave  up  his  life  for  his 
sake,  and  the  Jews,  the  murderers  of  the  Lord,  stoned 
him  with  stones  and  killed  him.  But  this  great  man,  who 
gushed  with  the  Spirit,  who  saw  the  doors  of  the  heavens  5 
opened  and  the  Lord  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father, 
we  did  not  observe  him  in  any  place  doing  what 
was  not  suitable  for  the  deacons,  or  that  he  offered 
Oblations,  or  that  he  laid  hand  upon  a  man,  but  he 
kept  to  the  Order  of  the  deacons  until  the  end,  as  was  10 
suitable  for  the  Martyr  of  Christ  to  complete  and  keep 
the  Order. 

And  if  there  is  anyone  who  blames  Philip  the  deacon 
and  Hananiya  the  faithful  brother,  the  former  because  he 
baptised  the  eunuch  and  the  other  (because)  he  baptised  is 
me,  Paul,  they  know  not  what  we  say.  We  say  that  no 
one  shall  seize  for  himself  the  Order  of  Priesthood,  but 
should  obtain  it  from  God  like  Melchizedeck  or  James,  or 
should  obtain  it  from  the  chief  priest  like  Aaron.  He 
obtained  it  from  Moses.  Philip  and  Hananiya  did  not  ao 
choose  for  themselves  that  they  should  do  that  But  it 
was  Christ  who  chose  them,  the  true  Chief  Priest  of  God, 
and  there  is  no  god  like  him. 

The  Apostolic  Canons  were  finished,  and  they  are 
seventy-one  Canons,  but  their  number  in  the  Greek  is  i; 
eighty-one'  canons,  and  they  are  those  which  the 
Apostles  transmitted  by  the  hand  of  Clement  To  God 
be  glory  continually,  and  upon  us  be  his  mercy  for  ever. 
Amin. 

1  'One*  is  added  above  the  line. 


I  ■ 

I 

I 

t; 

t 

!-l 

I  I 

lis 

■  r 


:  I 

it 


TRANSLATION    OF    THE   SAIDIC  TEXT 

Editbd  by  PAUL  DE  LAGARDE  in  ABGYPTIACA  Fkom 
MS.  Brit.  Mds.,  Ok.  1330:  GdrriKCKK,  1SS3 

THESE   ARE  THE    KANONS  OF  OUR    HOLY 

FATHERS,    THE   APOSTLES    OF    OUR    LORD 

JESUS  THE  CHRIST,  WHICH  THEY  APPOINTED 

FOR  THE  CHURCHES 

Hail,  O  our  sons  and  our  daughters,  in  the  name   of 
our  Lord  Jesus  the  Christ.  |  Said  Johannes  and  Math- 
thaios  and  Petros  and  Andreas,  Philippos  and  Simon,  10 
Jakobos  and  Nathanael,  Thomas  and  Kyphas,  Bartholo- 
maios  and  ^  Joudas  the  brother  of  Jakobos. 

I.  According  to  the  commandment  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
the  Christ  our  Saviour,  after  we  had  assembled  together  ; 
he  commanded  us,  saying :  Ye  have  not  yet  divided  the  15 
countries  among  you  :  before  that  ye  divide  them  among 
you,  so  that  each  may  take  his  place  according  to  your 
number,  |  Define  the  dignity  (axioma,'  in  the  plural)  of 
the  Bishops,  the  councils  {lit.  the  places  of  sitting)  of 
the  Presbyters,  the  assiduous  services  (proskarteresis)  so 
of  the  Deacons,   the  wisdom  (plural)  of  the   Readers 


'  The  word  for  '  and '  hitherto  hu  been  the  prepontion  '  with.' 
*  Many  of  the  Greek  words  used  by  the  SiUdic  truulator  are  given 
transliterated. 


296  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

(anagnostes)  and  the  sinlessness  (plural)  of  the  Widows ; 
and  all  the  other  [2]^  works,  by  which  it  is  right  to 
establish  the  foundation  of  the  Church  ;  that  they  may 
know  by  them  the  type  (typos)  of  the  things  which  are 
5  in  the  heavens,  and  keep  from  all  defilement,  |  Knowing 
that  they  will  give  account  to  God  in  the  great  day  of 
the  Judgment  concerning  all  the  things  which  they 
heard  (and)  did  not  keep.  And  he  commanded  us  to 
send  these  words  forth  in  all  the  world  (oikoumene). 

10  2.  Now  (de)  it  pleased  us  to  speak,  each  of  us  accord- 
ing as  the  Lord  revealed  to  him,  according  to  the  will  of 
God  the  Father,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  bearing  in  mind 
bis  words,  that  we  should  order  them  to  you  by  way  of 
reminder  and  fraternal  teaching. 

15  3.  Said  Johannes :  Men  and  brethren,  we  know  that 
we  shall  give  account  for  the  things  which  we  heard  and 
which  were  ordered  to  us.  Let  not  any  of  us  accept 
the  person  of  his  neighbour,  but  if  one  see  that  his 
neighbour  says  things  which  are  not  profitable,  let  him 

^  put  him  to  shame,  because  that  which  he  {lit  thou)  says 
is  not  good.  Then  (de)  it  pleased  them  that  Johannes 
should  speak  first. 

4.  Said  Johannes  :  Two  ways  exist,  one  is  belonging 
to   life   and  [3]   the   other  to   death.     There    is  great 

25  difference  between  these  two  ways.  The  way  indeed  of 
life  is  this :  *  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  who 
made  thee  with  all  the  heart,  and  glorify  him,  he  who 
redeemed  thee  from    death.'  ^  I  For    this    is    the    first 


1  The  numbers  in  brackets  record  the  pages  of  the  MS.  1320. 
^  Marked  as  quotation  in  MS. 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  397 

commandment  (entole).  |  But  the  second  is  this :  Thou 
shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself.  The  law  and  the 
prophets  are  depending  on  these  two  commandments 
(entole). 

5.  Said  Maththaios :  All  things  which  thou  wishest  not    5  . 
to  be  done  to  thee,  thou  also  do  them  not  to  another.  ( 
Which  is  this,  that  that  which  thou  hatest  do  not  do  to 
another.     Thou  therefore,  O  Petros  my  brother,  teach 
them  with  these  words. 

6.  Said  Petros :  Thou  shalt  not  kill ;  thou  shalt   not  to 
commit  adultery ;   thou  shalt  not  fornicate ;  thou  shalt 
not  corrupt  a  youth  ;  thou  shalt  not  steal ;  thou  shalt  not 
be  a  sorcerer  (pharmagos)  ;  thou  shalt  not  be  a  diviner  ; 
thou  shalt  not  cause  abortion,  nor  if  she  should  bring 
forth  shalt  thou  kill  him  ;  thou  shalt  not  covet  anything  15 
of  thy  neighbour ;  thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  ;  thou 
shalt  not  speak  evil  of  anyone,  n^jther^bajt  thou  design 
gvil ;  thou  shalt  not  be  of  double  heart ;  nor  shalt  thou 
be  of  [4]  double  tongue,  for  to  be  double-tongued  is  a 
snare  of  death  ;  j  Thy  speech  shall  not  be  vain  or  false ;  |  ao 
Thou  shalt  not  be  lover  of  the  larger  portion,  nor  an 
extortioner,    nor   hypocrite    (hypokrites),    nor    (of)    evil 
heart,  nor  proud ;  |  Thou  shalt  not  take  an  evil  counsel 
against  thy  neighbour ;  thou  shalt  not  hate  any  man,  but 
some  indeed  thou  shalt  reprove,  but  on  others  thou  shalt  35 
have,  pity;    and  for  some  thou  shalt  pray,    and    others 
thou  shalt  love  like  thy  soul  (psyche). 

7.  Said  Andreas :  My  son,  flee  from  all  evil  (poneron), 
and  hate  all  evil.     Thou  shalt  not  be  wrathful,  because 
wrath  (orge)  leads  to   murder.  |  For  wrath  is  an  evil  30 
demon  (daimonion).     Be  not  jealous;  be  not  contentious ; 


298  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

be    not    quarrelsome ;    because    from    these    things   is 
begotten  envy. 

8.  Said  Philippos  :  My  son,  be  not  lustful,  because  lust 
leads  to  fornication,  drawing  men  into  it  by  force.  |  For 

5  lust  is  a  female  demon  (d.),  |  And  if  the  demon  (d)  of 
wrath  (orge)  should  be  united  with  that  of  pleasure 
(hydone)  they  destroy  those  who  will  receive  them.  |  Now 
(de)  the  way  of  the  evil  (poneron)  spirit  is  the  sin  of  the 
soul  (ps.).  I  And  whenever  he  sees  a  little  place  of  rest  [5] 

10  and  goes  in,  he  enlarges  the  way,  and  takes  with  him  all 
the  other  evil  (p.)  spirits,  and  goes  unto  that  soul  (ps.),  and 
he  lets  not  the  man  look  up  at  all  to  see  the  right  Let 
your  wrath  have  its  measure,  and  check  it  after  a  litde 
interval  (diastema),  and  draw  it  back  to  you,  lest  it  cast 

15  you  into  an  evil  deed.  |  For  wrath  and  evil  pleasure 
(hydone),  if  they  remain  always  continuing,  become 
demons  (d.),  and  whenever  they  have  dominion  over  the 
man,  they  swell  (shafe)  in  the  soul  (ps.),  and  it  becomes 
under  derision  ;  and  if  they  should  bring  him  into  deeds 

20  of  wrong  they  mock  at  him,  rejoicing  over  the  destruction 
of  that  man. 

9.  Said  Simon  :  My  son,  be  not  a  speaker  of  evil 
words  nor  base  ;  nor  be  of  lofty  eye ;  for  of  these  things 
comes  adultery  (plural). 

25  ID.  Said  Jakobos :  My  son,  be  not  an  interpreter 
{Jit.  sayer)  of  signs,  since  interpreting  of  signs  leads 
to  idolatry,  nor  an  enchanter,  nor  an  assigner  of  hours, 
nor  maker  of  potions,  nor  a  wizard.  |  Neither  be  teacher 
or  hearer  of  them  ;   for  of  all   these  things  [6]  comes 

30  idolatry. 

1 1.  Said  Nathanael :    My  son,  be  not   a   liar ;   since 


TRANSLATION   OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  299 

lying  leads  to  theft ;  nor  a  lover  of  money  {lit.  brass), 
nor  a  lover  of  vainglory ;  because  of  all  these  come 
thefts.  I  My  son,  be  not  a  murmurer,  since  murmuring 
draws  man  to  blasphemy.  |  Be  not  harsh,  nor  designer  of 
evil ;  for  of  all  these  is  begotten  quarrelling.  ]  But  rather  5 
be  meek,  since  the  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth.  | 
Further  (de),  be  also  tender-hearted,  peacemaking, 
merciful,  cleansed  in  thy  heart  from  all  evil.  Be  un- 
malicious  (kakia),  meek,  good  (agathos),  trembling  at 
the  words  which  thou  heardest,  and  keeping  jhem.  |  10 
Do  not  exalt  thyself,  nor  shall  thou  give  heed  to 
the  proud,  but  be  more  and  more  (auxane)  with  the 
righteous  (dikaios)  and  the  pure.  All  evil  things  which 
come  upon  thee  receive  as  being  good,  recognising 
that  nothing  will  happen  to  thee  without  God.  15 

12.  Said  Thomas :  My  son,  him  who  told  thee  the  words 
of  God/^and  became  to  thee  the  cause  of  life,  and  gave 
to  thee  the  holy  seal  (sphragis)  which  is  in  the  Lonfll  [7] 
Thou  shah  love  like  the  apple  of  thine  eyes.  |  Remember 
him  therefore  by  night  and  day,  and  honour  him  like  the  10 
Lord  ;  I  For  where  they  speak  of  the  things  of  the  Lord,^ 
the  Lord  is  there  :  ]  And  (de)  thou  shalt  seek  his  face  daily, 
him  and  the  other  holy  ones  ;  that  thou  mayest  rest  upon 
their  words ;  |  For  he  who  associates  with  the  holy  will 
become  holy.  |  Thou  shalt  honour  him  according  to  thy  2$ 
powerwTth  thy  sweat  and  with  the  toil  of  thy  hands.  |  For 
if  the  Lord  made  thee  worthy  that  he  should  give  to  thee 
by  him  spiritual  food  (trophe)  and  spiritual  drink  and 
eternal  life,  j  It  is  most  right  that  thou  shouldst  give  to 

>  Lit.  the  Lordship. 


300  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

him   food  perishable   and  temporal.     For  the   labourer 
(ergates)   is   worthy    of    his   hire.  |  For   it   is  written : 
Thou  shalt  not  muzzle  an  ox  threshing,  |  Nor  does  any- 
one plant  a  vineyard  and  not  eat  the  fruit  thereof.  | 
5       13.  Said  Kypha  :  Thou  shalt  not  make  divisions  ;  thou 
shalt  rather  reconcile  them  who  quarrel,  for  peace  with 
one  another.     Judge  righteously  without  acceptance  of 
persons,  reproving  him   who   sinned  for  his  sin ;  |  For 
/riches  prevail  not  with  God,  nor  doth  he  respect  rank 
Id  (axioma),  nor  is  beauty  of  any  profit ;  but  a  just  (d.)  judg- 
/  ment  is  that  which  is  before  him.  |  Be  not  doubtful  in 
thy  [81  prayer,  considering  whether  that  which  thou  askest 
will  happen  or  not.  |  When  thou  art  going  to  receive,  be 
not  stretching  out  thy  hand,  but  if  thou  art  going  to  give, 
15  drawing  it  in  to  thee.  |  If  thou  hast  anything  by  thy 
hands  thou  shalt  give  it  for  the  ransom  of  thy  sins.    Thou 
shalt  not  hesitate  (tisdaze)  when  thou  art  about  to  give, 
nor  again  when  thou  givest  shalt  thou  murmur,  knowing 
that  God  is  the  true  rewarder.  |  Thou   shalt   not   turn 
10  away   from   the   needy,    but   share   (koinOnei)  with  the 
needy  in  all  things.  |  Thou  shalt  not  say :   Mine  alone 
are    these   (things).      For   if  ye    are    become   sharers 
(koin5nos)  with  one  another  in  the  imperishable,  how 
much  more  should  ye  not  be  in  the  perishable. 
25       14.  Said  Bartholomaios :  I  entreat  you,  my  brethren, 
'    while  there  is  time  (kairos),  and  still  (aitei)  being  with 
i    you  those  to  whom  ye  can  do  good,  |  Cease  not  to  give  of 
i    any  possession  that  ye  have ;  for  the  day  of  the  Lord 
draws  near,  that  which  will  cause  all  visible  things  to  be 
30  dissolved,  and  the  wicked  (poneros)  will  perish  therein,  j 
For  the  Lord  cometh  and  his  reward  with  him.  I  Be  law- 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  3OI 

givers  to  yourselves  :  |  Be  teachers  of  yourselves  as  God 
has  taught  you.  j  [9]  Thou  shalt  keep  the  things  which 
thou  hast  received,  and  not  take  from  them,  nor  add 
to  them. 

15.  Said  Petros  :  Men  and  brethren,  as  for  all  the  rest   5 
of  the  doctrine  the  holy  Scriptures  suffice  to  teach  you, 
but  let  us  indeed  say  to  them  the  things  which  have 
been  commanded  to  us.  |  Then  it  pleased  them  all  for 
Petros  to  speak. 

16.  Said  Petros:  If  there  is  a  place  in  which  are  10 
but  few  believing  men,  and  the  multitude  is  not  yet  large 
(enough)  to  enable  them  to  take  vote  (psyphisma)  for  the 
bishop,  to  the  number  twelve  men,  let  them  write  to  the 
neighbouring  Churches,  where  there  are  many  believers 
established  ;  that  three  chosen  men  may  come  from  that  15 
place ;  |  And  let  them  prove  (dokimaze)  carefully  him  who 

is  worthy  of  this  degree  (bathmos).  |  Whether  he  be  one 
of  good  report  among  the  heathen  (ethnos),  sinless,  without 
wrath,  lover  of  the  poor,  prudent,  sober,  not  a  drunkard, 
not  a  fornicator,  not  a  lover  of  the  larger  portion,  not  a  20 
railer,  not  an  accepter  of  persons,  nor  any  of  the  like.  | 
It  is  a  good  thing  if  he  has  no  wife.  |  But  if  he  has 
married  one  wife,  having  his  children,  let  him  stay  with 
her.  (Let  him)  have  a  share  of  (meteche)  all  learning, 
being  able  to  interpret  well  the  Scriptures.  |  [10]  If  he  25 
knows  not  how  to  write,  being  meek,  let  him  abound  in 
love  toward  all  men,  lest  haply  the  bishop  should  fall 
under  condemnation  in  a  matter,  and  become  guilty 
at  all 

17.  Said  Johannes :  The  bishop  who  will  be  ordained  30 
(kathista),  if  he  should  attend  to  knowledge  and  patience 


302  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


(hypomone)  (with)  love  of  God  (and  of)  them  who  are 
with  him,  let  him  then  (de)  appoint  (kathista)  two 
presbyters  after  having  proved  (dokimaze)  them. 

1 8.  And  they  all  answered  :  Not  two,  but  three  :  there 

5  are  four  and  twenty  presbyters,  twelve  on  the  right  hand 
and  twelve  on  the  left  hand.  |  Said  Johannes  :  Well  have 
you  reminded  me,  O  brethren  :  for  those  on  the  right 
hand  having  taken  the  vials  (phiale)  from  the  angels  offer 
them  to  the  Lord,  while  (de)  those  on  the  left  hand  are 

lo  having  power  over  the  multitude  of  angels.  |  But  it  is  right 
for  the  presbyters  to  be  adorned  (kosmei)  with  the  charac- 
ter of  old  age,  retiring  from  intercourse  with  woman,  doers 
of  good  in  brotherly  love,  and  not  accepting  the  person  of 
men,  sharing  (koinonei)  with  the  bishop  in  the  Mysteries, 

15  assisting  him  in  all  things,  gathering  the  multitude  to- 
gether that  they  may  love  [i  i]  their  shepherd.  |  Then  (de) 
the  presbyters  who  are  on  the  right  hand  shall  provide  for 
those  who  work  at  the  altar  (thysiasterion),  that  they  may 
honour  them  who  are  worthy  of  all  honour,  and  rebuke 

20  (epitima)  them  who  are  worthy  of  being  rebuked  (ep.).  | 
But  the  presbyters  who  are  on  the  left  hand  shall  provide 
for  the  multitude  that  they  may  be  quiet,  and  that  there 
may  be  no  disturbance,  (  [and]  They  having  learnt  to  be  in 
all  subjection  (hypotake).  |  Further  (de),  whenever  they 

as  correct  anyone,  and  he  answers  with  audacity  (authates), 
those  who  are  within  the  sanctuary  (thysiasterion)  shall 
be  of  one  heart  and  of  one  mind  (gnome),  and  take 
vengeance  on  such  an  one  according  to  his  desert :  and  all 
the  rest  will  fear,  lest  they  should  seek  to  please  (ariske), 

30  and  (the  sinner)  should  consume  as  a  cancer  (gaggraina), 
and  they  all  should  be  led  away  captive  (aikhmalotize). 


TRANSLATION  OP  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  303 

19.  Said  Jakobos:  They  shall  appoint  a  Reader 
(anagnostes)  after  proving  (dolcimaze)  him  with  a  great 
proof  (dokimazia),  whether  he  bridles  his  tongue,  being 
not  a  drunkard,  nor  a  scoffer  in  his  speech,  but  of  respect- 
able appearance,  obedient,  being  first  to  assemble  on  the  S 
Lord's  day  (kyriake).  As  minister  (diaknonei),  knowing 
that  it  is  right  for  him  to  fulfil  the  work  of  preacher ;  |  For 

it  is  right  that  he  who  filleth  the  [12]  ears  of  others  with 
his  instructions  should  be  all  the  more  a  doer  (of  the 
word)  faithful  before  God.  «> 

20.  Said  Maththaios :  Let  the  Deacons  be  ordained 
(kathista)  after  three  (persons)  have  borne  witness  to 
their  life  (bios)  ;  for  it  is  written  :  '  By  the  mouth  of  two 
or  three  witnesses  shall  every  word  stand.''  Let  them  be 
made  after  having  been  proved  (dok.)  in  all  service  15 
(diakonia) ;  being  witnessed  to  by  all  the  people  (laos) ; 
having  lived  with  one  wife,  rearing  their  children  well, 
pure,  prudent,  meek,  sober,  quiet  (esykhios),  not 
insolent,  who  murmur  not,  not  double-tongued,  not 
wrathful,  |  For  wrath  (orge)  is  the  ruin  of  wise  men  also  ;  *<* 
not  (men)  pleasers ;  not  hard  upon  the  poor,  and  respect- 
ing the  person  of  the  rich ;  not  drinkers  of  much  wine  ; 
willing  to  be  sent  on  all  ministries  (dia.)  good  and  secret, 
ready  to  encourage  (protrepe),  compelling  the  brethren 
who  have  somewhat  to  open  their  hand  to  give ;  |  And  a< 
being  themselves  also  benefactors,  and  sharers  (with 
others,  koinonikos) ;  that  the  people  (1.)  may  reverence 
them  and  honour  them  with  all  honour  and  all  fear, 
attending  (prosykhe)  with  great  diligence  to  them  who 

>  Marked  as  quotation. 


304  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


walk  unruly:  |  And  some  indeed  [13]  instructing  and 
some  rebuking  (epeitima),  but  others  exhorting.  Further 
(de),  let  them  cast  out  them  who  despise  (kataphronei) 
and  are  railers,  knowing  that  all  men  who  gainsay,  or  are 
5  revilers,  oppose  the  Christ 

21.  Said  Kephas  :  Let  them  ordain  (k.)  three  Widows, 
two  to  continue  (proskarterei)  together  in  prayer  for  all 
who  are  in  trials  (peirasmos),  and  to  ask  for  revelations 
concerning  that  which  they  require :   |   While   (de)  the 

10  other  (is)  to  be  appointed  to  wait  upon  the  women 
who  are  tried  (piraze)  in  sickness,  ministering  (diakonei) 
well,  being  sober  (nephe),  telling  the  presbyters  of  the 
things  which  happen,  not  a  lover  of  shameful  gain,  not  a 
drunkard,  that  she  may  be  able  to  be  sober  (n.)  so  as 

15  to  minister  (dia.)  at  night :  and  if  another  woman 
wishes  to  apply  herself  to  do  good  works,  let  her  do 
according  to  the  good  will  of  her  heart  For  (kai  gar) 
these  are  the  good  (agathon)  things  which  the  Lord 
foreordained. 

20  22.  Said  Andreas  :  Let  the  Deacons  be  doers  (ergates) 
of  good  works,  coming  by  day  and  night  in  all  places, 
and  not  exalting  themselves  over  the  poor,  nor  respecting 
the  person  of  the  rich  ;  they  shall  know  who  is  afflicted, 
and  give  to  him  of  the  abundance,  compelling  those  who 

25  have  power  to  do  good  works,  [14]  to  gather  them  in  for 
them,  I  Taking  heed  to  the  words  of  our  Master  (sah) : 
*  I  was  being  hungry,  ye  fed  me.'  For  those  who  have 
ministered  (dia.)  without  sin  get  for  themselves  much 
boldness  (parresia). 

30  23.  Said  Philippos:  Let  the  Layman  (laeikos)  hearken 
to  the  precepts  (prostagma)   which  they  deliver  to  the 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  305 

laity,  being  in  subjection  to  those  who  are  occupied  at 
the  altar  (thysiasterion).  Let  each  one  please  God  in 
the  place  which  was  defined  for  him,  not  liking  to  be  at 
enmity  with  one  another,  not  being  jealous  of  the  place 
defined  for  each  (other) ;  but  let  each  continue  in  the  s 
calling  in  which  he  was  called  by  God.  Let  not  any- 
one seek  to  make  his  neighbour  stumble  in  his  course  in 
which  he  runs  ;  for  neither  do  the  angels  anything  beyond 
the  commandment  of  the  Lord. 

24.  Said  Andreas  :  It  is  a  good  thing  to  set  apart  {Hi.  lo 
define)  women  to  be  made  deacons  (diakonos). 

25.  SaidPetros:  We  have  already  defined  this ;  butcon- 
cerning  the  Oblations  (prosphora)  of  the  Body  and  the 
Blood  of  the  Lord  we  shall  declare  the  thing  with  certainty. 

26.  Said  Johannes:  Ye  have  forgotten,  O  brethren,  15 
on  the  day  when  our  Master  (sah)  took  the  bread  and 
the  cup  (poterion)  he  blessed  them,  saying  :  '  This  is  my 
Body  and  my  Blood.'  Ye  have  seen  that  he  gave  not  a 
place  to  the  women  to  assist  [15]  with  them.'|  Martha 
answered  :  Concerning  Maria  because  he  saw  her  laugh-  so 
ing.  Said  Maria ;  Not  because  (of  that)  I  laughed ;  for 
he  said  to  us  in  his  teaching  :  '  The  weak  will  be  healed 
by  the  strong.' 

27.  Said  Kyphas :  Some  say  that  it  is  right  for  women 
to  pray  standing  up,  and  not  to  throw  themselves  upon  3; 
the  earth. 

28.  Said  Jakobos :  Where  shall  we  be  able  to  set 
apart  women  for  a  ministry  (dia.),  except  this  ministry 
(dia.)  of  this  kind  only,  that  they  should  help  the  needy  ? 

*  Tattam  makes  a  parenthesia  down  to  '  laos^ied.' 


306  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

29.  Said  Philippos  :  Brethren,  concerning  the  giving. 
He  who  does  a  work  gathers  in  a  good  treasure  for 
himself;  but  he  who  gathers  in  a  good  treasure  for 
himself  is  he  who  gathers  for  himself  the  kingdom  of  the 

5  heavens.     They  will  reckon  him  as  a  workman  (ergates) 
of  God  abiding  for  ever. 

30.  Said  Petros  :  Brethren,  we  are  not  having  author- 
ity (exousia)  over  anyone  by  compulsion  (anagke),  but 
as  we  have  been  commanded  by  God.  |  I  entreat  you  to 

10  keep  the  commandments  (entole)  of  God  without  taking 
anything  from  them  nor  adding  to  them,  in  the  name  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  the  Christ,  whose  is  the  glory  for  ever. 
Hamen.^ 

15'  CONCERNING   THE    BISHOPS 

31.  The  bishop  shall  be  ordained  (kheirodonei) 
according  to  the  word  which  we  said  before,  having 
been  [  1 6]  chosen  from  all  the  multitude,  and  (de)  being 

30  without  sin.  When  he  has  been  named  (onomaze)  and 
they  are  pleased  with  him,  the  whole  people  (laos)  shall 
assemble  themselves  together,  and  the  presbyters  with 
the  deacons  on  the  Lord's  day  (kyriake),  with  the  consent 
(syneudokei)  of  all  the  bishops,  who  have  laid  their  hand 

3$  upon  him.  The  presbyters  also  stand  by,  waiting,  | 
And  they  all  hold  their  peace  together,  and  pray  in 
their  heart  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  come  upon  him.  | 
And   they   request  (axiou)   one   of   the   bishops,  while 


^  Tattam's  Bohairic  text  gives  a  statement  of  the  end  of  the  first  and 
beginning  of  the  second  book. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  JO? 

all  Stand  up,  that  he  should  lay  his  hands  upon  him 
who  is  to  be  made  bishop,  and  pray  over  htm.  And 
(de)  when  he  is  made  bishop,  let  everyone  give  pefkce 
(eirene)  to  him  with  their  mouth,  saluting  (aspaze) 
him.  I  Let  the  deacons  then  (de)  offer  to  him  the  Ob-  s 
lation  (prosphora).  And  (de)  having  put  his  hand  upon 
the  Oblation  (pr.)  with  the  presbyters  let  him  say  in 
giving  thanks  (eukharistou) :  The  Lord  with  you  all 
(o  kyrtos  meta  panton  ymon).  And  all  the  people  (1.)  say : 
With  thy  spirit  (meta  to  pnatos  sou).  And  he  says  :  Lift  lo 
up  your  hearts  (ano  ymon  tas  kartias).  And  the  people 
(1.)  say ;  We  have  them  with  the  Lord  (eukhomen  pros 
ton  kn).  And  he  says  again :  Let  us  give  thanks 
to  the  Lord  (eukharistesomen  ton  kn).  And  all  the 
people  (1.)  say:  Meet  and  right  (axion  kai  dikaion).  i; 
And  let  him  pray  also  thus  and  say  [17]  the  things 
which  come  after  these  according  to  the  custom  of  the 
holy  Oblation. 

CONCERNING   THE    PRESBYTERS  " 

32.  Further  (de),  when  the  bishop  will  ordain  (kh.)  the 
presbyter  he  shall  lay  his  hands  upon  his  head,  all  the 
presbyters  touching  him.  And  let  him  pray  over  him 
according  to  the  form  which  we  said  for  the  bishop.  a; 

CONCERNING  THE   DEACONS 

33.  Further  (de),  when  the  bishop  will  ordain  (kathista) 

a  deacon,  who  has  been  chosen  according  as  we  said  30 
before,  the  bishop  shall  lay  his  hands  upon  him.  |  Why 


308  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

then  have  we  said  that  the  bishop  alone  is  to  place 
his  hands  upon  the  deacon  ?  |  The  reason  (aitia)  of  the 
thing  is  this,  that  he  is  not  to  be  ordained  (khi.)  for  a 
priesthood,  but  for  a  service  (hyperesia)  of  the  bishop, 
5  to  do  the  things  which  he  shall  command  him.  Neither 
is  he  to  be  ordained  (kath.)  to  be  fellow-councillor 
(synboulos)  of  all  the  clergy  (kleros),  but  to  take  care  of 
the  sick,  and  to  inform  the  bishop  about  them.  Neither 
is  he  to  be  ordained  (kath.)  to  receive  the  spirit  of  g^eat- 

lo  ness,  in  which  the  presbyters  share  (m.),  |  But  to  be  worthy 
(axios)  for  the  bishop  to  entrust  to  him  the  things  which 
it  is  right  (for  him  to  entrust).  For  this  cause  the  bishop 
alone  is  to  ordain  (kh.)  the  deacon,  |  But  (as  for)  the  pres- 
byter, the  bishop  [i8]  sharing  with  him  (in  the  gift),  they 

15  (the  presbyters)  lay  hand  upon  him,  because  the  same  spirit 
comes  upon  him  (the  presbyter)  (as  on  them).  For  the 
presbyter  receives  only.  He  has  no  authority  (exousia)  to 
give  orders  (kleros).  For  this  cause  he  is  not  to  ordain 
(kath.)  the  clergy  (klerikos).     He  only  seals  (sphragize) 

20  the  presbyter,  while  the  bishop  is  to  ordain  (kh.)  him. 

CONCERNING  THE  CONFESSORS 

34.  The  confessor  then  (de),  if  he  has  been  in  chains 
25  for  the  name  of  the  Lord,  they  shall  not  lay  hand  upon  him 
for  a  ministry  (diakonia)  or  presbyterate  :  for  he  has  the 
honour  (time)  of  the  presbyterate  by  his  confession.  | 
But  if  he  is  to  be  ordained  (kath.)  bishop,  then  hand 
shall  be  laid  upon  him.  |  But  if  he  is  a  confessor  who 
30  was  not  brought  before  an  authority  (exousia),  nor  was 
punished  with  chains,  nor  shut  up  in   prison,  nor   con- 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  309 

demned  (katakrtne)  with  any  sentence  (katadike),  but  in 
a  casual  way  he  was  only  insulted  for  the  name  of  our 
Lord,  and  he  was  punished  with  a  punishment  of  house, 
though  (de)  he  confessed,  hand  is  to  be  laid  upon  him 
(for)  every  office  (kleros)  of  which  he  is  worthy.  |  Now  s 
(de)  the  bishop  shall  give  thanks  (eukhartstou)  according 
to  things  which  we  said  before.  It  is  not  altogether 
(ou  pantos)  necessary  for  him  to  recite  the  same  words 
which  we  said  before,  as  if  learning  [19]  to  say  them 
by  heart  in  his  thanksgiving  (eu.)  to  God ;  but  according  10 
to  the  ability  of  each  one  he  is  to  pray.  If  indeed  he 
is  able  to  pray  sufficiently  well  (hikanos)  with  a  grand 
prayer  (proseukhe),  then  it  is  good  :  |  But  if  also  he  should 
pray  and  recite  a  prayer  (pr.)  in  (due)  measure,  no  one 
may  forbid  him,  only  (monon)  let  him  pray  being  sound  is 
in  orthodoxy. 

CONCERNING  THE   READER  (anagnostEs) 

35.  The  reader  (a.)  shall  be  appointed  (kath.)  by  the  » 
bishop  giving  to  him   the   book  of  the  Apostle,^  and 
praying  over  him,  but  he  shall  not  lay  hand  upon  him. 

CONCERNING  THE  SUBDEACON 

(hypodiakonos)  2S 

36.  They  shall  not  lay  hand  upon  a  subdeacon 
(hypod.),  but  they  shall  mention  his  name  (onomaze) 
that  he  may  follow  the  deacon. 


3IO  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


CONCERNING  THE   WIDOWS 

37.  Further  (de),  when  a  widow  is  appointed  (kath.) 
she  shall  not  be  ordained  (khirodonei),  but  she  shall  be 
S  chosen  by  the  name.  |  And  (de)  if  her  husband  has  died 
a  long  time  before,  then  let  her  be  appointed  (kath.).  | 
But  if  she  has  not  tarried  long  since  her  husband  died, 
trust  her  not.  But  (even)  if  she  has  become  old  let 
them    prove  (dokimaze)   her   by   time   (khronos).  |  For 

»o  often  the  passions  even  grow  old  with  him  who  gives 
place  for  them  in  himself.  |  Let  them  appoint  (kath.)  the 
widow  by  (mention  of)  the  word  only,  and  enrol  {lit. 
bind)  her  with  [20]  the  rest,  but  hand  shall  not  be  laid 
upon  her ;   because  she  does  not  offer  the  Oblation  (pr.) 

15  nor  conduct  the  public  worship  (litourgia).  |  And  (de) 
ordination  (khirodonia)  belongs  to  {Hi.  is  with)  the 
clergy  (kleros)  for  the  sake  of  public  worship  (lit),  |  But 
the  widow  indeed  is  appointed  (kath.)  for  the  prayer,  and 
(de)  that  is  the  (duty)  of  all  persons. 


20 


25 


CONCERNING   THE   VIRGINS 

38.  Hand  shall  not  be  laid  upon  a  virgin,  but  her 
purpose  (prohairesis)  alone  is  that  which  makes  her  a 
virgin. 

CONCERNING  THE   GRACE   OF   HEALING 


39.  Further  (de),  whenever  anyone  says :  I  received 
gifts  of  healing  by  a  revelation,  hand  shall  not  be  laid 
upon  him  :  for  the  deed  itself  shall  make  him  manifest  if 
he  speaks  the  truth. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  3II 

CONCERNING  NEW  MEN   WHO  WILL 
COME   IN  TO  THE   FAITH   (pistis) 

40.  Let  those  then  (de)  who  shall  be  brought  in  to  the 
new  faith  (pistis),  to  hear  the  word,  be  first  brought  in  s 
unto  the  teachers,  before  the  people  (1.)  enter.  And 
they  shall  inquire  the  cause  (aitia)  of  the  thing,  namely, 
for  the  sake  of  what  thing  they  come  in  to  the  faith. 
And  let  those  who  bring  them  bear  witness  to  them,  | 
Whether  they  are  able  to  hear  the  word.  Let  them  lo 
inquire  then  (de)  about  their  life  (bios),  of  what  sort  it 

is ;  either  if  he  has  a  wife  ;  or  whether  he  is  a  servant  of 
a  believer,  and  his  master  allowed  him  (to  come),  then 
let  him  hear.     If  his  master  should  not  bear  witness  to 
him,  that  he  is  good,  let  him  be  rejected.  |  If  his  master  15 
is  a  heathen  (ethnikos),  then  instruct  him  [21 J  to  please 
his  master,  that  there  may  be  no  scandal  (phlasphymia). 
If,  however  (de),  there  is  one  who  has  a  wife,  or  again 
(entof)  a  woman  who  has  a  husband,  let  the   man  be 
instructed  to  be  contented  with  his  wife,  and  the  .woman  ao 
to  be  contented  with  her  husband.  |  But  if  there  is  one 
who  did  not  live  with  a  wife,  let  him  be  instructed  not  to 
fornicate,  but  either  to  marry  a  wife  according  to  the  law, 
or    to  remain  (as  he  is)  according  to    the    law.  |  But    if 
there  is  one  who  hath  a  devil  (daimonion),  he  shall  not  as 
hear  the  word  of  instruction  until  be  is  cleansed. 

CONCERNING   THE   OCCUPATIONS   AND 
THE   CRAFTS   (epistymei) 

41.  They  shall  also  (de)  inquire  about  the  occupations 


312  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

and  works  of  those  whom  they  bring  to  set  them 
(kathista)  (in  the  faith),  as  to  what  they  are.  |  If  one  is 
a  pander,  who  is  a  supporter  of  harlots,  either  let  him 
leave  off  or  let  him  be  rejected.  |  If  there  is  a  maker  of 

5  images  or  a  painter  (zographos),  let  them  be  instructed 
not  to  make  an  idol  (eidolon),  either  let  them  leave  off 
or  let  them  be  rejected.  |  If  one  is  an  actor  (theatrikos) 
or  again  (entof)  who  makes  representations  (oupydexis, 
for  apodeixis)  in  the  theatre  (thyadron),  either  let  him 

lo  leave  off  or  let  him  be  rejected.  |  If  he  teaches  little 
ones,  it  is  good  indeed  for  him  to  leave  off:  if  he 
has  no  trade  (tekhne),  then  let  him  be  forgfiven. 
A  charioteer  (eneiokhos)  similarly  (homaios),  who 
contends  (agonize)   or   who  goes  to  the  games  (agon), 

15  either  [22J  let  him  leave  off  or  let  him  be  rejected  | 
One  who  is  a  gladiator  (monomakhos),  or  again  (ent) 
who  teaches  gladiators  to  fight,  or  a  hunter  (kynekos) 
who  is  occupied  with  hunting  (kynekion),  or  a  pubh'c 
official   (dymosios)   who    is    occupied    with    gladiatorial 

20  shows  (monomakhion),  either  let  him  leave  off  or  let 
him  be  rejected.  |  One  who  is  a  priest  of  the  idols 
(eidolon),  or  again  (ent)  being  a  keeper  of  the  idols 
(eidolon),  either  let  him  leave  off  or  let  him  be  re- 
jected. I  A  soldier  who  is  in  authority  (exousia),  cause 

25  him  not  to  kill  men  :  if  he  should  be  commanded  (to  do 
it)  cause  him  not  to  hasten  to  the  work,  nor  cause  him  to 
swear ;  and  (de)  being  unwilling  (to  comply),  let  him  be 
rejected.  |  One  who  has  power  (exousia)  over  the  sword, 
or  a  magistrate  (arkhon)  of  a  city,  who  is  clad  in  purple, 

30  either  let  him  leave  off  or  let  him  be  rejected.  |  If  a  cate- 
chumen or  a  believer  wishes  to  become  a  soldier,  let  them 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  3I3 

be  rejected ;  because  they  have  despised  (kataphronei) 
God.  I  A  harlot  or  a  dissolute  man,  or  one  who  castrated 
himself,  or  indeed  (ent.)  any  other  who  does  things  which 
it  is  not  right  to  say,  let  them  be  rejected,  for  they  are 
polluted.  Nor  shall  they  bring  a  magician  (magos)  for  j 
examination  (krisis).  |  The  charmer,  or  the  astrologer 
(astrologos),  or  the  diviner,  or  the  interpreter  of  dreams, 
or  the  troubler  of  multitudes,  or  they  {lit.  singular) 
who  spoil  fringes  of  tunics,  who  are  the  clippers 
(psellistes),  or  who  make  phylacteries  (phylakterion),  ,o 
either  let  them  leave  off"  or  let  them  be  rejected.  |  A 
concubine  of  one,  [23]  if  she  is  his  ser\^nt,  if  indeed  she 
reared  her  children,  and  comes  near  him  alone,  then  let 
her  hear  (instruction) :  if  not,  let  her  be  rejected  |  A 
man  who  has  a  concubine,  let  him  leave  off  and  let  him  ,j 
marry  a  wife  according  to  the  law :  but  if  he  is  not 
willing,  then  let  him  be  rejected.  |  If,  therefore,  we  have 
left  behind  any  other  work,  the  works  (themselves)  will 
instruct  your  mind  {lit.  sight),  for  we  all  have  the  Spirit 
of  God.  ao 

CONCERNING  THE  TIME  (khronos)  OF 
THOSE  WHO  HEAR  THE  WORD  AFTER 
THE  (GIVING  UP  OF  THE)  OCCUPA- 
TIONS AND  THE  CRAFTS  (epistimoi)  »S 

42,  Let  the  catechumens  spend  three  years  hearing 
the  word.     But  if  one  is  zealous  (spondaios)  and  persever- 
ing (proskarterei)  well  in  the  work,  they  do  not  decide 
by  (krine)  the  time  (kh.);   but   the    character   (tropos)  30 
alone  shall  decide  (krine)  him. 


314  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

CONCERNING  THE   PRAYING  OF  THOSE 

WHO  HEAR  THE  WORD 

43.  Whenever  the  teacher  leaves  off   his    teaching 

5  (kathegei),   let   the   catechumens   pray    by  themselves, 

separate  from  the  believers  :  |  And  let  the  women  stand 

as  they  pray  in  a  place  in  the  church  quite  by  themselves, 

whether  female  believers  or  female  catechumens.     And 

(de)  when  they  finish  praying,  let  them  not  give  peace 

10  (eirene),  for  their  kiss  is  not  yet  pure.     Let  the  believers 

then   (de)  only   [24]  salute  (aspaze)  one  another,    men 

with  men,  and  women  with  women  :  but  let  not  man  salute 

(aspaze)  woman.     Moreover  (de),  let  all  the  women  have 

their  heads  covered  with  a  robe  (pallin),  but  (not)  in  any 

15  article  (eidos)  of  linen  only,  for  this  is  not  a  veil  (kalyma). 

CONCERNING   THE    MANNER   OF    LAYING 
HAND   ON   THE   CATECHUMENS 

20  44.  When  the  instructor  after  the  prayer  lays  hand 
upon  the  catechumens,  let  him  pray  and  dismiss  them. 
Whether  he  is  an  ecclesiastic  who  gives  (instruction)  or 
a  layman  (1.),  let  him  do  (it)  thus.  |  If  a  catechumen  should 
be  seized  for  the   name  of  the   Lord,  let   him   not  be 

25  doubtful  concerning  the  testimony;  for  if  it  should 
happen  that  they  offer  violence  and  put  him  to  death 
before  ^  his  sins  have  been  forgiven,  he  will  be  justified ; 
for  he  was  baptised  in  his  own  blood. 

^  Emending  *  empatoa '  for  '  em.' 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT 


CONCERNING  THOSE  WHO  WILL  BE 
BAPTISED 

45-  Further  (de),  when  they  have  chosen  those  who 
are  set  apart  to  be  baptised,  their  life  (bios)  having  been    5 
examined,  whether  they  have  lived  seriously  (semnos)  as 
catechumens ;  whether  they  have  honoured  the  widows ; 
whether  they  have  visited  the  sick,  whether  they  have 
completed    every   good   work ;  |  And  when   those  who 
brought  them  have  borne  witness  to  them,  that  they  did  10 
thus,  then  let  them  hear  the  gospel  {euaggelion) ;  more- 
over (de),  from  the  time  that  [25]  they  will  be  separated 
(from  the  rest)  let  hand  be  laid  on  them  daily,  in  exorcis- 
ing (exorgize)  them.  |  And  (de)  when  the  day  draws  near 
on  which  they  will  be  baptised,  let  the  bishop  exorcise  15 
(exorgize)  each  one  of  them,  that  he  may  know  whether 
they  are  pure.  |  And  (de)  if  there  is  one  who  is  not  good 
(kalos)  or  pure  (katharos),  let  him  be  put  on  one  side; 
because  he  did  not  hear  the  word  in  faith  (pistis) :  for  it 
is  never  possible  for  the  alien  to  be  concealed.    Then  (de)  m 
let  those  who  are  set  apart  to  be  baptised  be  instructed 
to  bathe  and  make  themselves  free  (from  the  alien),  and 
wash  themselves  on  the  fifth  day  of  the  week  (sabbaton). 
And  (de)  if  a  woman  is  in  the  manner  of  women,  let  her 
be  put  on  one  side,  and  let  her  be  baptised  on  another  15 
day.  I  Let  them  who  will  be  baptised  fast  on  the  prepara- 
tion  (paraskeue)  of  the  sabbath  (sabbaton).  |  And  (de) 
on  the  sabbath  (sabbaton),  when  they  who  will  be  baptised 
have  assembled  in  one  place  by  the  direction  (gnome)  of 
the  bishop,  let  them  all  be  commanded  to  pray  and  bend  30 
their  knees.  |  And  when  he  has  laid  his  hand  upon  them, 


3l6  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

let  him  exorcise  (exorgize)  all  alien  spirits  to  flee  away 
from  them,  and  not  to  return  to  them  henceforward 
And  when  he  has  done  exorcising  (exorgize),  let  him 
breathe    in    their     face,  j  And     when    he    has    sealed 

5  (sphragize)  their  foreheads  and  [26]  their  ears  and  their 
noses,  let  him  raise  them  up.  j  And  let  them  spend  all 
the  night  in  vigil,  reading  to  them  and  instructing 
(kathege)  them.  Moreover  (de),  let  not  those  who  will 
be   baptised  bring   any   other  vessel   except   only   that 

10  which  each  one  will  bring  for  the  Eucharist  (eukharestia) : 
for  it  is  right  for  him  who  was  worthy,  to  bring  his 
Oblation  (prosphora)  then. 

CONCERNING  THE  TRADITION  (paradosis) 
15  OF  THE  HOLY  BAPTISM 

46.  At  the  hour,  then  (de),  when  the  cock  will  crow, 
let  them  first  pray  over  the  water.  Let  the  water  be 
flowing  along  into  the  tank  (kolymbethra)  or  descending 

20  upon  it.  And  (de)  let  it  be  thus  if  there  is  no  scarcity 
(anagke) :  |  But  if  there  is  scarcity  (anagke)  continuous 
and  sudden,  then  use  (khro)  the  water  which  ye  shall  find. 
And  (de)  let  them  undress  themselves.  |  And  ye  shall 
first  baptise  the  little  ones.  |  Moreover  (de),  all  who  can 

25  speak  for  themselves,  let  them  speak ;  |  But  for  them  who 
cannot  speak,  let  their  parents  speak  for  them,  or  any 
other  belonging  to  their  family  (genos).  |  And  afterwards 
ye  baptise  the  adult  men,  but  last  the  women,  who  have 
all  loosed  their  hair,  and  laid  aside  the  gold  and  silver 

30  ornaments  which  they  were  wearing:  [27]  let  not  any 
take  any  alien  thing  (eidos)  down  to  the  water  with  them.  | 


TRANSLATION   OF   THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  317 

And  (de)  at  the  hour  which  is  determined  for  baptising, 
let  the  bishop  give  thanks  (eukharistei)  over  the  oil,  and 
put  it  into  a  vessel  (skeos),  and  call  it  the  oil  of  the 
thanksgiving  (eukharestia) ;  and  take  also  other  oil, 
and  exorcise  it  (exorgize  upon  it),  and  call  it  the  oil  s 
of  exorcism  (exorgismos).  |  And  a  deacon  shall  carry 
the  oil  of  exorcism  (ex.)  and  stand  on  the  left  hand 
of  the  presbyter :  |  And  another  deacon  shall  take  the 
oil  of  the  thanksgiving  (eu.)  and  stand  on  the  right  hand 
of  the  presbyter.  |  And  when  the  presbyter  has  taken  lo 
hold  of  each  one  of  those  who  will  be  baptised,  let  him 
command  him  to  renounce  (apotasse),  saying :  I 
renounce  (ap.)  thee,  Satanas,  and  all  thy  service  and  all 
thy  works.  |  And  when  he  has  renounced  (ap.)  all  these, 
let  him  anoint  him  with  the  oil  of  exorcism  (ex.),  saying:  is 
Let  all  spirits  remove  far  from  thee.  And  thus  let  him 
give  him  to  the  bishop  naked,  or  (to)  the  presbyter 
who  stands  at  the  water  for  baptising.  |  Likewise  also 
(homaios  de)  let  the  deacon  go  with  him  into  the  water, 
and  let  him  say  to  him,  helping  him  to  say  it :  I  believe  m 
the  only  true  God,  the  Father,  the  almighty  (pantocrator) 
and  his  only  (monogenes)  Son  Jesus  the  Christ,  our  Lord 
[28]  and  our  Saviour,  and  his  Holy  Spirit,  giver  of  life 
to  the  universe,  the  Trinity  of  the  same  substance  (trias 
en  homoousion),  one  Godhead,  one  Lordship,  one  King-  35 
dom,  one  Faith,  one  Baptism,  in  the  Catholic  (katholike) 
apostolic  holy  Church,  life  eternal.  Amen.  |  And  (de) 
he  who  receives,  let  him  also  say  according  to  all  these 
things :  I  believe  thus.  |  And  he  who  gives  (the  baptism) 
shall  put  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  him  who  receives,  3a 
and  dip  him  three  times,  professing  (homologei)  these 


3l8  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

things  every  time,  |  And  afterwards  again  let  him  say: 
Thou  believest  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Christ,  the  only  {lit. 
one)  Son  of  God  the  Father,  that  he  became  man  by  a 
miracle  for  our  sake,  in  an  incomprehensible  unity,  in  his 
5  Holy  Spirit,  from  Maria  the  holy  virgin,  without  seed 
(sperma)  of  man  :  |  And  that  he  was  crucified  (strou)  for 
us  in  time  of  Pontios  Pilatos  ;  he  died  voluntarily  for  our 
salvation  withal,  he  rose  in  the  third  day,  he  released  those 
who  were  bound,  he  ascended  into  the  heavens,  he  sat  on  the 

lo  right  hand  of  his  good  (ag.)  Father  in  the  height,  |  And  he 
comes  again  to  judge  the  living  and  the  dead  according  to 
his  appearing  and  his  kingdom  :  |  And  thou  believest  the 
holy,  good  (ag.),  and  life-giving  Spirit,  purifying  the  uni- 
verse, in  the  holy  Church.^    [Again  let  him  say :  I  believe. 

15  And  let  them  go  up  from  the  water,  and  let  the  presbyter 
anoint  him  with  oil  of  the  thanksgiving  (eu.),  saying :  I 
anoint  thee  with  an  unction  in  holy  oil  in  the  name  of 
Jesus  the  Christ.  Thus  having  anointed  each  one  of  the 
rest  he  clothes  them.     And  let  them  go  into  the  church. 

20  Let  the  bishop  lay  his  hand  upon  them  with  great 
earnestness  {lit.  desire),  saying :  Lord  God,  according 
as  thou  hast  made  these  worthy  of  receiving  the  forgive- 
ness of  their  sins  unto  the  future  life,*  make  them  worthy 
of  being  filled  with  thy  Holy  Spirit,  and  send  down  upon 

25  them  thy  grace,  that  they  may  serve  thee  according  to 
thy  will,  because  thine  is  the  glory.  Father  and  Son  and 
Holy  Spirit  in  the  holy  Church,  now  and  always  and 
for  ever  and  ever.     And  he  shall  pour  some  oil  of  the 

^  Two  lost  folia  of  the  MS.  have  been  supplied  from  the  recent  Bohairic 
MS.  of  Tattam. 
*  Lit,  *  unto  the  age  which  comes.* 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  319 

thanksgiving  (eu.)  upon  his  hand  and  lay  hand  upon  his 
head,  saying :  I  anoint  thee  with  an  unction  in  holy  oil  by 
God  the  Father,  the  almighty  (pantokrator),  and  Jesus 
the  Christ  and  the  Holy  Spirit.  And  he  shall  seal 
(sphragizin)  upon  his  forehead,  kissing  him,  and  he  shall  5 
say :  The  Lord  (be)  with  thee.  And  he  who  has  been 
sealed  shall  answer :  And  with  thy  spirit  (ke  meta  tou 
pneumatos  sou).  Thus  all  the  rest  severally  shall  do.^ 
And  let  all  the  people  pray  together,  and  all  those  who 
receive  baptism  shall  be  praying.  Let  them  give  (A/.  lo 
say)  peace  with  their  mouth.  Let  the  deacons  bring  the 
Oblation  (prosphora)  to  the  bishop,  and  he  shall  give 
thanks  over  bread  because  that  (it  is)  the  form  of  the 
Flesh  (sarx)  of  the  Christ ;  and  a  cup  of  wine  because 
it  is  the  Blood  of  the  Christ,  which  will  be  shed  for  all  15 
who  believe  him  ;  and  milk  and  honey  mingled  in  fulfil- 
ment of  the  promises  of  the  fathers,  because  he  said : 
I  will  give  to  you  a  land  Bowing  with  milk  and  honey.] 
[31]  This  is  the  Flesh  (sarx)  of  the  Christ,  which  he 
gave  to  us  to  nourish  us  with  it  like  children,  namely,  so 
we  who  believe  him  ;  j  It  will  cause  the  bitterness  of  the 
heart  to  be  dissolved  by  the  sweetness  of  the  word 
(logos).  All  these  things  shall  the  bishop  recount 
(logos)  to  him  who  shall  be  baptised.  |  And  when  the 
bishop  therefore  has  now  broken  the  bread,  let  him  give  a  15 
piece  (klasma)  to  each  one  of  them,  saying :  This  is  the 
bread  of  heaven,  the  Body  of  the  Christ  Jesus.  Let  him 
also  who  receives  answer :  Hamen.  [  Further,  if  there  is 
no  [more]  priest,  let  the  deacons  take  hold  of  the  cup 

'  There  is  some  doubt  as  to  the  reading  of  this  sentence.^ 


320  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


(poterion)  and  stand  in  right  order  (eutaxia)  and  give 
to  them  the  Blood  of  the  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  ;  and  he 
who  has  the  milk  and  the  honey.  |  Let  him  who  gives 
the  cup  (poterion)  say :  This  is  the  Blood  of  Jesus  the 

5  Christ  our  Lord.  And  he  who  receives  also  shall 
answer :  Hamen.  |  When  these  things  have  been  done, 
let  each  one  hasten  (spoudaze)  to  do  all  that  is  good, 
and  to  please  God,  and  to  live  (politeue)  rightly,  devoting 
himself  to  the  Church,  doing  the  things  which  he   has 

lo  learnt,  advancing  (prokoptei)  in  the  service  of  God  | 
Now  (de)  we  have  delivered  these  things  to  you  in 
brief  concerning  the  holy  Baptism  and  the  holy  Oblation,  | 
Since  they  have  already  instructed  (kath^ei)  you  [32] 
concerning  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh   (sarx)   and   all 

15  other  things  according  as  it  is  written.  |  But  if  there  is 
any  other  thing  which  it  is  right  to  be  told,  let  the 
bishop  say  it  quietly  to  those  who  shall  be  baptised  ;  and 
(de)  let  not  the  unbelievers  know  (it),  except  first  they 
are   baptised.  |  This   is   the  white   stone    (psyphos)    of 

20  which  Johannes  said,  that  there  is  a  new  name  written 
on  it,  which  no  one  knows  except  him  who  will  receive 
the  stone  (psyphos). 


CONCERNING  THE   FAST  (nEstia) 
25 

47.  Let  the  widows  and  the  virgins  fast  (nesteue)  often, 

and  let  them  pray  in  the  church.  |  Likewise  (hdmaios) 
the  presbyters  and  the  laymen  let  them  fast  (n.)  at  the 
time  when  they  wish.  |  But  it  is  impossible  for  the  bishop 
30  to  fast  (n.)  except  on  the  day  when  all  the  people  (1.) 
will  fast  (n.).     For  it  will  happen,  that  some  one  wishes 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  321 

to  take  some  (food)  to  the  church,  and  it  is  impossible 
for  him  to  be  denied  (arna) :  and  (de)  having  broken 
the  bread  he  shall  certainly  (pantos)  taste  the  bread; 
and  (de)  eating  it  with  other  believers  with  Him,  |  Let 
them  take  from  the  hand  of  the  bishop  one  piece  of  a  s 
loaf  (/('A  bread)  before  that  each  breaks  his  own  bread. 
For  this  is  a  blessing,  and  it  is  not  a  thanksgiving  (euch.) 
like  the  Body  of  the  Lord. 

CONCERNING  THE  TIME  OF  EATING  „ 
[33]  48-  And  (de)  it  is  right  for  all  before  they  drink 
to  take  a  cup  and  give  thanks  (eukharistou)  over  it,  and 
drink  and  eat,  being  purified  in  that  way.  And  (de)  let 
them  give  to  the  catechumens  bread  of  exorcism  (ex.) 
and  a  cup.  15 

CONCERNING  THAT  IT  IS  NOT  RIGHT 
FOR  THE  CATECHUMENS  TO  EAT  WITH 
THE  BELIEVERS 

49.  Let   not  the  catchumens  sit  down  at  the  supper  30 
(dipnon)  of  the  Lord  with  the  believers.     Moreover  (de), 
let  him  who  eats  remember  him   who  invited   him,  at 
every  time  they  are  eating ;  for  for  this  cause  he  begged 
them  to  come  in  under  his  roof 

CONCERNING  THAT  IT  IS  RIGHT  TO    EAT  '' 
DISCREETLY     (epistEmei)    AND    MODER- 
ATELY 

50.  But  when  ye  eat  and  drink  becomingly,  drink  not 
so  as  to  be  drunken,  that  men  may  not  mock  you,  and  30 
he  who  invited  you  be  grieved  (lypei)  by  your  dissolute- 


322  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

ness.  But  rather  (entof)  that  he  may  pray  that  the  holy 
ones  should  come  in  unto  him,  for  He  said  :  Ye  are  the 
salt  of  the  earth.  |  If  to  all  of  you  should  be  given 
portions  *(meris)  at  once,  then  thou  wilt  take  up  thy 
5  portion  alone.  |  But  if  also  ye  shall  be  invited  to  eat, 
ye  shall  eat  only  what  is  sufficient ;  that  he  who  invited 
thee  may  send  the  things  which  ye  leave  [34]  to  whom 
he  will,  as  the  leavings  of  the  holy  ones  ;  and  that  he  may 
rejoice  at  your  coming  in  unto  him.  |  And  (de)  let  them 

10  who  are  invited  eat  quietly,  not  contentiously ;  but  when 
the  bishop  permits  (protrepe)  anyone  to  ask  for  a  word, 
let  him  answer  him.  |  And  when  the  bishop  speaks,  let 
all  hold  their  peace  in  modesty,  until  he  asks  them  (to 
speak)  again.     If,  however  (de),  the  bishop  is  not  there, 

IS  but  only  believers  at  the  supper  (dipnon),  let  them 
take  the  Eulogia  from  the  hand  of  the  presbyter,  if  he  is 
there ;  |  But  if  not,  let  them  take  from  the  hand  of  a 
deacon.  Likewise  (homaios)  the  catechumen  shall  take 
the  bread  of  exorcism  (ex.).     But  the  laymen  (1.)  being 

30  with  one  another  without  the  clergy  (klerikos),  let  them 
eat  discreetly  (epistemei) ;  but  the  layman  (1.)  cannot 
give  the  Eulogia. 


2$  CONCERNING  THAT  IT  IS  RIGHT  TO  EAT 

WITH  GIVING  OF  THANKS 

5 1 .  Further  (de),  let  each  one  eat  with  giving  of  thanks 
in  the  name  of  God  :    for  this  is  proper   for  godliness, 
30  that  we  all  should  be  sober  (nephe)  and  that  the  heathen 
(ethnos)  may  envy  us. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT 


CONCERNING  THE  SUPPER  (dipnon)  OF 
THE  WIDOWS 

52.  When  anyone  wishes  at  any  time  to  invite  the  S 
widows,  all  who  are  aged,  let  him  cause  them  to  eat,  and 
dismiss  them  before  it  is  evening.  [35]  And  if  they 
cannot  come,  because  of  the  lot  (kleros)  which  they  have 
drawn  (klerou),  then  let  him  give  to  them  wine,  and 
something  to  eat,  and  they  shall  eat  in  their  house,  as  10 
they  wish. 

CONCERNING  THE  FRUITS  WHICH  IT  IS 
RIGHT  TO  BRING  (prosvnagke)  TO  THE 
BISHOP  'S 

53.  Let  all  hasten  to  bring  to  the  bishop  at  all  limes 
the  first  fruits  (aparkhe)  of  the  fruits  of  the  first  growth 
(genema). — And  (de)  let  the  bishop  also  take  them  with 
giving  of  thanks,  and  bless  them,  and  name  (onomaze)  the  30 
name  of  him  who  brings  them  to  him,  saying  :   '  We  give 

'  thanks  (eukharistou)  to  thee.  Lord  God,  and  we  offer  to 
'  thee  the  first  fruits  (aparkhe)  of  the  fruits  which  thou  hast 
'  given  to  us  to  partake  of  them,  having  perfected  them  by 
'  thy  word ;  |  And  thou  hast  commanded  the  earth  to  send  as 
*  forth  all  fruits  for  profit  and  rejoicing  and  nourishment 
'  (trophe)  of  the  race  (genos)  of  men  and  all  creatures. 
'  We  bless  thee,  God,  for  these  and  all  other  things  with 
'  which  thou  hast  benefited  (euergetei)  us,  having  gar- 
'nished  (kosmei)  all  creation  with  various  fruits:  by  thy  30 
'holy  Son  Jesus  the  Christ,  our  Lord,  through  whom 


324  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

*(be)  glory  to  thee  with  him  and  the  Holy  Spirit  for 
*  ever  and  ever.     Hamen.'  ^ 

THE  BLESSING  (eulogia)  OF  THE  FRUITS 

5 

54.  These  are  the  fruits  which  shall  be  blessed :  [36] 

the  grapes,  the  fig,  the  pomegranate,  the  olive,  the  pear, 
(papidion),  the  apple,  the  peach  (persikon),  the  cherry 
(kerasion),   the  almond  (amekdalon).  |  But  neither  the 

10  garlic  nor  the  leek,  nor  the  onion,  nor  the  gourd  (pepon), 
nor  the  apple-gourd  (melopepdn),  nor  the  cucumber,  nor 
any  other  vegetables  (lakhanon)  shall  be  blessed.  |  But 
it  will  happen  that  flowers  (anthos)  are  offered  (pros- 
pherei) :  let  them  bring  the  roses  and  the  lily  (krinon),  but 

15  let  not  others  be  brought  And  (de)  for  all  things  which 
will  be  eaten  they  shall  give  thanks  to  God,  and  taste 
them  to  his  glory. 

CONCERNING    THAT    IT    IS     NOT     RIGHT 
20         FOR  ANY   MAN   TO  TASTE   ANYTHING 
IN   THE   PASKHA   BEFORE  THE   HOUR 
IN  WHICH  IT  IS  RIGHT  TO  EAT 

55.  The  fast  (nestia)  shall  not  be  reckoned  to  such  a 
35  one,  if  he  be  greedy  before  the  hour  at  which  the  fast 

(n.)  is  completed.  |  But  if  anyone  is  sick  and  cannot  fast 
(nesteue)  for  the  two  days,  then  let  him  fast  (n.)  on  the 
day  of  the  sabbath  (sabbaton)  of  necessity  (anagke), 
and  be  contented  moreover  (de)  with  bread  and  salt  and 


^  Marked  in  MS.  as  quotation. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT 


32s 


water.  I  And  if  anyone  is  on  a  voyage,  or  again  (entof) 
he  was  ignorant  of  the  day  of  the  Paskha,  when  he  should 
know  of  it,  let  him  perform  his  fast  (n.)  after  Pentekoste.  | 
For  it  is  not  a  Paskha  which  we  observe ;  for  that  which 
is  for  a  type  (typos)  passed  by.  For  this  cause  we  said  5 
not,  in  the  second  month,  but  that  when  he  knows  the 
truth  he  shall  [37]  come  to  the  fast  (n.). 

CONCERNING    THAT    IT    IS    RIGHT    FOR 
THE     DEACONS     TO     ATTEND     (pros-  '«> 
KARTEREi)  UPON  THE  BISHOP 

56.  Further  (de),  let  each  one  of  the  deacons  and  the 
subdeacons  attend  (pr.)  upon  the  bishop,  and  tell  him  of 
all  who  are  sick ;  that  if  it  seem  good  (dokei)  to  the  15 
bishop  he  may  visit  them.  For  let  the  sick  be  consoled 
when  they  see  the  chief  priest  visiting  them,  and  that  they 
are  remembered. 

CONCERNING  THE  HOUR  AT  WHICH  IT    ao 
IS  RIGHT  TO  PRAY 


57.  Further  (de),  let  all  believers  at  the  hour  when  they 
wake,  before  they  begin  any  work,  pray  to  the  Lord,  and 
thus  let  them  go  to  their  works.  |  And  (de)  if  there  should  as 
be  the  word  of  instruction  (kathegesis),  let  them  choose 
rather  for  themselves  to  go  and  hear  the  word  of  God,  for 
the  confirming  of  their  soul.  And  (de)  let  them  hasten 
to  go  to  the  church  where  the  Spirit  breaks  forth.' 


326  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


CONCERNING     THAT     IT     IS     RIGHT     TO 

RECEIVE       OF      THE       EUCHARESTIA 

EARLY  AT  THE  TIME  WHEN    IT  WILL 

5  BE    OFFERED     UP,    BEFORE    TASTING 

ANY  FOOD 

58.  Further  (de),  let  every  believer  hasten  (spoudaze) 
to  receive  of  the  Eucharestia  before  that  he  have  tasted 

10  any  food ;  |  For  if  there  are  believers  there,  who  receive 
it,  if  anyone  should  give  to  him  a  deadly  potion  it  will 
not  [38]  overpower  him. 

CONCERNING     THAT     IT     IS     RIGHT     TO 
15  WATCH       DILIGENTLY       OVER       THE 

EUCHARESTIA 

59.  Let  all  take  care  diligently  for  an  unbeliever  not 
to  eat  of  the  Eucharestia,  nor  a  mouse,  nor  any  other 

20  creature,  or  that  not  any  of  it  should  fall  and  be  lost :  it 
is  the  Body  of  the  Christ,  he  {lit.  this)  of  whom  all 
believers  receive,  and  it  is  not  right  to  despise  (kata- 
phronei)  it. 

25  CONCERNING  THAT  IT  IS  NOT  RIGHT  TO 
SPILL  ANY  FROM  THE  CUP  (poterion) 

60.  For  having  blessed  the  cup  (poterion)  in  the  name 
of  God,  and  having  received  of  it  as  (hos)  being  the 

30  Blood  of  the  Christ,  give  great  heed  to  thyself,  spill  not 
from  it,  lest  an  alien  (allotrion)  spirit  lick  it  up  ;  lest  God 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  327 

be  angry  with  thee,  seeing  that  (hos)  thou  hast  despised 
(kataphronei)  and  become  guilty  (aicios)  of  the  Blood  of 
the  Christ,  in  despising  the  price  with  which  thou  hast 
been  bought  [  Further  (de),  let  the  deacons  and  the 
presbyters  assemble  daily  at  the  place  where  the  bishop  s 
shall  command  them  (to  come) ;  [  And  let  not  the  deacons 
indeed  neglect  (amelei)  to  assemble  at  all  times,  unless 
sickness  prevents  (kolye)  them.  And  (de)  when  all 
have  assembled,  let  them  give  information  to  those  who 
are  in  the  churdi,  and  likewise  having  prayed,  let  each  lo 
one  go  to  the  works  which  are  determined  for  him. 

CONCERNING  THE  BURIAL  PLACES 

[39]  61.  Let  not  men  overcharge  (barei)  for  burying  men  is 
in  the  cemetery  (koimeterion) ;  for  it  is  the  property  of  all 
the  poor ;  or  else  (plen)  let  them  give  the  wages  of  the 
workman  (ergates)  to  him  who  digs,  and  the  price  of  the 
earthen  vessels  (keramos).  But  those  who  are  at  that 
place  who  take  care  {of  it)  let  the  bishop  support,  lest  any  ao 
of  those  who  go  to  that  place  (topos)  should  be  burdened 
(with  a  charge). 

CONCERNING  THE  TIME  AT  WHICH  IT  IS 

RIGHT  TO  PRAY  n 

62.  Further  (de),  let  all  believers,  men  and  women, 
when  they  rise  early  (from)  sleeping,  before  they  touch 
any  work,  wash  their  hands  and  pray  to  God ;  and  so 
let  them  go  to  their  works.  |  Further  (de),  if  there  should  y> 
be  an  instruction  (katheg€sis)  of  the  word  of  God,  let 


328  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

everyone  choose  for  himself  to  go  to  that  place,  |  Reckon- 
ing this  in  his  heart,  that  it  is  God  whom  he  hears 
speaking  in  him  who  gives  instruction  (kath^ei) :  for 
having   prayed  in  the  church  he  will  be  able  to  avoid 

5  (parelthe)  the  evil  of  the  day.  |  Let  the  pious  man 
reckon  that  it  is  a  great  loss,  if  he  should  not  go  to 
the  place  in  which  they  instruct  (kathegei);  especially 
(malista)  if  he  can  read:  or  if  the  teacher  should 
come,  let  none  of  you  be   deficient   in   coming  to   the 

3  church  where  they  give  the  teaching.  Then  it  shall 
be  given  to  him  who  speaks  to  utter  things  which 
are  profitable  to  all ;  and  thou  wilt  hear  things  which 
thou  thinkest  not;  [40]  and  thou  wilt  be  profited 
(ophelei)  by  the  things  which  the  Holy  Spirit  will  give 

5  to  thee  from  him  who  instructs  (kathegei) :  |  Thus  thy 
faith  will  be  established  upon  the  things  which  thou 
hast  heard.  |  And  (de)  it  will  be  told  to  thee  also  in 
that  place  the  things  which  it  is  right  for  thee  to  do  in 
thy  house.  |  For   this  cause  then   let   each   one   hasten 

5  (spoudaze)  to  go  to  the  church,  the  place  in  which  the 
Holy  Spirit  breaks  forth.  |  If  there  is  a  day  in  which 
there  is  no  instruction  (kathegesis),  let  each  one  in  his 
house  take  a  holy  book,  and  read  sufficiently  in  it  what 
seems  (dokei)  to  him  profitable.  |  And  if  indeed  thou  art 

5  in  thy  house,  pray  at  the  third  hour  and  bless  God.  |  If 
however  (men)  thou  art  in  another  place  and  thou  comest 
by  chance  to  that  time  (kairos),  pray  in  thy  heart  to  God. 
For  in  this  hour  the  Christ  was  seen  nailed  to  the  wood. 
For  this  cause  also  in  the  old  (palaia  testament)  the  law 

3  commanded  to  offer  the  shew  (prothesis)  bread  at  every 
hour,  as  type  of  the  Body  and  the  Blood  of  the  Christ ; 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  329 

and  the  slaughter  of  the  senseless  (alogon)  lamb,^  which 
was  a  type  of  the  perfect  (teleion)  Lamb ;  for  the  Christ  is 
the  shepherd ;  he  also  is  the  Bread  which  came  from 
heaven.  |  Pray  also  likewise  (hom.)  at  the  sixth  hour; 
for  the  Christ  having  been  nailed  to  the  wood  of  the  5 
cross,  that  day  divided,  and  a  great  darkness  happened, 
wherefore  (hoste)  let  them  pray  at  that  hour  with 
[41]  a  prevailing  prayer,  likening  themselves  to  the 
voice  of  him  who  prayed,  (and)  caused  all  creation 
(ktesis)  to  become  dark  for  the  unbelieving  Jews.  |  And  10 
(de)  let  them  also  make  a  great  prayer  and  a  great  bless- 
ing at  the  ninth  hour,  that  thou  mayest  know  how  the 
soul  (ps.)  of  the  righteous  ones  blesses  the  Lord  the  true 
God,  he  {lit.  this)  who  remembered  the  holy  ones,  (and) 
sent  his  Son  to  them,  who  is  his  Word,  to  shine  upon  15 
them.  I  For  in  that  hour  was  the  side  of  the  Christ 
pierced  with  a  spear  (logke)  (and)  blood  and  water  came 
out,  and  afterwards  the  rest  of  the  day  shone  until 
evening.  |  For  this  cause  also,  when  thou  goest  to  sleep, 
thou  shah  begin  (arkhisthai)  another  day  and  make  the  w 
type  of  the  Resurrection.  |  Pray  also  before  thou  restest 
thyself  upon  the  bed  in  thy  sleeping  place ;  and  having 
risen  up  at  midnight  upon  thy  bed,  wash  thyself  and 
pray ;  and  (de)  thou  shalt  wash  thyself  in  pure  water.  | 
Further  (de)  also,  if  thou  hast  a  wife,  pray  with  one  an-  v, 
other  together.  But  if  she  has  not  yet  become  a  believer, 
withdraw  (anakhOrei)  thyself  to  a  place  and  pray  alone, 
and  return  again  to  thy  place.  |  And  (de)  thou  who  art 
bound  by  the  marriage,  be  not  unready  to  pray ;  for  ye 

>  Lit. '  sheep '  thus  ^ain. 


330  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

are  not  unclean.  For  they  who  have  been  washed  have 
no  need  to  be  washed  again,  because  they  are  pure  and 
they  are  clean  (katharos).  |  [42]  Further  (de),  when  thou 
breathest  into  thy  hand,  and  sealest  (sphragize)  thyself 

5  with  the  spittle  which  thou  wilt  bring  forth  from  thy 
mouth,  thou  art  purified  all  over  unto  thy  feet :  for  this 
is  the  gift  (d5ron)  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  |  And  the  drops  of 
the  water  are  (those)  of  Baptism  coming  up  from  a 
fountain  (pyge),  which  is  the  heart  of  the  believer,  puri- 

10  fying  him  who  believed.  |  But  it  is  also  necessary 
(anagkaion)  for  us  to  pray  at  that  hour,  for  even  the 
presbyters  themselves  delivered  this  work  unto  us,  and 
they  instructed  us  {lit.  our  sight)  in  this  way;  because 
in  that  hour  all  creation  is  quiet  for  blessing  God.  |  The 

15  stars  and  the  trees  and  the  waters  are  as  those  who  stand 
up  :  I  all  the  host  (stratia)  of  the  angels  offer  worship 
(litourgei)  and  the  souls  (ps.)  of  the  righteous  sing 
hymns  (hymneue)  to  God  the  almighty  (pantokrator)  at 
that  hour.  |  For  this   cause   it  is   right   for   those   who 

20  believe  to  pray  at  that  hour.  And  (de)  the  Lord  also 
said  thus,  bearing  this  testimony,  saying  :  At  midnight,  lo, 
there  was  a  voice,  |  Lo,  the  bridegroom  came,  come  ye  forth 
to  meet  him.  |  And  he  spake  further  also,  saying :  For  this 
cause  then  watch,  because  ye  know  not  the  day  nor  the 

25  hour  when  the  Son  of  Man  cometh.  |  Likewise  (horn.) 
having  risen  up  [43]  at  the  hour  when  the  cock  will  crow, 
pray,  because  the  children  of  Israel  denied  (arna)  the 
Christ  at  that  hour,  him  {Jit.  this)  whom  we  have  known, 
we  who  believe  him,  looking  out  by  faith  with  a  hope  of 

30  the  day  of  eternal  light,  that  which  will  shine  upon  us 
for  ever  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  |  So  (de)  all  ye 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  33I 

believers,  if  ye  perform  these  things  and  remember 
them,  teaching  one  another,  and  instructing  the  cate- 
chumens to  do  them,  nothing  will  tempt  (piraze)  you,  nor 
will  ye  ever  fall,  remembering  the  Christ  at  all  times.  | 
And  (de)  make  proof  (peira)  at  every  hour  of  sealing  (sphr.)  5 
thy  forehead  in  fear  (of  God)  ;  for  this  is  the  sign  which 
is  known  and  is  manifest :  by  this  the  devil  is  ruined. 
If  thou  makest  it  in  fjiith  thou  not  only  manifestest  thy- 
self before  men,  but  in  the  knowledge  with  which  thou 
art  confident  like  a  shield  (theron) :  |  since  the  adversary  10 
(antikimenos),  the  devil,  only  sees  the  power  of  the  heart, 
and  if  he  should  see  the  inner  man  that  he  is  sensible 
(logikos),  sealing  (sphragize)  himself  within  and  without 
with  the  seal  (sphragis)  of  the  Word  (logos)  of  God, 
then  he  flies,  pursued  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  [44]  who  is 
is  in  the  man  who  makes  place  for  him  within  him.  | 
This  also  is  what  Moses  the  prophet  taught  us  before 
by  the  Paskha,  and  the  Iamb  which  was  slaughtered,  he 
commanded  that  they  should  smear  the  blood  on  the 
lintel  and  the  two  door-posts,  telling  us  of  the  faith  20 
which  is  in  us  now,  this  which  was  given  to  us  by  the 
perfect  (t)  Lamb.  Wherewith  when  we  seal  (sphragize) 
our  foreheads  with  our  hand,  we  shall  be  saved  from  those 
who  wish  to  kill  us.  |  And  when  ye  receive  these  things 
in  thanksgiving  and  right  faith  ye  will  be  edified  and  aj 
eternal  life  will  be  granted  to  (kharize)  you.  |  These 
things  are  those  which  we  counsel  you  to  keep,  you  who 
have  sense  {lit.  heart).  |  For  if  all  should  follow  the 
tradition  (paradosis)  of  the  Apostles,  these  things  which 
they  have  heard,  and  keep  them,  no  heretics  (hairetikos)  30 
will  prevail  to  lead  them  astray  (plana),  nor  any  man  at 


332  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

all  I  For  thus  the  numerous  heresies  (hairesis)  increased 
(auxane),  because  that  they  who  were  leaders  (prohista) 
would  not  learti  the  purpose  (prohairesis)  of  the  Apostles ; 
but  according  to  their  own  pleasures  (hydone)  do  what 
5  they  like,  not  what  was  proper  (prepei).  |  If,  then,  we  left 
out  anything,  our  beloved,  God  will  reveal  them  to  those 
who  are  worthy,  steering  (keberna)  the  Church  which  is 
[45]  worthy  of  mooring  in  the  quiet  haven. 

'^CONCERNING  THE  GIFTS  (kharisma)  AND 
THE  ORDINATIONS  (khirodonia),  FOR  NO 
ONE  TO  BOAST  OF  HIMSELF  ABOUT 
THEM 

'5  63.  Our  God  and  our  Saviour  Jesus  the  Christ 
delivered  to  us  the  great  mystery  of  godliness,  and  called 
the  Jews  and  all  the  Greeks  (hellen),  that  they  might  know 
the  true  God,  the  only  Father ;  according  as  the  Lord 
himself  saith  in  a  place,  giving  thanks  for  the  salvation 

20  of  those  who  believed  on  him :  *  I  have  manifested  thy 
name  unto  the  men  whom  thou  gavest  to  me,  I  have 
finished  the  work  which  thou  gavest  to  me  to  do '  ^ :  |  And 
again  speaking  unto  his  Father  concerning  us,  he  says : 

*  My  holy  Father,  the  world  knew  thee  not,  but  I  have 
25  known  thee,  and  these  also  have  known  thee/^  |  It  is 

now  proper  (prepei)  for  us  that  he  should  speak  to  us 
all  who  have  been  made  perfect  (telios)  concerning  the 
gifts  (kharisma)  which  he  gave  to  us  by  his  Holy  Spirit :  | 

*  These   signs  will   follow  them  who  will  believe ;  they 


^  Marked  as  quotations  in  MS. 

\ 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  33j 

will  cast  out  demons  (daimonion)  in  my  name,  they  will 
speak  languages,  they  will  take  up  serpents  in  their  hands, 
and  if  they  should  drink  a  deadly  potion,  it  will  not  hurt 
them,  they  will  lay  their  hands  upon  the  sick  and  they 
shall  have  rest'*  |  These  gifts  (kharisma)  then  were  first  s 
given  to  us  the  Apostles  [46]  at  the  time  when  we  were 
appointed  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  all  creation  (ktesis),  for 
us  to  give  them  to  those  who  should  believe  through  us, 
not  as  a  profit  for  us  indeed  who  exercise  them,  but  rather 
for  you.  We  are  they  who  belong  to  God,  but  (the  gifts)  10 
are  for  a  profit  to  you  for  the  unbelievers  who  are  among 
us,  that  those  whom  the  word  was  not  able  to  persuade 
(peithe)  the  power  of  the  signs  might  put  to  shame. 
For  the  signs  are  not  for  us  the  believers,  but  they  are 
for  the  unbelievers  |  Of  the  Jews  and  the  Greeks  (hellen),  15 
For  neither  is  it  any  gain  to  us,  if  we  cast  out  demons  (dai- 
monion), but  the  gain  is  for  those  who  have  been  purified 
by  the  energy  of  the  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  |  According 
as  our  God  himself  instructs  (paideue)  us  in  a  place, 
making  the  thing  plain  to  us,  saying :  '  Rejoice  not  in  this  »> 
that  the  spirits  are  subject  to  you,  but  rejoice  rather  (entoO 
because  your  names  are  written  in  the  heavens.'^  |  Since 
the  casting  out  demons  (d.)  does  not  belong  to  our  power, 
but  the  having  our  names  written  in  the  heavens  belongs 
to  our  will  and  our  diligence  (spoude),  being  assisted  by  25 
him  as  is  plain,  j  It  is  not  then  necessary  (anagkaion)  now 
that  every  believer  should  cast  out  demons  (d.),  or  raise 
the  dead,  or  speak  languages ;  but  he  who  will  be  worthy 
of  this  grace  will  be  worthy  of  it  [47]  certainly  (pantos) 

1  Marked  as  quotatioai  in  MS. 


334  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


for  a  useful  reason  (aitia)  in  regard  to  the  salvation  of 
the  unbelievers  who  are  put  to  shame  through  it ;  for 
since  they  were  unwilling  to  receive  the  declaration  of  the 
word,  therefore  the  energy  of  the  signs  was  sent  to  them,  if 

5  haply  they  might  be  saved  :  |  for  the  ungodly  are  not  even 
ashamed,  though  put  to  shame  by  the  wonders.  |  And 
God  himself  bears  witness  to  this,  as  he  saith  in  the  Law : 
*  In  other  languages  and  with  other  lips  I  will  speak  to  this 
people  (L),  and  they  will  not  hear  me  even  thus,  saith  the 

lo  Lord.'  ^  I  For  neither  did  the  Egyptians  believe  God  when 
Moyses  the  prophet  did  those  great  signs  and  those 
wonders  among  them.  Nor  again  did  the  multitude  of 
the  Jews  believe  him  who  was  greater  than  Moyses, 
namely   the   Christ,  when  he  healed  all  the  sick  of  all 

15  the  infirmities  which  were  in  them.  |  Neither  again  did 
the  rod  put  to  shame  those  (men)  when  it  was  changed  into 
a  serpent  which  became  a  living  soul  (psyche)  in  the  hand 
of  his  servant  Moyses ;  or  the  hand  which  became  white 
(with  leprosy),  and  the  water  which  became  blood  |  Nor 

20  these  also  were  the  blind,  who  saw,  able  to  persuade 
(peithe),  nor  the  lame  who  walked,  nor  the  dead  who 
were  raised.  And  he  indeed  was  resisted  by  Jannes 
and  Jambres,  while  (de)  the  Lord  [48]  also  by  Annas 
and  Kaiphas.  |  Thus  then  the  signs  do  not  put  all  to 

25  shame,  but  only  those  of  good  disposition  (eugnomon),  and 
for  their  sake  also  God  like  a  wise  steward  is  willing  that 
mighty  works  {lit.  powers)  should  be  done,  not  by  the 
strength  of  men,  but  by  his  own  will.  |  These  things  then 
we  say,  that  those  who  have  received  these  gifts  (kh.) 


^  Marked  as  quotation  in  MS. 


TRANSLATION   OF   THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  335 

and  graces  of  this  kind  should  not  exalt  themselves  over 
those  who  have  not  received  them :  we  are  speaking  of 
the  gifts  (kh.)  of  God  which  are  (accompanied)  by  signs,  | 
Since  there  is  no  man  who  believed  God  through  his  holy 
Son,  who  did  not  receive  a  spiritual  grace  (kharis)  or  gift  s 
(kharisma)  from  him  :  j  For  the  freedom  from  the  ungodli- 
ness (asebia)  of  the  service  of  many  gods,  |  And  the 
entrance  into  the  faith  of  the  Father  and  the  Son  and  the 
Holy  Spirit,  is  a  gift  (kh.)  of  God ;  especially  because  we 
have  cast  away  from  us  the  veil  of  the  Jews  ;  and  we  have  lo 
believed  that,  by  the  will  of  the  Father  and  (of)  the  only 
(monogenes)  Son  who  is  with  his  good  (ag.)  Father 
before  all  ages  (aiOn)  and  (of)  the  Holy  Spirit  the  Life- 
giver,  he  (the  Son)  in  the  end  of  these  days  was  born  of 
the  immaculate  virgin  Maria  without  seed  (sperma)  of  15 
man,  |  [49]  And  that  he  lived  (politeue)  among  men 
without  sin,  having  fulfilled  all  the  righteousness  of  the 
law,  I  And  that  by  the  permission  (synkhoresis)  of  the 
Father,  God  the  Word  (logos)  endured  (hypomine)  the 
cross,  despising  the  shame,  |  And  that  he  died,  and  that  20 
he  was  buried,  and  that  he  rose  from  the  dead  on  the 
third  day,  |  And  that  after  he  had  risen  he  spent  forty 
days  with  the  Apostles,  |  And  after  his  commanding  them 
with  all  commands  he  was  taken  up  (analanbane)  in  their 
presence  unto  him  who  sent  him,  God  the  Father.  So  15 
(de)  he  who  believed  this,  believed  not  thus  as  a  matter 
of  course  (haplos),  nor  irrationally  either,  but  rather  by  a 
calling  and  a  persuasion,  having  received  the  gift  (kh.)  from 
God  the  Father.  J  Thus  again  he  who  is  free  from  all 
heresy  (hairesis),  received  the  same  gift  (kh.)  |  Nay,  30 
let   not  anyone  then  among  you  by  any  means  judge 


336  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

one  of  those  who  became  believers,  that  he  was  not 
worthy  to  do  signs  and  wonders.  For  various  are  the 
graces  of  God  which  are  given  to  men  by  him,  |  And  thou 
hast  received  this,  and  (de)  another  another  :  and  one  (it 
%  may  be)  has  received  a  word  of  wisdom,  or  knowledge, 
or  discrimination  (diakresis)  of  the  spirit,  or  knowing 
beforehand  what  will  happen,  or  a  [50]  word  of  teaching, 
or  patience,  or  continence  (egkratia).  |  For  Moyses  him- 
self even,  the  man  of  God,  who  did  the  signs  in  Eg^t, 

10  was  not  haughty  over  his  brethren ;  |  Nor  when  he  was 
called  god  was  he  haughty  over  his  prophet  AarOn.  | 
But  neither  again  did  Jesou  of  Naue,  who  led  the  people 
(1.)  after  him,  exalt  himself  over  Phinees  nor  over  Khaleb, 
when   he  stayed   the  sun  over  GabaOn  and  the  moon 

15  over  the  valley  of  Elom  in  the  battle  (polymos)  with  the 
Jebusites  (ieboussaios),  because  the  day  only  did  not 
suffice  for  the  victory.  Nor  again  when  Samouel  did 
all  those  signs  did  he  count  David,  the  lover  of  God,  to 
be  nothing ;  and  yet  they  were  both  prophets,  the  one 

20  indeed  a  chief  priest  and  (de)  the  other  a  king.  |  And 
again  among  the  seven  thousand  holy  men  who  were  left 
in  Israel  who  kept  themselves  from  bowing  the  knee  to 
Bahal  or  any  other,  [for]  only  Elias  (helias)  and  Elisha 
(elissaios)  his  disciple,  who  lived  among  them,  did  signs 

35  and  wonders.  |  But  neither  did  Elias  deride  Abdias  the 
steward,  who  feared  God,  doing  signs  and  wonders ;  | 
Nor  did  Elisha  his  disciple  despise  his  [51]  youth 
trembling  at  the  surrounding  enemies.  |  For  neither  was 
the  wise  Daniel  proud  when  he  was  twice  saved  from 

30  the  mouth  of  the  lions,  |  Nor  again  did  the  three  holy 
children  scorn  their  companions  when  they  were  saved 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  337 

from  the  burning  fiery  furnace ;  |  For  they  knew  that  they 
were  saved  from  all  those  evils  not  by  their  own  power, 
but  by  the  power  of  God  they  were  doing  the  signs  and 
wonders  (and)  escaping  from  those  troubles.  |  Wherefore 
(oukoun)  let  no  one  among  you  exalt  himself  over  his  s 
brother,  though  he  be  a  prophet,  or  do  signs  and  wonders  : 
for  if  it  was  given  that  there  should  not  be  any  unbelievers 
anywhere,  how  would  the  working  (energia)  of  the  signs 
be  of  any  use  ?  For  the  man  indeed  to  become  godly 
belongs  to  his  good  heart,  |  But  for  him  to  do  signs  lo 
and  wonders  belongs  to  the  power  of  God  being 
efficacious  (energia) :  |  And  (of)  these  the  former  indeed 
belongs  to  us,  but  the  second  belongs  to  God  who  works 
(energei).  |  Because,  moreover  (de),  of  the  reasons  which 
we  have  said  before,  let  not  the  king  by  any  means  "S 
despise  the  officers  (stratoigos)  who  are  under  him,  |  Nor 
let  the  rulers  those  over  whom  they  rule ;  for  the 
rulers  would  be  nothing,  if  there  were  not  those  over 
whom  they  rule ;]  and  the  kingdom  [52]  could  not 
stand,  if  there  were  not  officers  (strategos).  |  But  v> 
neither  let  the  bishop  exalt  himself  over  deacon  or 
presbyter,  |  Nor  let  the  presbyter  exalt  himself  over 
the  people  (1.) ;  for  the  establishment  of  our  social 
state  comes  from  one  another ;  |  For  if  there  was  no 
laity  (1.),  over  whom  would  the  bishop  be  bishop  ?  or  35 
the  presbyter  ?  |  And  it  belongs  indeed  to  ourselves  for 
all  to  become  Christians,  but  for  becoming  Apostles  or 
bishops  or  any  other  belongs  not  to  us  henceforward, 
but  it  belongs  to  God,  who  gives  those  graces.  |  Lo,  these 
things  indeed  we  have  said  hitherto  concerning  those  30 
who    have    become    worthy    of    graces    and    dignities 


338  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

(axiOma),  but  this  other  word  we  shall  add  to  it,  that 
all  who  prophesy  are  not  godly,  nor  are  all  who  cast  out 
demons  (d.)  holy.  |  For  Balaham  the  son  of  Baior  the 
diviner,  being  godless,  prophesies ;  |  And  Kaiphas  also, 
5  called  Chief  Priest,  the  name  which  he  had  being  false.  | 
Further,  the  devil  and  also  the  demons  (d.)  under  him 
foretold  many  things,  though  for  all  that  there  is  no 
sign  at  all  (holos)  of  godliness  in  them ;  for  they  per- 
suade (peithe)  themselves  in  their  ignorance  concerning 

lo  the  evil  which  [53]  they  wish  to  do.  |  The  thing  is  plain, 
that  if  the  ungodly  prophesy,  they  will  not  be  able  to 
conceal  their  prophecy  by  their  ungodliness  (asebes) ;  | 
Nor  if  demons  (d.)  cast  out  demons  (d.)  will  they  be  able 
to  become  holy,  |  By  the  former  {lit.  these)  being  subject 

15  (hypokhorei)  to  the  latter  {lit.  these) :  for  they  deceive 
(apata)  one  another  like  men  who,  feigning  anxieties 
for  the  sake  of  merriment,  are  led  astray  (and)  lead  astray 
others  among  those  who  will  support  them.  |  And  (de) 
the  king,   if  he  should  be  ungodly  (asebes)  is   hence- 

30  forth  not  a  king  but  a  tyrant ;  |  and  (oude)  the  bishop 
contented^  with  ignorance  or  malice  (kakia)  is  not  a 
bishop,  but  the  name  which  he  had  is  false,  and  he  was 
not  appointed  by  God  but  by  men,  as  Ananias  and 
Samaias  in  Israel,  |  And  as   Zedekias  also  and  Achia, 

25  who  were  false  prophets  in  [the]  Babylon ;  |  and  as 
Balaham  the  diviner,  who  was  punished  (dimorei)  be- 
cause he  made  all  Israel  to  sin  in  Beelphegor  ;  |  and  as  the 
sons  also  of  Skeva,  after  trying  to  cast  out  demons  (d.), 
they  fled  in  shame,  having  been  wounded  (plyge)    by 


^  Probably  the  same  confusion  as  above  between  Trct^cD  and  Tric^fo. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  339 

those  (demons) ;  |  And  as  all  the  kings  of  Israel  and  Judah 
(louda),  who  were  punished  (dimSrei)  with  every  punish- 
ment (dimOria).  |  The  thing  therefore  is  plain  that  [54] 
even  the  bishops  and  presbyters,  who  are  of  false  name, 
will  not  be  able  to  escape  from  the  just  judgment  of  s 
God ;  I  For  it  will  be  said  to  them  again  (as  before) :  Ye 
priests  also  who  profane  my  holy  name,  I  will  give  you 
to  slaughter  as  Zedekias  and  Achias,  whom  the  king  of 
[thej  Babylon  slew,  |  As  Jeremias  the  prophet  saith.  | 
For  we  are  not  disparaging  the  prophecies  of  the  true  10 
prophets,  for  we  know  that  the  holy  men  of  God  are 
moved  (energei)  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  |  but  rather  are  we 
taking  away  boastful  pride,  and  we  are  showing  them 
that  God  is  wont  to  take  away  his  grace  from  such 
persons.  |  For  God  resists  the  proud,  but  he  gives  ij 
grace  to  the  humble.  |  Silas  indeed  then  and  Agabos 
became  prophets  in  our  time,  and  they  did  not  exalt 
themselves  over  the  Apostles,  nor  go  beyond  their 
measure,  and  yet  they  were  the  beloved  of  God.  |  Further 
(de)  also,  even  women  prophesied  in  the  old  (testament),  30 
and  Mariham  the  sister  of  Moyses  and  AarOn,  |  And  (de) 
afterwards  DebbOra,  and  after  them  OUa  and  Joudith, 
the  one  indeed  in  time  of  J5sias,  the  other  in  time  of 
Tarios.  |  And  (de)  in  the  new  (testament)  also  the 
Mother  of  the  Lord  prophesied,  [55]  and  Elisabet  her  35 
kinswoman,  and  Anna  the  daughter  of  Phanouel,  j  And 
in  our  time  the  daughters  of  Philip :  and  these  dtd  not 
exalt  themselves  over  the  men,  but  kept  (within)  their 
measure.  |  Wherefore  (oukoun)  if  it  be  a  woman  indeed 
(de)  or  a  man  has  partaken  of  such  graces,  let  him  be  30 
humble,  that  God  may  have  pleasure  in  him.  |  For  he  said  : 


340  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

Upon  whom  shall  I  look,  except  him  who  is  humble  and 
meek  and  those  who  tremble  at  my  words  ?  |  In  the  first 
(part)  of  this  discourse  (logos)  we  have  declared  concerning 
the  gifts  (kharisma)  which  God  is  wont  to  give  to  men 

5  according  to  his  holy  will,  |  And  how  he  rebuked  the  form  ^ 
of  those  who  set  to  work  to  speak  lies,  being  moved  by 
the  alien  spirits ;  |  And  that  God  is  often  wont  to  cause 
wicked  ones  (poneros)  to  prophesy,  and  do  signs  and 
wonders.     Now,  then,  the  word  leads  us  on  to    enter 

lo  upon  the  chief  matter  (kephalaion)  of  the  ordinance  of  the 
Church,  that  ye  who  have  been  ordained  bishops  by  us 
with  the  commandment  of  the  Christ,  when  ye  know 
this  order  (taxis)  through  us,  may  do  every  thing  accord- 
ing to  the  commandment  (entole)  which  was  delivered 

15  to  you,  I  Knowing  that  he  who  hears  us  is  hearing  the 
Christ,  and  he  who  hears  the  Christ  is  hearing  God  the 
Father,  (to)  whom  (be)  the  glory  for  ever.     [56J  Hamen. 


CONCERNING  THE  BISHOPS 


30 


64.  It  is  right  then  that  the  bishop  should  be  ordained 
(khirodonei)  as  we  have  all  in  common  previously 
commanded,  being  in  the  first  place  a  chosen  man,  holy, 
choice  in  every  thing,  all  the  people  (1.)  having  chosen 
2$  him :  further  (de),  when  he  has  been  named  and  found 
acceptable,  let  all  the  people  (1.)  with  the  presbyters  and 
the  honoured  bishops  assemble  on  the  Lord's  day, 
(kyriake),  |  And  let  the  eldest  who  is  among  them  ask 

^  Rendering  the  Greek  '  tupos,'  which  may  have  been  confused  with 
'tropos,'  meaning  'character.' 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  341 

of  the  presbyters  and  all  the  people  (1.)  whether  this  man 
is  he  whom  ye  asked  (aitei)  to  be  yoiir  ruler  (arkhon). 
And  when  they  shall  have  said:  Yea,  this  is  (he)  in 
truth,  I  Let  him  ask  them  again,  whether  ye  all  bear 
witness  of  him  that  he  is  worthy  of  this  great  leadership  S 
(hegemon),  honourable  and  holy.  |  And  when  they  have 
established  (katorthou)  his  piety  (eusebes)  which  he 
has  toward  God :  j  And  that  he  observed  righteousness 
(dikaion)  toward  all  men,  |  and  that  he  conducted 
(oikonomei)  his  house  well,  and  that  his  whole  life  (bios)  "> 
is  sound,  in  no  way  reproachable,  as  also  that  of  his 
household  |  And  when  they  have  all  borne  witness 
together,  that  such  it  is  according  to  truth,  and  not 
according  to  an  acceptance  of  person,  God  the  Father 
and  his  only  (monogenes)  Son  Jesus  the  Christ  and  the  'S 
Holy  [57]  Spirit  being  judge  (krites)  of  such  things,  | 
Let  them  ask  them  again  the  third  time,  whether  he  is 
worthy  of  so  great  a  kind  of  ministry  (litourgia) ;  that 
by  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses  every  word  may 
stand,  j  And  when  they  shall  have  said  the  third  time  ao 
that  he  is  worthy,  let  them  take  from  them  all  their  votes 
(synthyma),  |  And  when  they  have  given  it  readily,  let 
there  be  a  silence  and  stillness  (esychia),  |  and  let  one 
of  the  great  bishops  take  with  him  two  other  bishops, 
while  all  the  other  bishops  stand  near  the  altar  (thysias-  »5 
terion),  praying  in  silence  with  the  presbyters,  (and)  while 
all  the  deacons  hold  the  holy  Gospel  spread  open 
over  the  head  of  him  who  is  ordained  (khirodonei),  |  Let 
the  bishop  pray  to  God  for  him ;  And  when  he  has 
finished  praying  for  him,  let  one  of  the  bishops  place  the  30 
Oblation  (thysia)  upon  the  hands  of  him  who  is  ordained 


342  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


(kh.),  and  let  the  other  bishops  set  him  upon  the  seat 
(thronos)  which  is  proper  (prepei)  for  him.  |  And  when 
they  have  saluted  (aspaze)  him  with  the  salutation  (as- 
pasmos)  which  is  in  the  Lord,  let  them  read  in  the  holy 
$  Gospels.  I  And  when  they  have  finished  reading  the 
Gospel,  let  the  bishop  who  has  been  ordained  (kh.) 
salute  (a.)  all  the  church,  |  saying:  The  [58J  grace 
(kharis)  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Christ,  and  the  love 
(agape)  of  God  the  Father,  and  the  fellowship  (koinOnia)  of 

10  the  Holy  Spirit  (be)  with  you  all.  |  And  let  all  of  them 
answer:  With  thy  spirit  also.  |  And  when  he  has 
finished  saying  this,  let  him  also  speak  {lit  say)  to  the 
people  (1.)  with  words  of  exhortation :  then  (de)  having 
finished  his  instruction,  let  the  deacon  mount  upon  a  high 

15  place  and  proclaim  (kyrisze) :  Let  no  unbeliever  remain 
in  this  place.  |  And  thus  when  the  bishop  has  finished 
all  the  prayers  which  it  is  right  for  him  to  make,  whether 
for  the  sick  and  also  the  rest,  |  Let  the  deacon  say  to 
them  all :  Salute  (a.)  one  another  with  a  holy  kiss,  j  And 

20  let  the  clergy  (klerikos)  salute  (a.)  the  bishop,  and  let 
the  laymen  (1.)  salute  (a.)  one  another,  and  let  the  women 
also  salute  (a.)  the  women.  Let  the  children  stand  near 
the  bema ;  |  And  let  another  deacon  stand  by  them,  that 
they  may  not  make  a  noise  (spatala)  with  one  another,  | 

25  and  let  other  deacons  walk  about  watching  (paraterei)  the 
men  and  the  women,  that  there  may  not  be  any  disturb- 
ance among  them,  |  And  that  one  should  not  beckon  to 
another  or  whisper  or  go  to  sleep.  |  Let  a  subdeacon 
stand  at  the  door  of  the  men,  and  let  other  deacons  stand 

30  at  the  door  of  the  women,  that  none  [59]  may  go  out,  and 
that  they  may  not  open  the  doors  at  the  time  of  the  holy 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  343 

Oblation  (prosphora),  even  if  it  is  a  believer  who  is  at  the 
door.  I  Then  (de)  let  the  subdeacon  bring  water,  and  let 
the  priests  wash  their  hands,  for  a  sign  of  purity  of  their 
souls  (ps.),  lifted  up  to  God  the  almighty  (pantokratOr).  | 
And  let  another  deacon  cry  out :  Let  no  catechumen  s 
remain  in  this  place.  |  Let  not  any  of  those  who  only 
hear  the  word,  but  who  do  not  communicate  (koinOnei) 
of  the  holy  Mysteries,  stand  in  this  place.  |  Let  not  any 
of  the  unbelievers  remain.  |  Let  not  any  of  the  heretics 
(hairetikos)  stand  in  this  place  with  us  to-day.  |  Mothers  lo 
hold  your  children.  |  Let  no  one  have  a  quarrel  in  his 
heart  with  another.  |  Let  none  stand  in  this  place  in 
playing  the  hypocrite  (hypokrine)  or  with  hypocrisy 
(hypokresis).  |  Be  all  of  you  sincere  {lit.  straight) 
toward  the  Lord  God:  let  us  stand  in  fear  of  God  and  is 
trembling. 

TO   OFFER  (pbospherin) 

65.  Further  (de),  when  these  things  have  been  done, 
let  the  deacons  bring  the  gifts  (doron)  to  the  bishop  at  » 
the  holy  altar  <thysiasterion).  |  And  let  the  presbyters  stand 
on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left  hand  of  the  bishop  in 
silence  (esykhia),  in  the  form  of  disciples  standing  by 
their  master,  |  Let  two  other  deacons  stand  on  either  [60] 
side  of  the  altar  (th.),  with  thin  fans  in  their  hands  made  35 
of  something  thin,  or  feathers  of  peacock,  or  again  (entof) 
thin  stoles  (phakiarion'),  that  they  may  cause  to  By 
away  the  little  flying  creatures,  so  that  they  may  not  go  into 
the  cup  (poterion).  |  And  thus  let  the  Chief  Priest  suppli- 

*  Butler,  And0nt  Coptic  Chtrehu,  toL  iL  p^  149,  note. 


344  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

cate  over  the  Oblation  (prosphora),  that  the  Holy  Spirit 
may  come  upon  it,  |  And  make  the  bread  indeed  Body  of 
the  Christ,  and  (de)  the  cup  (p.)  Blood  of  the  Christ  | 
And  when  he  has  finished  the  prayers  (proseukhe)  which 

5  it  is  right  for  him  to  say,  let  the  bishop  receive  first, 
after  him  the  presbyters,  after  them  the  deacons,  |  And 
thus  all  the  clergy  (klerikos)  according  to  order  (taxis).  I 
And  after  them  let  all  the  people  (1.)  receive.  |  And  (de) 
when  the  bishop  gives,  let  him  say  :  This  is  the  Body  of 

lo  the  Christ,  and  let  him  who  receives  also  answer :  Hamen.  | 
Then  (de)  likewise  also  the  deacon  who  gives  the  cup 
(p.),  let  him  say  :  This  is  the  Blood  of  the  Christ ;  this  is 
the  cup  (p. )  of  life.  |  And  let  him  also  who  receives  answer : 
Hamen.  |  And  let  them  sing  (psallei)  while  they  are  giving, 

15  until  all  have  finished  communicating  (synage).  |  Further 
(de),  when  all  shall  have  received,  and  when  all  the 
women  also  have  received,  and  when  the  singer  (psaltes) 
has  left  off  singing  (psallei),  |  Let  the  deacon  call  out, 
saying :  We  have  all  received  of  the  Body  and  the  precious 

20  Blood  of  the  Christ ;  let  us  [6 1  ]  give  thanks  (eukharistou) 
to  him  because  he  has  made  us  worthy  to  partake 
(metekhe)  of  his  Mysteries  holy  and  immortal,  belonging 
to  the  heavens.  |  And  afterwards  let  the  bishop  pray, 
giving  thanks  for  the  eating  of  the  Body  and  the  drinking 

25  of  the  Blood  of  the  Christ.  |  Further  (de),  when  he  has 
finished  praying,  let  the  deacon  say :  Bend  your  head 
down  to  the  Lord  that  he  may  bless  you.  And  when 
they  have  received  blessing,  let  the  deacon  say  to  them  : 
Go   in  peace.  |  Then   (de)  let  the   presbyters  and  the 

30  deacons  wrap  up  (systelei)  the  little  (pieces)  which  will 
be  left,  being  very  careful  (prosekhe)  not  to  let  much  be 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  345 

over,  that  there  may  not  come  upon  them  very  great 
condemnation  (krima),  like  to  the  sons  of  Aaron  and  the 
sons  of  Helei,  whom  the  Holy  Spirit  smote  (patasse) 
because  they  did  not  keep  themselves  from  despising  the 
sacrifice  (thysia)  of  the  Lord :  |  How  much  more  those  5 
who  will  despise  (kataphronei)  the  Body  and  the  Blood 
of  the  Lord,  thinking  that  it  is  only  bodily  food  (trophe) 
which  they  receive,  and  not  spiritual  |  These  then  (de) 
are  the  things  which  we  command  you,  O  bishops  and 
presbyters  and  deacons,  concerning  the  holy  service  of  10 
the  Mysteries. 

CONCERNING  THE  ORDINATION   (kh.)    OF 
THE  PRESBYTERS  AND  THE  DEACONS 

'5 

66.  But  thou,  O  bishop,  when  thou  ordainest  (kh.)  the 
presbyter,  lay  thy  hand  upon  his  head,  while  all  the 
presbyters  stand  by  and  the  deacons,  pray  and  ordain 
(kh.)  him :  [62]  the  deacon  also  thou  shalt  ordain 
(kh.)  according  to  the  same  ordinance.  |  But  as  for  30 
the  subdeacons  and  the  readers  (a.)  and  the  deacon- 
esses, we  have  already  said  that  it  is  not  right  to  ordain 
(kh.)  them. 

CONCERNING  THE  CONFESSORS  '5 

67.  The  confessor  is  not  ordained    (kh.) ;  for    this 
thing  belongs  to  his  resolution  (gnome)  and  his  endurance 
(hypomone).     For  he  is  worthy  of  great  honour,  as  having 
confessed  the  name  of  Ciod  and  his  Son  before  kings  and  30 
the  heathen  (ethnos).     But  should  there  be  need  (khria) 


346  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

to  make  him  bishop  or  presbyter  or  deacon,  let  him  be 
ordained  (kh.).  If  when  he  has  not  been  ordained  (kh.) 
a  confessor  should  seize  for  himself  the  dignity  (axioma) 
on  account  of  his  confession,  let  him  be  deposed 
5  (kathairou) ;  for  he  is  not  an  (ordained  person),  since  he 
denied  the  commandment  of  the  Christ,  and  he  became 
worse  than  an  unbeliever. 


o  CONCERNING  THE  VIRGINS 

68.  Let  them  not  ordain  (kh.)  the  virgins.     We  have 

no  commandment  (to  do  so)  from  the  Lord.      For  this 

conflict  (agOn)  belongs  to  her  purpose  (prohairesis),  and 

5  it  is  not  in  her  case  because  of  a  despising  of  the  marriage, 

but  for  having  time  for  pious  observances. 


CONCERNING  THE  WIDOWS 

to 

69.  The  widows  shall  not  be  ordained  (kh.).  But  if  it 
is  one  whose  husband  died  a  long  time  ago,  and  she  lived 
soberly,  no  charge  being  found  against  her,  |  and  she  has 
taken  good  care  [63]  of  her  household,  like  Joudith  and 

1$  venerable  Anna,  then  let  them  enrol  (tasse)  her  among 
the  widows  (kherikon).  |  If  indeed  she  has  not  waited 
long  since  her  husband  died,  trust  (pisteue)  her  not,  but 
let  her  be  proved  (dokimaze)  by  time  (khronos).  The 
passions  even  are  wont  to  grow  old  with  the  man  who 

30  will  give  place  for  them  in  himself,  unless  they  are  reined 
in  (khalinou)  with  a  strong  {/ti.  hard)  bridle  (khalinos). 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT 


CONCERNING   THE    EXORCISM    (exorgismos) 

70.  The  exorcists  are  not  ordained  (kh.) ;  for  the 
trial  (athlon)  belongs  to  the  purposeful  (prohairesis)  j 
will,  and  to  the  grace  (kharis)  of  God  and  the  Christ 
Jesus,  I  When  the  Holy  Spirit  rests  on  the  mjin.  For 
he  who  shall  receive  a  grace  of  healing  is  made  manifest 
by  the  revelation  of  God  in  causing  the  grace  (kharis)  of 
God  which  is  in  him  to  shine  upon  all  men.  |  If  then  10 
there  should  be  need  (khria)  for  him  to  become  bishop  or 
presbyter  or  deacon,  let  him  be  ordained  (kh.). 

CONCERNING     BY    HOW    MANY    BISHOPS 
IT  IS  RIGHT  THAT  A  BISHOP  SHOULD  '$ 
BE    ORDAINED   (kh.) 

71.  It  is  right  that  a  bishop  should  be  ordained  (kh.)  by 
three  bishops  or  two.    And  (de)  if  one  bishop  has  ordained 
(kh.)  him,  let  him  be  deposed.  |  But  if  necessity  (anagke)  aa 
obliged  anyone  to  be  ordained    (kh.)    by   one,    because 
many  could  not  assemble  on  account  of  persecution  (diQg- 
mos)  which  was  outside,   or  for  any  other  such   cause 
(aitia),   [64]  let  him   receive   warrant    (psyphos)    from 
many  other  holy  bishops,   permitting  (epeitrepe)   this  as 
(function)  to  him.     The  bishop  blesses,  he  is  not  blessed, 
he  ordains  (kh.),  he  lays  hand  upon  men,  he  offers  the 
Oblation   (prosphora) :    he   receives   Eulogia   from   the 
bishops,  but  not  from  the  presbyters.  |  The  bishop  deposes 
(kathairou)  every  cleigyman  (klerikos)  who  is  worthy  to  30 
be  deposed  (k.) :  but  to  another  bishop  like  himself  it  is 


348  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

impossible  for  him  to  do  this  alone.  |  The  presbyter  also 
blesses,  he  receives  Eulogia  from  a  fellow-presbyter,  and 
from  the  bishop,  and  he  also  gives  to  his  fellow-presbyter, 
he  lays  hand  upon  men:  but  he  does  not  ordain  (kL), 
5  nor  depose  (k.),  he  puts  out  those  who  are  below 
him  :  |  And  (de)  if  there  are  any  worthy  to  be  punished 
(dimorei),  let  him  give  (punishment).  |  The  deacon  does 
not  bless,  nor  does  he  give  Eulogia;  further  (de),  he 
receives  from  the  presbyter  and  the  bishop  :  he  does  not 

lo  baptise,  nor  does  he  offer  the  Oblation :  |  But  when  the 
bishop  or  the  presbyter  offers,  it  is  the  deacon  who  gives 
the  cup  (poterion),  not  as  priest,  but  as  ministering 
(diakonei)  to  the  priests  :  it  is  not  lawful  (exestei)  for  any 
of  the  clergy  (klerikos)  to  do  the  work  of  the  deacon.  |  The 

15  deaconess  does  not  bless,  nor  does  she  any  work  of  those 
which  the  presbyter  [65]  and  deacon  do,  but  she  only 
keeps  the  doors,  and  does  service  (hjrperetei)  to  the 
presbyters  at  the  time  when  the  women  are  to  be  baptised, 
because  this  is  that  which  is  proper  (prepei).  |  The  deacon 

20  shall  put  out  the  subdeacon,  and  reader,  and  singer,  and 
deaconess,  if  the  matter  refers  to  them,  the  presb)rter 
indeed  being  absent.  It  is  not  lawful  (ex.)  for  the  sub- 
deacon  to  put  out  the  reader,  and  the  singer,  and  the 
deaconess  or  layman,  for  they  are  the  ministers  of  the 

25  deacons. 

CONCERNING  THE   FIRST-FRUITS 
(aparkhe)  and  the  tithes 

30  72.  All  first-fruits  (aparkhe)  shall  be  brought  to  the 
bishop  and  the  presbyters  and  the  deacons  for  them  to 


TRAMSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  349 

eat.  I  And  (de)  all  tithes  also  shall  be  taken  for  the  other 
clergy  (klerikos)  to  eat,  and  the  virgins,  and  the  widows, 
and  all  who  are  in  poverty.  For  the  first-fruits  (ap.) 
belong  to  the  priests  alone,  and  those  who  do  service 
(hyp.)  for  them.  S 

CONCERNING  THE  (THINGS)  WHICH  ARE 
OVER  OF  THE  OBLATIONS  (prosphora) 
WHICH  WERE  NOT  OFFERED  AT  THE 
TIME  OF  THE  MYSTERY  « 

73.  The  Eulogies  (eult^a)  which  shall  be  over  at  the 
Mysteries,  which  were  not  offered,  let  the  deacon  divide 
among  the  clergy  (kleros)  according  to  the  decision 
(gnome)  of  the  bishop  and  the  presbyters,  so  that  four  15 
parts  may  be  given  to  the  bishop,  and  three  may  be  given 
to  the  presbyter,  two  may  be  given  to  the  deacon.  |  But 
the  others,  namely,  the  subdeacons,  and  the  readers,  and 
the  singers,  and  the  deaconesses,  that  (one)  part  may  be 
given  to  [66]  each  ;  for  this  is  good  and  acceptable  30 
before  God,  that  each  should  be  honoured  (tima)  accord- 
ing to  his  rank  (axioma).  |  The  Church  is  not  the  school 
of  confusion  but  of  good  order  (taxis). 

CONCERNING     THOSE     WHO     COME     TO  'S 
PARTAKE      (metekhe)     OF      THE      HOLY 
MYSTERIES 

74.  Further  (de),  those  who  will  come  to  partake  (m.) 
of  the  Mysteries  of  godliness,  let  them  first  be  brought  30 
to  the  bishop  or  the  presbyters  by  the  deacons,  |  And  let 


3 so  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

them  be  asked  by  what  cause  (aitia)  and  for  what  thing 
have  ye  come  to  the  words  of  the  Lord :  and  (de)  let 
those  who  bring   them   bear   witness   to   them,    having 
examined  diligently  about  their  deeds. 
s 

CONCERNING   THE  CRAFTS  (tekhnE) 
AND   OCCUPATIONS 

75.  Let    them    diligently   inquire    about    their    life : 

10  whether  they  are  slaves,  and  whether  they  are  free 
(eleutheros).  |  And  if  it  is  a  slave,  let  them  ask  his 
master  to  bear  witness  to  him  :  if  he  should  not  bear 
witness  to  him,  let  them  reject  him,  until  he  is  worthy  of 
having  witness  borne  to  him  by  his  master.  |  If  then  (de) 

15  he  shall  not  bear  witness  to  him,  let  him  not  be  received.  | 
And  if  he  should  bear  witness  to  him,  let  him  be 
received.  |  Further  (de),  if  he  is  the  slave  of  a  heathen 
(hethnikos),  let  him  be  taught  to  please  his  master,  that 
the  word  may  not  be  blasphemed.  |  And  (de)  if  it  is  a 

20  man  who  has  a  wife,  or  a  woman  who  has  a  husband, 
let  them  be  taught  to  be  content  with  each  other.  |  But 
if  they  were  not  joined  [67]  in  marriage,  let  them  be 
taught  not  to  fornicate,  but  to  be  married  according  to 
the  law.  I  And  if  his  master  is  a  believer,  (and)  knows 

25  that  he  fornicates,  and  does  not  give  wife  to  him,  or 
does  not  give  husband  to  his  slave,  let  that  master  be  put 
out.  I  Further  (de),  if  it  is  one  who  hath  a  demon 
(daimOnion),  let  him  indeed  be  taught  piety  (eusebes), 
and    (de)    let    him    not    be    received   to   communicate 

30  (koinonei)  of  the  Mysteries  unless  (eimetei)  he  has  first 
been  made  clean ;   though   (de)   if  death   be   imminent 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  351 

(epeige)  upon  him,  let  him  be  received  |  If  it  is  one  who 
is  a  pander,  either  let  him  leave  off  his  wicked  form  (of 
life)  or  let  him  be  rejected.  |  If  a  harlot  should  come, 
let  her  either  leave  off  (her  sin)  or  let  her  be  rejected,  j 
If  one  who  makes  images  (eidolon)  should  come,  either  5 
let  him  leave  off  or  let  him  be  rejected.  [  If  a  man  or 
woman  who  is  (concerned)  with  the  theatre  (theadron) 
should  come  in,  or  a  charioteer  (eneiokhos)  or  single 
combatant  (monomakhos),  or  one  who  runs  in  the  stadium 
(stadion),  or  a'  professional  (dimosios)  single  combatant  10 
(monomakhion),  or  engaged  at  Olympic  games  (olympi- 
akos),  or  piper  (cholaures),  or  harper  (kitharotos),  |  Or 
singer  to  the  lyre  (lyra),  or  dancing-master  (orkhistes), 
or  huckster  (kapellos),  either  let  them  leave  off  or  let 
them  be  rejected,  j  If  a  soldier  should  come,  let  him  be  15 
taught  not  to  do  violence,  |  Nor  to  slander  anyone  ; 
further  (de),  let  him  be  taught  to  be  satisfied  with  his 
pay  (opsonion)  which  is  given  to  him  :  if  then  (de)  he 
should  be  persuaded  (peithe),  let  him  be  received,  but  if 
he  should  refuse  (antilige),  let  him  be  [68]  rejected.  [  ao 
One  who  does  the  abomination,  namely,  he  who  lies 
with  male,  or  a  lascivious  man,*  or  a  magician  (magos), 
or  a  raiser  of  sedition  (stasiastes),  or  a  charmer,  or  an 
astrologer  (astrologos),  namely,  an  appointer  of  hours, 
or  a  diviner,  or  a  serpent  charmer,  or  a  maker  of  phylac-  as 
teries  (ph.),  or  a  charmer  who  bewitches,  or  an  augur, 
or  he  who  gives  sign  by  any  kind  of  vessel,  or  an 
interpreter  of  the  movements  of  limbs  (melos)  when 
they  twitch,  or  who  avoids  meeting  the  blind  and  lame, 

I  '  Sboushou,'  uncertain  meaning. 


352  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

or  who  watches  for  (paratereis)  birds  calling  or  cats 
(kale),  or  one  who  attends  to  the  words  which  men  say, 
in  order  to  get  a  sign :  let  such  as  these  be  proved 
(dole)  by  time  (khronos) ;  for  this  wickedness  (kakia)  is 
5  very  hard  to  wash  off.  |  If  indeed  they  should  leave  off 
doing  these  things,  let  them  be  received,  but  if  they  will 
not  be  persuaded  (peithe),  let  them  be  rejected  |  A 
concubine  (pallake)  of  an  unbeliever,  if  indeed  she  is  his 
slave  and  devotes  herself  (scholaze)  to  him,  let  her  be 

lo  received.  |  But  if  she  defiles  herself  with  others,  let  her 
be  rejected.  |  But  a  believer  who  has  a  concubine  (palL), 
if  indeed  she  is  a  slave,  let  him  put  her  away,  and  let  him 
marry  according  to  the  law  ;  but  if  she  is  a  freewoman,  let 
him  live  with  her,  and  (de)  if  he  is  not  willing,  let  him 

15  be  rejected  |  One  who  is  a  follower  of  heathen  (hethnos) 
customs,  or  Jewish  fables,  either  let  him  leave  off  or  let 
him  be  rejected.  |  One  who  is  mad  to  gaze  (theorei) 
[69]  in  the  theatre  (th.),  or  the  hunt  (kynekion),  or  in  the 
horse-racings  (hyppikos),  or  in  the  contests(ag6n)(of  men), 

20  either  let  him  leave  off  or  let  him  be  rejected.  |  He  who 
is  appointed  to  become  catechumen,  let  him  be  instructed 
(kathegei)  three  years  :  |  But  if  one  is  diligent  (spoudaios), 
being  eager  for  the  work,  let  him  be  accepted  without 
delay  :  for  it  is   not   the   time   (khr.)   which   is  judged 

25  (krine)  but  the  character  (tropos).  |  And  (de)  he  who 
instructs,  if  he  is  a  layman,  instructing  (paideue)  in  the 
word,  and  being  respectable  (semnos)  in  his  character 
(tropos),  let  him  instruct ;  for  they  shall  all  be  taught  of 
God,  said  the  prophet.  |  Further  (de),  when  the  believing 

30  man  or  woman  rises  early  from  sleep,  before  they 
do   any   work,   let   them   wash   their  hands  and   pray. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  353 

And  (de)  if  there  should  be  the  instruction  (kathegesis) 
of  the  word,  let  them  choose  the  word  of  piety  for  them- 
selves more  than  anything  else.  |  Further  (de),  let  every 
believing  man  or  woman  behave  (prosekhe)  towards  his 
slaves  with  mildness,  according  as  we  have  commanded  s 
you  in  time  past  {Jit.  behind),  and  we  instructed  them 
thus  in  the  Epistles  (epistole).  |  Let  the  slaves  spend  five 
days  doing  work,  but  on  the  sabbath  (sabbaton)  and 
Lord's  day  (kyriake)  let  them  devote  themselves  to  the 
church,  that  they  may  be  instructed  in  piety  (eusebes)  "> 
of  godliness,  |  The  sabbath  (s.)  indeed  because  the  Lord 
rested  on  it  from  finishing  all  the  creation,  |  And  (de)  the 
Lord's  day  (k.)  because  it  is  the  day  of  the  resurrection 
of  the  Lord.  And  (de)  let  them  not  work  also  in  the 
week  (hebdomas)  [70]  of  the  great  Paskha,  and  that  'S 
which  comes  after  it,  which  is  the  festival :  the  one 
indeed  because  the  Lord  was  crucified  in  it,  |  And  (de) 
the  other  because  he  rose  from  the  dead  in  it ;  |  For  it  is 
needful  (khria)  that  they  should  know  by  the  instruction 
who  died  and  rose.  |  And  (de)  let  them  not  work  also  on  •» 
the  Ascension,  because  the  dispensation  (oikonomia)  of 
the  Lord  was  finished  on  that  day.  |  Nor  let  them  work 
on  the  Pentekoste,  because  of  the  coming  (parrousia)  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  which  (if.  the  coming)  came  upon  us 
the  Apostles  and  all  who  believe  in  the  Christ  |  Let  them  as 
not  also  work  on  the  Birthday  of  the  Christ,  because  of 
the  grace  (kharis)  which  was  suddenly  given  to  men  on 
that  day,  by  God  the  Word  (logos)  of  the  Father  being 
bom  of  the  holy  TheodOkos,  Maria  the  virgin,  for  the 
salvation  of  all  the  race  (genos)  of  men.  |  And  (de)  let  30 
them  not  work  also  on  the  festival  of  the  washing,  for 


354  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

that  was  the  day  when  the  Godhead  of  the  Christ  was 
manifested;  the  Father  bore  witness  to  him  at  the 
baptism,  |  And  the  Holy  Spirit  came  upon  him  in  likeness 
of  dove,  and  he  was  manifested  who  bore  witness  to 
S  those  who  stood  by  that  this  is  the  true  God  and  the 
Son  of  God  in  truth.  |  Let  them  not  work  on  the  days  of 
the  Apostles  ;  for  they  were  those  who  became  instructors 
for  you  unto  the  Christ,  and  they  caused  you  to  be  worthy 
to  partake  (metekhe)  [71]  in  the  free  gift  (dOraia)  of  the 

10  Holy  Spirit.  |  Let  them  not  work  on  the  day  of 
Stephanos  the  martyr  and  chief  deacon,  and  the  other 
holy  martyrs,  who  loved  the  Christ  more  than  their  own 
lives.  I  Further  (de),  when  ye  rise  at  the  hour  of  morn- 
ing, pray.  |  Pray  also  at  the  third  hour,  and  the  sixth, 

15  and  the  ninth,  and  at  evening,  and  the  hour  when  the 
cock  will  crow.  |  The  hour  indeed  of  the  light  because 
the  Lord  enlightened  us,  he  caused  the  night  to  pass 
away,  he  brought  to  us  also  the  light  of  the  day.  |  And 
(de)  the  third  because  Pilatos  gave  sentence  (apophasis) 

ao  upon  the  Lord  at  that  hour.  |  And  (de)  the  sixth  because 
the  Christ  was  crucified  (strou)  at  that  hour,  and  his  side 
having  been  pierced  blood  and  water  came  out.  |  And  (de) 
the  ninth  also  because  when  the  Lord  was  crucified  (st.) 
all  the  earth  shook,  trembling  at  the  audacity  (tolmeria) 

25  of  the  godless  Jews ;  it  {lit.  they)  could  not  bear  to  see 
its  (their)  Lord  derided :  but  at  evening  ye  shall  give 
thanks,  because  he  gave  to  you  the  night  for  rest  from 
the  labours  of  the  day.  |  And  (de)  at  the  hour  when  the 
cock  will   crow  ye   shall  pray,    because   (then)  is    pro- 

30  claimed  to  you  the  coming  (parrousia)  of  day,  in  which 
ye  shall  go  to  the  works  of  light  which  ye  will  do.  |  If 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  355 

ye  cjinnot  go  to  the  church  because  of  the  unbelievers,  | 
Thou,  then  (de),  O  bishop,  [72]  shalt  make  the  synaxis 
(plural)  in  thy  house,  that  the  godly  may  not  assemble 
with  the  impious  (asebes) :  for  it  is  not  the  place  (topos) 
which  sanctifies  the  man,  but  it  is  the  m£ui  who  sanctifies  $ 
the  place  (topos).  |  If  the  impious  (asebes)  take 
possession  of  the  place  (topos),  flee  from  it,  because  they 
polluted  it.  I  For  as  the  holy  men  sanctify  the  place 
(topos),  so  also  those  who  are  not  holy  pollute  it  |  If  it  is 
impossible  to  assemble  together  either  in  the  house  or  10 
in  the  church,  let  each  sing  (psallei)  by  himself,  let  him 
read,  let  him  pray,  or  otherwise  when  there  are  with  one 
another  two  or  (e)  three.  |  For  he  said :  Where  two  or 
three  assemble  in  my  name  I  am  with  them  in  their 
midst,  j  Let  not  the  believer  pray  in  the  houses  of  the  15 
catechumens ;  for  it  is  not  right  (dikaion)  that  he  who 
communicates  (koinOnei)  of  the  holy  Mysteries  should 
touch  those  who  do  not  communicate  (koi.),  j  Nor  let  the 
godly  pray  in  the  house  of  the  heretics  (hraitikos).  For 
what  is  the  communion  (koinonia)  of  the  light  with  the  20 
darkness,  or  what  is  the  part  (meris)  of  the  Christ  with 
Belear.  |  If  a  believing  man  or  woman  should  live  with 
a  servant,  either  let  them  be  separated  or  let  them  be 
rejected  from  the  Church. 

CONCERNING  WHAT  ARE  THE  DAYS 
WHICH  IT  IS  RIGHT  TO  OBSERVE  (/ii. 
do)    FOR    THOSE    WHO   HAVE    FALLEN 

ASLEEP 
76.  Let  them  observe  the  third  for  those  who  have  30 
fallen  asleep  with  psalms  (psalmos)  and  prayers,  because 


3S6  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


of  him  who  rose  [7  3]  from  the  dead  after  three  days.  | 
And  let  them  observe  their  seventh,  commemorating 
those  who  are  alive  with  those  who  have  fallen  asleep.  | 
And  (de)  let  them  also  observe  their  month,  on  the 
S  ancient  (arkhaion)  pattern  (typos),  for  thus  the  people  (L) 
mourned  for  M6ys€s.  |  And  let  them  observe  their  year 
for  a  sign  of  their  remembrance,  giving  to  the  poor 
from  the  goods  of  him  who  died,  in  memory  of  him.  | 
But  these  things   we  are  saying  concerning  the  godly 

10  only  :  but  as  for  the  ungodly,  even  if  thou  gavest  all  the 
things  in  the  world  to  the  poor  for  them  thou  wouldst 
not  do  them  any  benefit  (ophelei).  |  For  to  them  to 
whom  God  is  enemy  in  this  world,  he  will  still  be  enemy 
after  they  have  gone  from  this  world  ;  for  there   is  no 

15  iniquity  with  him.  |  The  Lord  is  righteous,  he  loved 
righteousness,  and  also  :  Behold  the  man  and  his  work. 
Further  (de),  if  you  should  be  invited  on  their  days,  eat 
in  comely  fashion  and  fear  of  God,  as  (hos)  having 
power  to    intercede    (presbeue)    for    those   who    have 

ao  departed  from  this  world  :  being  presbyters  and  deacons 
of  the  Christ,  |  Ye  ought  therefore  to  be  sober  (nephe) 
always  by  yourselves  and  with  others,  that  ye  may  be 
able  to  instruct  these  ignorant  ones.  |  For  the  Scripture 
says :  *  These    great   ones  are  wrathful :  let  them    not 

25  drink  wine  lest  they  drink  and  become  forgetful  of  wisdom, 
and  be  unable  to  judge  (krine)  the  right. '^  |  [74]  Wherefore 
(oukoun)  after  God  the  almighty  (pantokrator)  and  his 
beloved  Son  Jesus  the  Christ  and  the  Holy  Spirit  the 
bishops  and  the   presbyters  are  the  great  ones  of  the 


^  Marked  as  quotation  in  MS. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  357 

Church.  I  But  in  saying  these  things  we  are  not  forbidding 
(koly)  them  to  drink,  for  we  have  no  power  to  despise 
what  God  has  made  for  the  cheerfulness  of  men  ;  but  we 
are  commanding  them  not  to  drink  and  be  drunken.  | 
For  the  Scripture  did  not  say  that  they  were  not  to  drink  s 
wine  at  all,  but  what  does  it  say  ?  '  Drink  not  wine,'  it 
says,  '  to  be  drunken.' '  |  And  again  :  '  Thorns  grow  up  in 
the  hand  of  the  drunkard ' :  ^  and  (de)  we  are  not  saying 
it  for  the  clergy  (klerikos)  alone,  but  for  the  lay  (L) 
Christians  also,  they  over  whom  has  been  pronounced  lo 
the  name  of  the  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  |  For  these  words 
were  also  said  for  them  :  '  To  whom  shall  be  woe  ?  And 
to  whom  confusion?  and  to  whom  condemnation?  and 
to  whom  evil  babbling  and  gratuitous  contentions?  or 
whose  eyes  are  bloodshot?  Is  it  not  they  who  wait  long  iS 
at  wine,  and  seek  where  there  may  be  places  of  drink  ? ' ' 

CONCERNING  THOSE  WHO  ARE  PERSE- 
CUTED (diokei)  BECAUSE  OF  THE  FAITH, 
AND  THOSE  WHO  FLEE  TOGETHER  " 
FROM  CITY  TO  CITY  BECAUSE  OF  THE 
FAITH,  SO  THAT  THEY  MAY  HELP 
(boEthei)  THEM  TOGETHER 

77.  Receive  those  who  are   persecuted   (d.)  for  the  *5 
faith,  and  pursued  from  city  to  city,  because  of  [75]  the 
remembrance  of  the  words  of  the  Lord,  knowing  indeed 
that  the  spirit  indeed  is  ready,  but  the   flesh  is  weak 
(asthenes).  |  For  this  cause  they  flee,  and  they  suffer 

'  Marked  as  quotation  in  MS. 


3S8  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

the  spoiling  of  their  goods,  that  they  might  keep  for 
them  the  name  of  the  Christ,  not  having  denied  him. 
Help  (b.)  them  and  give  to  them  according  to  their  need 
(khria),  and  fulfil  the  commandment  (entole)  of  the  Lord. 


5 


78.  This  then  (de)  we  prescribe  (paraggeile)  to  you  all 
in  common,^  that  each  one  should  remain  in  the  order 
(daxis)  which  was  delivered  to  him,  and  tha^  ye  should 
not  transgress  the  measure  and  limit  which  was  limited 

10  to  you  ;  for  they  are  not  ours,  but  they  are  (the  limits) 
of  God  :  I  For  the  Lord  said :  *  He  who  hears  you  is  hear- 
ing me,  and  he  who  despiseth  (athetei)  you  is  despising 
me ;  and  (de)  he  who  despiseth  me  is  despising  him 
who  sent  me.'*     For  if  things  without   life  (apsychon) 

15  which  he  made  keep  their  order  (taxis)  perfect — namely 
the  night  and  the  day,  the  sun  and  the  moon,  the  stars, 
the  elements  (stoikhion),  the  changes  (trope),  namely 
the  variation  of  the  times,  the  months,  the  weeks 
(hebdOmas),  the  hours,  are  subservient  to  the  need  (kh.) 

20  whereunto  he  limited  them,  according  to  what  he  said : 
*  He  set  for  them  a  limit,  they  cannot  pass  over  it'  *  | 
He  says  also  concerning  the  sea :  *  I  have  set  for  it  a 
limit,  and  (de)  I  have  given  bars  to  it  and  gates  (pyle), 
and  (de)  I  have  said  to  it :  Thus  far  shalt  thou  reach, 

25  and  ye  shall  not  pass  it.**  |  If  the  elements  (st.)  [76] 
transgress  not  the  limits  which  God  the  creator 
(dymiourgos)  of  the  universe  defined  (horize)  for 
them,  much  more  (poly  mall5n)  is  it  right  for  you 
yourselves   not  to  dare  (tolma)  to  move  any  of  those 


^  The  Greek  has  '  koina.'  ^  Marked  as  quotation  in  MS. 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  359 

things  which  God  defined  (horize)  for  you  according 
to  his  holy  will.  |  Since  many  have  reckoned  this  to  be 
nothing,  namely  to  confuse  the  orders  (taxis),  and  to  dare 
(t.)  to  change  the  ordination  (khirodonia)  with  which 
they  were  ordained,  grasping  for  themselves  dignities  s 
(axioma)  which  were  not  given  to  them,  |  And  allowing 
(epeitrepe)  themselves  tyrannically  (dyrannos)  to  grant 
(kharize)  to  others  the  things  over  which  they  have  no 
authority  (exousia) ;  |  For  this  cause  they  provoke  God 
like  the  sons  of  Kore  and  Osias  the  king,  who  grasped  "> 
for  themselves  the  chief  priesthood  without  (the  will  of) 
God :  I  For  this  cause  those  indeed  were  burned  with 
fire,  and  (de)  he  also  was  defiled  in  his  forehead.  |  They 
make  the  Christ  Jesus  indignant,  he  who  commanded 
that  these  things  should  be  so ;  and  they  grieve  (lupei)  15 
the  Holy  Spirit,  despising  (athetei)  his  witness.  We  are 
knowing  therefore  now  truly  the  danger  which  is  imminent 
upon  those  who  do  such  works,  and  the  neglect  (amelia) 
which  comes  upon  the  sacrifices  (thysia)  and  the 
eucharists,  |  When  they  are  offered  by  those  who  have  » 
no  right  to  do  so,  who  think  that  the  honour  of  the  [77] 
chief  priesthood,  which  resembles  the  great  {and)  true 
Chief  Priest  Jesus  the  Christ  our  King,  is  a  thing  of 
sport.  ]  For  this  cause  necessity  (anakge)  constrained  us 
to  give  you  this  advice  {synbouleue),  for  henceforth  some  as 
turned  away  after  their  vanity.  Further  (de),  we  say 
that  Moyses  the  servant  of  God,  to  whom  God  spoke 
face  to  face  as  one  speaks  to  his  friend,  who  said  to  him  : 
I  know  thee  above  (para)  all  men,  |  Who  spoke  to  him 
mouth  to  mouth,  by  his  likeness  and  not  by  a  resem-  30 
blance,  not  in  signs  and  in  dreams,  or  (by)  angels,  or  (in) 


36o  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

enigmas  (ainigma),  |  This  one  indeed,  at  the  time  when 
he  commanded  the  law  of  the  Lord,  defined  (hd.) 
what  things  indeed  it  was  right  to  be  done  by  the 
priests,  I  And  (de)   what  also  were  the   works   of  the 

5  levites,  having  separated  that  which  was  proper  (prepei) 

for  each  and  suitable   for  his  service  (litourgia).  |  And 

•  those  things  which  the  chief  priests  were  commanded  to 

do,  it  was  against  the  law  for  the  priests  to  go  to  them.  | 

To  those  which  were  defined  (ho.)  for  the  priests,  the 

lo  levites  approach  not  But  each  was  keeping  himself 
from  overstepping  the  service  which  he  received  ( 
When  anyone  took  upon  him  (epeicheirei)  to  overstep 
the  commission  (paradosis)  which  was  delivered  to  him, 
death  was  the  punishment  (epeitimia) :  and  (de)  this  is 

15  made  very  plain  by  what  happened  to  Saul.  |  [78]  For 
having  thought  to  offer  sacrifice  (thysia)  apart  from  the 
prophet  and  chief  priest  Samouel,  he  brought  upon 
himself  a  great  sin  and  an  everlasting  curse.  |  But  not 
even  did  the  prophet  spare  him  because  of  the  unction 

ao  with  which  he  was  anointed.  |  God  also  showed  to  us  by 
a  great  work,  evident  in  the  things  which  happened  to 
Ozias :  he  delayed  not  in  taking  vengeance  on  him  for 
the  lawlessness  (paranomia)  which  he  committed,  having 
put  him  out  ^  of  the  kingship  also,  because  of  the  chief 

25  priesthood  which  he  coveted  (epithymei).  |  And  (de)  it 
will  be  also  (that)  ye  are  not  ignorant  of  the  things  which 
have  been  defined  |  For  ye  know  that  some  indeed  we 
have  called  Bishop,  |  and  (de)  others.  Presbyter,  and 
others,   Deacon,  with   prayer  and   imposition  of  hand, 


^  LU.  *  made  him  alien  to.' 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  361 

having  taught  them  the  difference  of  the  works  by  the 
difference  of  the  names.  |  For  it  is  not  indeed  our  wont 
that  he  who  is  willing  to  fill  our  hands  should  be  able  to 
receive  from  us  what  he  wished  for,  after  the  fashion  of 
the  priests  of  the  calves,  whom  Jeroboam  made,  those  S 
who  were  despicable  and  reprobate  before  God  and  men.  j 
For  if  there  was  no  law  and  difference  of  order  (taxis) 
it  would  have  sufficed  to  perform  the  whole  (ministration) 
in  one  name.  |  But  having  been  taught  by  the  Lord  a 
succession  (akoulouthia)  of  the  works,  |  For  the  bishops  "> 
indeed  we  assigned  the  chief  priesthood,  |  And  (de) 
the  presbyters  also  [79]  the  things  which  belong  to  the 
priesthood,  I  And  (de)  again  the  deacons  the  service 
(diakonia)  which  is  done  for  them  both  {sc.  bishop  and 
priest) ;  that  the  (meaner)  works  of  the  ministry  might  15 
be  performed  in  a  sacred  (manner).  |  For  neither  is  it 
right  for  the  deacons  to  offer  sacrifice  (thysia),  or  baptise, 
or  to  give  the  Eulogia  to  small  or  great,  |  Nor  for  the 
presbyters  to  ordain  (khirodonei).  For  it  is  not  right 
(dikaion)  to  transfer  the  orders  (daxis),  |  For  God  is  not  ><> 
(the  author)  of  confusion,  so  that  those  of  inferior  order 
should  grasp  for  themselves  in  a  tyrannical  (manner)  (d.) 
the  things  which  belong  to  their  superiors,  fashioning 
(plasse)  for  themselves  a  new  law  unto  their  own 
destruction,  being  ignorant  that  it  is  harder  for  them  to  ^S 
kick  against  the  pricks  than  this.  1  For  such  men  oppose 
not  us  the  bishops,  but  they  are  opposing  the  great  bishop 
of  the  universe  and  the  great  Ghief  Priest,  our  Lord  Jesus 
the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God  and  truly  God.  |  For  Chief 
Priests  and  priests  and  levites  were  appointed  (kathista)  3^ 
by  Moyses  the  prophet  and  the  lover  of  God  |  Again, 


362  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

the  twelve  Apostles  also  were  appointed  by  God  our 
Saviour.  |  And  (de)  by  the  Apostles  we  were  appointed, 
I  Klemes  and  Jakobos,  and  many  others  with  us,  not  to 
mention  each  of  all  (the  rest).  |  We  also  ourselves  all 

S  in  common  appointed  presbyters  and  deacons  and  sub- 
deacons  and  [80]  readers  (anagnostes).  |  The  first,  then, 
now  is  the  true  Chief  Priest,  the  lawgiver  (nomothetes), 
the  Christ,  he  who  did  not  grasp  for  himself  the  honour, 
but  it  was  the  Father  who  appointed   (k.)  him.  |  He 

10  having  become  Chief  Priest  for  us,  and  having  offered 
the  spiritual  sacrifice  (thysia)  to  God  his  Father  before 
he  was  crucified  (strou),  commanded  us  alone  to  do  these 
things.  I  Although  there  were  others  with  us  who  be- 
lieved him  :  but  certainly  (pantos)  it  does  not  belong  to 

15  all  who  believed  him  to  become  priest,  nor  to  be  worthy 
of  the  dignity  (axioma)  of  the  Chief  Priesthood.  |  After 
he  was  taken  up  (analambane),  we,  according  to  the  grace 
which  he  gave  to  us,  and  according  to  his  command, 
offered  a  living,  holy,  bloodless  sacrifice  (thysia),  j  We 

20  (ean)  appointed  bishops  and  presbyters  and  deacons,  their 
number  being  seven.  Among  whom  was  Stephanos  the 
blessed  (makarios)  martyr,  being  not  inferior  to  us  in 
the  love  which  he  had  toward  God :  but  he  displayed 
his  godliness  by  the  faith  and  the  love  (agape)  which 

25  he  had  toward  the  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  so  thoroughly, 
that  he  gave  up  his  life  (psyche)  for  him,  |  When  the 
Jews,  the  murderers  of  the  Lord,  stoned  (and)  killed 
him.  I  But  nevertheless  (homos)  this  man  of  such  great- 
ness, fervent  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  this  so  great  arch- 

30  deacon,  |  [81]  Who  saw  the  gates  of  the  heavens  open, 
and  Jesus  the  Lord  standing  at  the  right  hand  of  God 


TRANSLATION  OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  363 

his  Father,  was  not  shown  forth  in  any  place  as  making 
use  (khro)  of  that  which  was  not  proper  for  the  diaconate 
and  those  who  are  in  it,  (such  as)  to  offer  sacrifice  (thysia), 
or  lay  hand  upon  any ;  but  he  was  keeping  to  the  order 
(daxis)  of  the  diaconate  until  the  end.  j  For  this  is  what  f 
was  proper  (prepei)  for  the  holy  martyr  of  the  Christ 
to  fulfil  his  course,  keeping  his  right  order  (eutaxia).  |  If 
some,  then,  of  you  find  fault  with  Philip  the  deacon  and 
Ananias  the  believing  brother,  because  the  one  indeed 
baptised  the  eunuch,  |  And  (de)  the  other  baptised  me,  lo 
even  Paul,  they  are  ignorant  of  what  we  say.  For  we 
have  said,  that  no  one  grasps  for  himself  the  dignity  (ax.) 
of  the  priesthood,  but  he  receives  it  from  God,  like 
Melkhizedek  and  Jakob  the  Patriarch,  or  he  receives 
it  from  the  chief  priest  like  Aaron,  who  received  it  from  i; 
Moyses.  Wherefore  (oukoun)  Philip  and  Ananias  were 
not  those  who  chose  for  themselves  to  do  those  things  of 
their  own  accord,  but  it  was  the  Christ  who  commissioned 
them,  the  true  Chief  Priest,  God  unto  whom  no  other 
god  can  be  compared.  ao 

Finished  are  the  Canons  (kanon)  of  the  holy  fathers 
the  Apostles.  Chapters  (kephalaion)  78.  Ego  Zakarias 
boethei  amn. 


COLLATION  OF  BRIT.  MUS.  793  =a. 


BRIT.  MUS.  794=b.;  BRIT.  MU&  796-c  ;  BERLIN  396- 
d.;  BERLIN  398  =  6.;  VATICAN  2=v.;  LUDOLrS 
PRINTED  TEXT  =  L 

For  short  notke  of  t)u  MSS,,  sa  Iniroduttiott, 


Page  127,  line  2,  one  God]  om.  L.  5,  All  hail  {lit. 
rejoice  ye),  our  sons]  orn.  b.  7,  Statute  i]  and,  b. ; 
om.  L.  V.  Ludolf  names  these  Canons  (teezaz)  Statuta, 
but  the  word  'azaza'  means  'command,'  and  it  has  been 
translated  '  command '  or  '  bid '  when  occurring  in  the 
text  And  Petros]  b.  has  'and'  before  Matewos,  om. 
before  Petros,  Sem'on,  Endreyas,  Yehuda;  L.  has 
'  and '  before  Matewos.  Petros]  trs.  before  '  Yuhanes,' 
d.  II, of  our  LordJ+'Jesus  Christ,'d.;  +'and  our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,'  continuing,  '  by  his  knowledge : 
and  when  we  were  assembled  together,  he  commanded,' 
b.  14,  to  us]  a.  b.  c.  V. ;  cm.  L.  d.  e.  so  that  every 
one  of  you  may  take  his  (om.  c.)  place]  to  every  one  of 
you  a  place,  b.  16,  Take]  the  Ethiopic  here  renders 
the  pointed  Arabic,  which,  being  unpointed,  can  mean 
'  define ' ;  c.  renders  the  Arabic  '  verily.'  Bishops] 
365 


366  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

bishop,  c.  17,  Presbyters] +*  and  deacons,'  L.  v. 
Deacons]  deacon,  L.  v. 

Page  128,  line  3,  keep  from  all  wickedness]  keep  the 
fast  and  (from)  all  wickedness,  b.  8,  to  him]  om,  L. 
be  glory]  om.  L.  b.  d.  e.  v.  11,  brethren]  fathers,  d 
13,  2]  second,  a.         17,  who  says  what]  who,  b.  18, 

caused]  +  again,  e.  19,  to  speak]  om.  d.  Said] 
pref.  'Statute  third,'  d.  20,  separate]  om.  b.  v.  one  for 
life]  trs.  *  one  for  death,'  etc.,  b.  c.  21,  is  this]  om.  b. 
22,  and  thy  creator  with  all  thy  heart]  om.  b. ;  who 
created  thee  with,  etc.,  L.  c.  d.  e.  v.  23,  because] 
a.  e.  ;  who,  L.  b.  c.  d.  v.  27,  my]  om.  L.  b.  c.  d.  e.  v. 
29i  3]   b.   c.  e.  V. ;   third,  L.  a.  ;   fourth,  d.  30,  do 

I*]  find,  b.  c.  d,  e.  v.  ;  agreeing  with  Arabic. 

Page  129,  line  2,  my  brother]  om.  d.  5,  4]  b.  c.  e 
V.  ;  fourth,  L.  a. ;  fifth,  d.  life]  om.  L.  b.  c.  d.  e.  8, 
soothsayer]  speaker  of  evil,  c.  14,  speaker]  doer,  b. 
think  about  doing  evil]  think  evil  to  do,  b.  18,  and 

thou  shalt  not  be  false]  om.  b.  c.  19,  a  hypocrite  nor] 
om.  v.  22,  but  reprove  him]  om.  b.  c.  23,  and  to 
others  be  merciful]  om.  b.  24,  much]  d.  e.  v.  ;  trs, 
after  '  thyself,'  a. ;  om.  b.  c.  26,  5]  b.  c.  e. ;  fifth,  L. 
a. ;   sixth,   d.  28,  because,  2**]  om.  b.         30,    or  a 

lover  of  fighting]  om.  b.  c.  depraves  and]  om.  b.  c.  d.  e. 
v.     and  causes  to  inherit]  om.  c. 

Page  130,  line  i,  6]  b.  c.  e.  v. ;  sixth,  L.  a.;  seventh, 
d.  7,  finds,  etc.]  a.  d. ;  finds  where  he  may  enter  a 
little,  L.  b.  c.  e.  v.  9,  they  enter]  he  enters,  L.  v.  into 
that  soul]  into  him  and  into  that  soul,  b.  10,  and  it  is 
impossible  for  him]  om.  b.  c.  d.  e.  v.  11,  at  all]  trs. 
after  *  the  man,'  b.  c.  d.  e.     Make]  a.  b. ;  om.  L.  c,  d.  e.  v. 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  367 

1 2,  at  which]  om.  b.  that  ye  may  cool]  a.  d. ;  pref. 
'and,'  L.  b.  c.  e.  v.  13,  anger  after]  a. ;  om.  L.  b.  a 
d.  e.  V.  Satan]  he,  L.  b.  c.  d.  e.  v.  cast]  cause  to  rush, 
c.  14,  deed]  a.  d.  e. ;  snare,  L.  b.  c.  v.  15,  (men) 
cool]  a.  b.  c  ;  ye  cool,  L. ;  he  cools,  d.  e.  16.  their 
anger]  your  anger,  L. ;  e.  altered  the  sufiix.  1 7,  their 
souls]  the  soul,  e.  18,  them]  him,  v.  sin  and]  om.  v. 
they  deride  them]  they  deride  hira,  L.  c.  d.  e.  .v. ;  and 
they  deride  him,  b.  19,  over  the  ruin]  over  him  at  the 
ruin,  b.  their]  his,  L.  b.  v.  21,  7]  b.  c  e.  v. ;  seventh, 
L.  a. ;  eighth,  d.  25,  8]  b.  c.  e.  v. ;  eighth,  L.  a. ; 
ninth,  d.  26,  augur  {lit.  divines  by  a  bird),  because 
all  this]  by  a  bird  which  flies,  for  this,  c.  28,  a 
chooser  of  hours  ....  days]  a. ;  a  chooser  of  days,  L. ; 
of  men,  choosers  of  hours,  etc.,  b.  c.  d.  e. ;  of  men, 
choosers  of  hours,  v.,  omitting  'days.'  31,  all  this 
is  for  thee]  -  in  all  this  is,  L.  b.  c  d.  e. ;  om.  *  for 
thee,'  v. 

Page  131,  line  i,  9]  a.  b.  c  e.  v. ;  ninth,  L. ;  tenth,  d. 
3,  all  this  is  sin,  and  leads]  a. ;  in  all  this  is  that  which 
leads,  L.  b.  c  d.  (e.)  v.  6,  10]  a.  b.  c.  e. ;  11,  d.; 
L.  V.  continue  the  ninth.  7,  leads  a  man]  tends,  c 
8,  or  oppressive]  om.  L.  etc  12,  And  be  good 
....  keep]  humble  and  good,  and  keep,  L.  c.  d.  e.  v. ; 
Because  the  humble  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
and  keep,  b.  17,  to  God]  om.  L.  etc  20,  11]  12, 
d. ;  tenth,  L.  v.  spoke]  speaks,  L.  etc  22,  love] 
honour,  b.  24,  most  high]  om.  h.  etc  35,  God, 
1°]  the  deity,  L.  etc  26,  visit  those]  visit  him  and 
those,  V.  28,  like  them]  om.  i-  etc  honour  them]  a. 
c  ;  honour  him,  L.  b.  d.  e.  v.         30^  sustain  them]  cause 

24 


368  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


him  to  eat,  c  ;  om.  L.  b.  d.  e.  v.  31,  from  them]  from 
him,  L.  etc. 

Page  132,  line  i,  proper]  pref.  *very/  L.  etc  give 
them]  give  him,  L.,  etc  4,  in  the  threshing  floor] 
when  thou  threshest,  c  7,  12]  13,  d, ;  1 1,  L.  v,  O  my 
son]  om.  L.  etc         8,  among  men]  om.  L.  etc  10,  a 

rich  man  in  case  of  his  being  a  sinner]  a  sinner  for  his 
sin,  L.  etc.  12,  with  a  writing]  probably  an  error  of 
the  Ethiopic  translator.  1 3,  with  thee  all  shall  be  equal, 
etc.]  with  him  act  equally,  etc.,  b. ;  with  him  it  is  the 
same,  etc.,  L.  c  d.  (e.) ;  with  thee  it  is  the  same,  etc,  v. 
15,  to  thee  then]  om.  L.  c  d.  e. ;  om.  then,  b.  v.  16, 
Nor,  etc.]  Nor  shalt  thou  be  doubtful  (as)  one  who 
thinkest  when  thou  openest  and  stretchest  forth  thy 
hands,  c  17,  for  that  which  thou  wilt  then  gain] 
om.  L.  etc  18,  when  thou]  and  when,  etc,  v.  19, 
give  it,  and  seek]  he  gave  to  thee,  and  seek,  c  ;  and  be 
gave  to  thee,  and  that  thou  might  seek,  b.  d.  e. ;  that 
which  he  gave  to  thee,  and  that  thou  might  seek,  L. ; 
and  thou  gavest  and  thou  seekest,  v.  21,  when  thou 
gfivest,  etc]  when  thou  givest  and  that  thou  may  receive 
and  know,  L.  b.  d.  e.  v. ;  when  thou  givest,  and  thou 
shalt  not  be  doubtful,  and  know,  c  24,  everything 
.  .  .  .  anything]  everything  whatsoever.  Nor  shalt 
thou  say,  L.  etc  27,  incorruptible  ....  corruptible] 
trs.  d.  30,  13]  14,  d. ;  12,  L.  v.  31,  good]  om. 
b.  V. 

Page  133,  line  i,  all]  them,  L.  etc  4,  doers] 
teachers,  doers,  d  5,  and  teachers  of  yourselves]  om. 
c  7,  nor  diminish  from  it]  om.  L.  And  said  Petros] 
Statute  14.     And,  etc,  c         9,  of  the  words  and]  om.  L. 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  369 

etc.  13,  i4]a.  b.  e. ;  15,  c.  d. ;  13,  L.  v.  the  ordina- 
tion of]  om.  c.  a  Bishop]  Bishops  L.  v.  1 5,  assembly 
about  the  bishop]  a.  c.  d.  e. ;  assembly  ....  bishops, 
L. ;  assembly  of  bishops,  b.  16,  not  even]  om.  v. 
r8,  believers]  L.  a.  d.  e. ;  faithful,  b.  a  21,  them] 
him,  L.  etc.  25,  for  himself]  om.  v.  26,  And 
....  wife]  And  (it  is)  good  that  he  is  without  wife,  L. 
etc.  30,  if  he  should  be,  etc]  if  he  should  be  one  who 
knows  not  the  Scriptures,  L.  d.  e.  v. ;  om.  b.  c 

Page  134,  line  10,  they  who  are  on  the  right]  om.  L. 
etc.  12,  have  authority]  a.  d. ;  are,  L.  b.  c.  e.  v. 
18,  love]  will  (or  counsel),  b.  19,  and  give  assistance] 
in  assistance,  L.  etc.  (d.  adds  '  to  him ').  at  the  altar]  L. 
a. ;  with  the  altar,  b.  c.  d.  e.  v.  23,  quiet]  pref.  'worthy 
and,'  b.  and  not  in  commotion]  that  they  may  not  be  in 
commotion,  b.  and  be  controlled]  being  controlled,  L. 
etc.  26,  15]  a.  b.  e. ;  16,  c  d.;  14,  L.  v.  30,  a 
lover  of  the  good]  om.  c.  31,  every  day]  om.  L.  etc. ; 
the  church]  the  congregation,  L.  etc. 

Page  135,  line  8,  i6j  a.  b.  e. ;  17,  c  d.;  15,  L.  v. 
II,  concerning]  in,  v.  15,  double-tongued  nor]  om.  e. 

16,  and  they  shall  not,  etc.]  they  shall  respect  the 
rich,  c.  18,  they  shall  work  hard]  they  shall  not  work 
hard,  c.  e.  21,  to  him  who  has  nothing]  om.  c.  22, 
giving]  prayer,  b.  all,  1°]  om.  v.  23,  and  modesty] 
L.  leaves  a  space.  24,  purity]  firmness,  L.  etc.  And 
some  of  them  ....  adversaries]  om.  'and  some  they 
shall  console,'  L.  d.  e.  v. ;  om.  'the  revilers,'  L.  &  d.  e. 
v.;  om.  'are  your  adversaries,'  d.;  and  some  of  them 
they  shall  reprove  at  once  and  they  shall  know,  etc.,  c ; 
and  some   of  them   they  shall  reprove,  those  who  arc 


370  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

rejected,  the  blasphemers  are  your  adversaries,  b. ;  om. 
*  those  who'  (2*),  v.  The  omissions  of  b.  and  c.  are 
chiefly  by  homeoteleuton. 

Page  136,  line  i,  17]  a.  b.  e.  ;  18,  c.  d.  ;  16,  L.  v. 
Kefas]  Kefa,  L.  etc.  2,  Three  widows  ....  Two] 
widows  2  .  .  .  .  One,  c.  4,  daily]  for  them,  L.  etc 
5,  of  them]  om.  v.  7,  by  sending  word]  and  she 
shall  forbid,  L.  v.  by  error.  9,  her  work]  om.  v. 
IT,  according  to  the  commandment]  om.  L.  etc  12, 

of  the  sorrowful]  om.  L.  etc  16,  18]  a.  b.  e. ;  19,  c  d ; 
17,  L.  17,  Said  ....  works]  om.  c  homeot.  18, 
with  everyone]  om.  L.  etc  19,  in  every  place]  om. 
*in,'  c  20,  the  poor  and]  om.  L.  etc.  22,  and 
shall  bid  ....  to  them]  and  shall  bid  them  to  give 
alms  to  those  who  have  nothing,  b.  c  24,  (and)]  and, 
L.  etc  26,  of  rest]  of  life  and  rest,  c  28,  19]  a 
b.  e.  ;  20,  c  d. ;  18,  L.  v.  Concerning  the  statute  of 
the]  the  statute  for  the,  b. ;  the  statute  of  the,  L.  d.  c  v. ; 
of  the,  c  29,  people]  person,  b.  v.,  continuing  twice 
with  the  singular  number.         30,  told]  commanded,  d. 

Page  137,  line  2,  them  ....  them]  him  ....  him, 
V.  3,  enmity]  derision,  d. ;  because  ....  you]  om.  b. 
commanded]  taught,  e.  4,  hasten]  carry,  c  e.  6, 
nor  cause  a  neighbour  to  be  hated]  a  neighbour,  L.  etc 
ID,  20]  a.  b.  e.  ;  21,  c  d. ;  19,  L.  v.  Concerning]  om. 
L.  etc.  12,  We  ....  that  it  is]  We  have  already 
ordered  this  concerning  the  Oblation,  this  is,  L.  d.  e.  ▼. ; 
We  have  already  ordered  concerning  the  Oblation  of 
which  it  was  said  this  is,  b.  c  14,  precious]  om.  L. 
etc.  you]  om.  v.  17,  he  said]  om.  v.  25,  21]  a.  b. 
e. ;  22,  c  d. ;  20,  L.  v.     It  is  not  fitting]  pref.  'there  arc 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  37I 

some  who  say,'  L.  etc  27,  with  face]  cm.  L.  etc 
28,  Said]  Statute  23.  Said,  c.  29,  of  the  Mystery, 
om.  L.  etc. 

Page  138,  line  i,  he  gathers  ....  kingdom]  he 
gathers  for  himself  in  the  kingdom,  c ;  he  gathers  .... 
treasure,  and  that  which  he  gathers  for  himself  in  (om.  b. 
e.)  the  kingdom,  L.  b.  d.  e.  v.  3,  who  continues]  om. 
L.  d.  V.  4,  ye  know]  a.  d. ;  om.  L.  b.  c  e.  v.  6, 
keep]  do,  b.  7,  them]  it,  L.  v.  8,  them]  it,  L.  v. 
9,  honour  and]  om.  L.  etc. ;  for  ever,  etc  {lit.  to  age  of 
age)]  a.  c.  d.  e. ;  unto  age  of  age,  b. ;  now  and  unto,  etc., 
L.  II,  22]  a.  b.  e. ;  24,  c  ;  33,  d. ;  21,  L.  v.  12, 
right]  om.  b.  V.  14,  together]  om.  b.  c  19,  help 
them  and]  om.  L.  etc.  20,  him]  them,  b.  c.  3i, 
their  hands]  hand,  L.  etc.  22,  him]  them,  e.  they 
shall]  a.  b.  c.  d. ;  he  shall,  L.  e.  33,  saying]  om.  L. 
etc  34,  Lord]  +  'and  our  Saviour,'  L.  etc.  25,  sees] 
seest,  b.  c.  d. ;  om.  L.  e.  the  humble]  with  the  humble,  b. 
26,  and  who  knew]  who  knows,  L.  etc.  31,  ministers] 
minister,  L.  etc.     creation  of]  om.  c 

Page  i  39,  line  2,  from  thee]  which  is  upon  thee,  L.  v. ; 
which  is  without  thee  and  from  thee,  d.  3,  might] 
+  'of  the  judge,'  L.  etc.  Holy]  om.  L.  etc.  4,  to  us] 
om.  L.  etc.  5,  Apostles,  thy  helpers  in]  thy  Apostles 
of,  L.  etc.  thy  Church]  the  Church,  L.  etc.  6,  in  the 
place]  a.  b.  c. ;  in  each  place,  L.  d.  e.  v.  7,  to  thee 
....  praise]  a.  b.  c. ;  to  thee  be  glory  and  to  thee 
praise,  c. ;  glory  and  praise,  d. ;  om.  L.  9,  send  .... 
servant]  give  upon  thy  servant,  L.  etc.  10,  pontificate] 
episcopate,  L.  etc.  1 1,  serving  thee]  we  serving  thee, 
e. ;  pref.  'praying,'  b. ;  om.  'thee,'  L.  v.         12,  day  and 


372  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

night]  night  and  day,  L.  v.  and  supplicating  ,  ,  .  . 
face]  suppl.  and  see  thy  face,  L.  v.  14,  Churchj  d  e. 
have  full   point     in  the   Holy  Spirit]  pref.   'and/  L; 

b.  has  full  point  after  *  Spirit.'  15,  authority]  +  *  which 
thou  gavest  to  the  Apostles/  c.         16,  and  to  give]  om. 

*  and,'  a. ;  +  *  to '  or  '  for  thee,'  b.  e.  ordination]  plural, 
L.  d.  e.  thy  ordinance]  om.  'thy,'  c.  17,  iniquity] 
sin,  c.  according  ....  Apostles]  om.  c.  18,  he  may 
please  thee]  L.  a. ;  they  may  be  pleasing  to  thee,  b.  c.  d 
e.  19,  with  gentleness  and]  om.  c.  22,  thy]  the, 
L.  V.  24,  the  bishop  ....  ordained]  his  ordination 
the  bishop,  c.         25,  kissing]  venerating  him  because, 

c.  him  who  has  become  a  bishop]  om.  d.  29,  with 
all  ...  .  presbyters]  with  all  (om.  d.)  the  presbyters, 
L.  etc.  thus]  all  thus,  b.  31,  perfectly]  om.  c. ;  may 
he  be]  om.  c. 

Page  i  40,  line  i ,  hearts]  a.  c.  e. ;  heart,  L.  b.  d.  v. 
4,  it  is  meet,  etc.]  a.  d. ;   and  just  it  is  meet,  b. ;   om. 

*  it  is  meet,*  L.  c.  e.  v.  6,  the  bishop]  a.  c. ;  om.  b. ;  trs. 
after  '  as  follows,'  L.  c.  v.  7,  We  give]  Thus  therefore 
we  give,  c.  Lord]  om.  c. ;  God,  L.  v.  9,  thy  Son] 
a.  d. ;  om.  L.  b.  c.  e.  11,  is  from  thee,  by  whom,  etc.] 
is,  and  by  him  thou  madest  for  us  by  thy  will,  and  thou 
sentest,  b.  1 2,  all  things]  for  thee,  c.  thy  Son]  a.  d  ; 
om.  L.  b.  c.  e.  v.  1 3,  who]  a.  c.  d.  e. ;  om.  L.  b.  v. 
1 5,  having  been  born  of  a  Virgin]  om.  L.  etc.  1 6,  thy 
will]  all  thy  will,  d.  Spreading  out]  L.  b.  c, ;  he  spread 
out,  a.  d.  e.  v.  17,  for  suffering]  while  he  suffered, 
L.  etc.         19,  abolish]  a.  b. ;  *open'  or  'unloose,'  L.  c 

d.  e.  V.  22,  his  resurrection]  a.  b.  c  ;  the  resurrection, 
L.  b.  e.  V.     On  that  night  ....  betrayed]  om.  L.  b.  v. 


COLLATION  OP  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  373 

23,  he  took]  he  took  therefore,  b. ;  while  he  takes,  L.  v. 
he  gave  thanks]  + '  therefore,'  d.  24,  to  them]  om.  L. 
etc.  and  eat]  a.  c  ;  om.  '  and,'  L.  b.  d.  e.  v.  25,  for 
the  remission  of  sin]  a  ;  that  sin  might  be  remitted,  d. ; 
om.  L.  b.  c.  e.  v.  26,  having  given  thanks]  om.  L. 
etc.  he  said]  om.  c.  28,  take  and]  om.  L.  etc.  and 
drink]  a.  b. ;  om.  L.  c.  d.  e.  v.  of  it]  om.  L.  etc.  and 
when]  om.  'and,'  L.  v.  make]  ye  shall  make,  L.  etc. 
29,  thy  death  and  thy]  his  ...  .  his,  L.  etc.  30, 
this  cup]  a.  b.  d. ;  the  cup,  L.  c.  e.  v.  31,  made  us 
worthy]  made  worthy  even  us,  b. 

Page  141,  line  I,  We  ....  Lord]  a.  b. ;  om.  '  O  Lord,' 

c.  d. ;  om.  L.  e.  v.  2,  thy  Holy  Spirit]  L.  a.  c  e.  v. ; 
the  H.  S.,  b. ;  the  Holy  Spirit  and  power,  d.  3,  this] 
a.  (b.)  d.  ;  om.  L.  c.  e.  v.  Church] +' change  it  into 
the  Body  and  Blood  of  our  Lord  and  our  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ  to  age  of  age.  Amen,'  b.  The  verb  literally 
'  place '  can  with  double  accusative  imply  converting  one 
thing  into  another.  4,  to  them,  etc]  a.  b.  c. ;  to  all,  L. 
e. ;  to  them,  d.  of  it  that  it  may  be  to  them  for]  a.  c.  d. ; 
om.  b.  e.  V. ;  L.  brackets.  8,  our  Saviour]  om.  L.  etc. 
9,  and  might]  ora.  c  11,  Concerning  the  Oblation  (of 
oil)]  L.  expresses  'of  oil,'  v.  has  'of  oil'  as  heading. 
Oil  he  shall  offer]  the  oil  which  he  offers,  L. ;  and  oil  he 
shall  offer,  b. ;  om.  oil,  d.  1 2,  according  as  the  Obla- 
tion] a.  b.  c.  e. ;  at  the  Oblation,  L.  v. ;  the  Oblation, 

d.  13,  in  that  (/li^.  this)  ordinance]  om. '  that,'b.  14, 
he  shall  ....  words]  om.  c  homeot  15,  but]  ontL 
L.  etc.  words] +' therefore,'  L.  etc.  16,  thus: 
Having  ....  oil]  a.  b.  e. ;  that  (indirect  narration) 
having  sanctified  this  oil,  L.  v. ;  thus :  Having  sanctified, 


374  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

d  ;  As  oil  of  thy  holiness,  c  i6|  to  allj  to  those,  L 
etc.  1 8,  and  in  like  manner]  om«  'and/  L.  etc*  ig^ 
taste]  L.  a.  d.   e.  v. ;  are   baptised,  b.   c.  23,   The 

bishop  shall  say]  a.  d  ;  om.  'shall  say/  L.  v. ;  cm.  'the 
bishop/  c  ;  om.  b.  e.  25,  with  blessing]  as  blessing, 
b.         27,  but]  om.  L.  d  V. 

Page  142,  line  i.  The  deacon  shall  say]  L.  b.  e.  ▼. ; 
Shall  say  the  deacon,  a.  c.  d  And  the  bishop  shall  say] 
om.  L.  etc.  2,  almighty] +  ' we  ask  thee  and  we 
beseech  thee,'  b.  thy]  om.  b.  v.  3,  our]  om.  bi  4, 
Christ] +' through  thy  only  son,'  c.  6,  now]  a.  b; 
om.  L.  c.  d.  e.  v.  7,  The  deacon  shall  say]  L.  b.  d  e. 
V. ;  Shall  say  the  deacon,  a.  c.  d  9,  The  bishop  shall 
say]  a. ;  The  bishop,  c  ;  om.  L.  b.  d  e.  v.  eternal]  om.  c 
of  that]   L.  a.  d.  e.  v. ;  of  the  heart,  b.  c.  d  10^ 

and  that  which  is  open]  a.  b.  c  ;  om.  L.  d.  e.  v.  15, 
protect]  L.  a.  d  V. ;  save,  e. ;  +'and  help,*  b.  c.  17, 
thy  faith]  a.  b.  c  d  ;  om.  'thy,*  L.  e.  v.  18,  and  thy 
fear]  a.  b.  d. ;  om.  '  thy,*  L.  e.  v. ;  om.  c.  20,  now 
and]  om.  v.  21,  the  deacon  shall  say]  L.  b.  e.  v. ; 
shall  say,  etc,  a.  c.  d.  22,  shall  say]  om.  L.  e.  v. 
And  the  people  shall  say]  om.  '  And,'  L.  b.  v.  ;  And 
shall  say,  etc.,  a.  c. ;  the  presbyter  shall  say,  d.  25, 
the  people,  etc.]  L.  b.  e.  v. ;  shall  say,  etc.,  a.  d.  ;  om*  c 
26,  their  hands  for  glorifying]  a. ;  glory,  L.  d.  e.  v. ; 
bread,  c. ;  om.  b.  27,  for]  om.  L.  etc.  28,  their 
sin]  sin,  L.  v. 

Paqe  143,  line  i,  the  holy]  a.  d  ;  thy  holy,  L.  b.  c  c. 
V.  3,  the  people,  etc.]  L.  e.  v. ;  shall  say,  etc.,  a.  b.  d ; 
om.  c  5,  the  presbyter]  L.  a.  d  e.  v. ;  the  priest 
(kahen),  b. ;  the  bishop,  c.     shall  say]  + '  the   Lord  be 


COLLATION  OF  THE  BTHIOPIC  TEXT  375 

with  you  all,'  L.  etc.  (the  prayer  of)]  cm.  L.  etc.  laying 
>  on  of  hand  ....  received]  c  e.  v.  give  this  as  a  rubric, 
c.  adds  'the  Oblation.'  9,  prosper  (them)]  d.  has  full 
point  Archangel]  a.  b.  c. ;  angel,  L.  d.  e.  v.  10, 
in  {it^.  upon)  them]  a. ;  om.  'them,'  L.  etc.  ji,  that 
they  shall  ....  believe  what  is  thine]  thy  power  that 
they  may  believe,  b.  12,  believe] +' grant,'  L.  etc. 
grant,  etc]  d.  puts  '  peace '  before  '  will ' ;  peace  without 
sin  and  anger  grant,  b.  v.  13,  etc]  om.  'spirit'  and 
'might,'  V.  14,  The  people  shall  say :  Amen]  L.  b.  c 
e.  v.;  shall  say,  etc,  a. ;  om.  d.  15,  the  bishop,  etc] 
L.  c  d.  v. ;  shall  say,  etc,  a. ;  om.  '  shall  say,'  b.  e. 
17,  the  people,  etc.]  b.  c  e. ;  shall  say,  etc,  a.  d. ;  om. 
'shall  say,'  L.  v.  iS,  the  deacon,  etc]  L.  b.  e.  v. ; 
shall  say,  etc,  a.  d. ;  om.  c  Go  forth  in  peace]  om.  c 
21,  23]  a  b. ;  22,  L.  d.  e.  v. ;  25,  c.  23,  shall  touch] 
shall  share,  d.  24,  shall  pray]  a.  c ;  he  shall  pray, 
L.  b.  d.  e.  V.         25,  before]  om.  L.  etc 

Page  144,  line  1,  grace]  thy  grace,  c  e.  the  gift]  a. 
/it  '  honour,'  but  the  Coptic  word  means  both,  and  the 
Arabic  rendered  it  '  honour ' ;  counsel,  L.  etc  holiness] 
L.  a.  c  d.  V. ;  presbyterate,  b.  e.  3,  Moses]  them,  c. 
4,  Holy]  a.  d. ;  om.  L.  b.  c  e.  v.  5,  to  thy  servant] 
and  thou  madest,  c  6,  Lord]  my  Lord,  L.  etc. 
7,  grace]  L.  a. ;  om.  b.  c.  d.  e.  v.  spirit  of  thy  favour] 
favour  of  thy  Spirit,  L.  v.  8,  us,  2°]  L.  a.  d.  e.  v. ; 
om.  b.  c  9,  our  heart]  om. '  our,'  L.  etc.  10,  Jesus] 
pref.  '  our  Lord,'  c  1 2,  the  holy]  om.  c.  etc]  c  e. 
omit  'And  all  ...  .  Amen  (2°).'  16,  24]  a.  b. ;  23, 
L.  d.  e. ;  26,  c  17,  the  bishop]  trs.  after  'shall  lay,' 
L.  V.         19,  alone]  a.  V. ;  trs.  after  '  upon  bim,'  b. ;  trs. 


376  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

after  'hand/  L.  c  d.  e.  his  head]  him,  L.  v.  Why 
.  .  .  .  upon  him?]  om.  c.  21,  For  a  sign  it  is  of  this 
thing]  a. ;  om.  *  it  is/  L.  d.  e. ;  For  an  instruction  about 
(in,  V.)  the  office,  b.  v. ;  Why  is  this  work?  c  25,  to 

be]  to  gain  and  to  be,  e.  27,  to  acquire]  that  he  should 
not  acquire,  d.         28,  Spirit]  om.  b. 

Page  145,  line  4,  whereas,  etc.]  and  the  presbyters 
share  with  him  and  they  lay,  etc.,  e.  the  presbyters 
indeed]  Here  is  the  end  of  Ludolf's  printed  text,  which 
he  tells  us  proceeded  no  farther  on  account  of  the  failure 
of  his  copyist  to  continue  the  copy  of  the  manuscript  in 
Rome.  6,  one  (and  the  same)]  a.  c.  d.  v. ;  om.  b.  e 
8,  presbyter]  presbyters,  d  shall  not  do  it]  (is)  he  who 
acquires,  b.  e.  v. ;  om.  d.         9,  to  ordain]  om.  b.  c  d.  v. 

11,  but  the  bishop  ....  ordain]  om.  v.  alone]  om.  d 
and  lay]  a.  c.  d. ;  and  not  lay,  b.  e. ;  and  he  lays  not,  v. 

12,  his  hand]  hand,  v.  13,  deacons]  deacon,  v.  15, 
and  our  Saviour]  om.  c.  e.  v.  1 7,  to  us]  a.  c. ;  for 
thee,  b.  d.  e.  secret]  a.  d. ;  om.  b.  c  e.  v.  18,  and 
grace]  of  thy  grace,  v.  1 9,  to  be  a  deacon]  as  deacon 
to  be,  V.  our]  thy,  b.  etc.  2 1 ,  the  glory  of  thy  name] 
thy  glory  and  to  thy  name,  b.  thus  without]  that 
without,  V.  22,  life]  heart,  d.  having  served,  etc] 
the  exalted  to  serve  the  degrees  of  ordination  he  may 
obtain,  b. ;  they,  having  served  the  degrees  of  ordination, 
the  exalted  he  may  obtain,  c. ;  he,  having  served  the 
degrees  of  ordination,  the  exalted  he  may  obtain,  v. 
23,  priesthood]  om.  b.  etc.  and  thy  honour]  a.  d.  e. ; 
in  thy  counsel,  c. ;  om.  b.  24,  and  glorify  thee]  om. 
*and/  d.  25,  with  him]  om.  b.  v.  and  might]  a.  d. ; 
om.  b.  c.  e.  v.         28,  25]  a.  b. ;  24,  d.  e.  v. ;  27,  c.     the 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOnC  TEXT  377 

name]  om.  d.  v.  29,  our  Lord  Jesus]  om.  b.  etc. 
.  If  .  •  •  .  Christ]  om.  d.  homeot. 

Page  146,  line  3,  the  honour]  the  work,  b.  etc.  4, 
the  honour  of]  that  of,  b.  v.  the  presbyterate]  d.  e.  v. ; 
the  sanctity,  a.  b.  c.  though  he  hath,  etc]  though  he  hath 
the  honour  of  the  bishop  they  shall  lay  hand,  b.  6, 
having  ....  him]  he  shall  lay  hand  upon  him,  v.  10, 
the  name]  om.  v.  11,  was  not  condemned]  was  con- 
demned, b.  etc  14,  deacon]  om.  b.  etc  15,  that  he 
should  mention]  b. ;  that  we,  etc,  a.  etc  16,  that  he 
should  recite]  that  we  should,  etc,  c  18,  according] 
And  according,  v.  proper]  possible,  v.  20,  and  he 
himself  being  good]  it  is  well,  c  22,  praying]  con- 
tinuing to  pray,  c  truly  right]  true  in  right,  b.  etc 
35,  26]  a.  b. ;  28,  c  ;  25,  d.  &  v.  28,  she  shall  be 
ordained]  om.  b.  29,  trusted]  repudiated  (yeman- 
enva),  v. 

Page  147,  line  i,  many]  sixty,  b. ;  om.  v.  3,  by  word 
only  ....  widows]  om.  b.  homeot.  9,  of  all]  all,  b. 
II,  27]  a.  b. ;  29,  c. ;  26,  d.  e.  v.  12,  Subdeacons]  Sub- 
deacon,  v.,  thus  again,  of  healing]  and  healing,  b.  1 3, 
the  bishop]  om.  c.  14,  not]  om.  c  v.  15,  a  virgin] 
virgins,  v.  17,  he  shall  not  ....  subdeacon]  om. 
c.  homeot  18,  of  the  name]  om.  c  19,  As  for, 
etc]  Statute  30.  As  for  the  grace  of  healing,  as  for 
the  prophesying.  They  shall  not  lay  hand  upon  him, 
until  his  deed  make  evident  that  he  is  trustworthy, 
c.  2(^  of  healing]  and  healing,  b.  if  ...  .  healing] 
om.  d.  homeot  zi,  and  prophecy]  with  prophecy,  b. 
V.         25,  28]  a.  b. ;  31,  c. ;  27,  d.  e.  v. 

Page  148,  line  4,  as  to  what  they  are]  a.  c  d. ;  as  to 


378  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


their  life  and  what,  etc.,  b.  e.  5,  or  a  woman  .... 
husband]  om.  b.  etc  6,  slave]  + '  and  if  he  was  a 
slave,'  V.  7,  his  master  was  ....  away]  om.  c 
9,  they  shall  hear,  etc]  a.  c  ;  and  they  know  not  if  there 
was  permission  of  his  master,  b.  d.  e. ;  om.  '  they  shall 
hear  from  him,'  v.  13,  And  if  ...  .  wife]  om.  c 
14,  did  not  live]  lived,  b.  d.  e.  15,  not,  etc.]  that  they 
are  committing  fornication,  b.  18,  the  occupations, 
....  exhortation]  the  occupations  of  those  which  are  to 
those  whom  they  bring,  b. ;  as  b.  + '  to  exhortation,'  d 
e. ;  the  occupations  and  the  occupation  which  are  if  they 
bring  them  to  exhortation,  v.  the  crafts  beside  the 
occupations]  om.  c.  2 1 ,  or  who  divines]  a. ;  or 
a  picture,  b.  d.  e.  v.  or  who  ....  image]  om.  c 
homeot.  23,  the  image]  om.  c.  e.  v.  26,  one] 
three,  b.  30,  or  teachers  ....  teaches]  om.  c ;  or 
teaches  hunting,  om.  d.  e. 

Page  149,  line  i.  And  ....  rejected]  om.  c.  2,  or  a 
guardian  of  the  gods]  a.  v. ;  om.  b.  d.  e.  3,  A  soldier] 
a.  d.  e.  V. ;  if  there  is  a  soldier,  b.  c  4,  and  .... 
him]  om.  b.  etc  8,  29]  a.  b. ;  32,  c  ;  28,  d.  e.  v. 
9,  and  among  the  instructed]  om.  b.  etc.  13,  believer] 
young  believer,  c.  if  they,  etc.]  a.  d.  v. ;  if  he  was  and 
wished  to  be  a  soldier,   b.   e. ;   if  he,  etc.,   c  15, 

adulteress] +  *  or  adulterer,'  c  man,  i**]  a.  c  d.  e.  v. ; 
woman,  b.  man,  2°]  woman,  c  who  does]  om.  c  d.  e. 
V.  1 7,  they  are  alien  and  unclean  and]  om.  v.  alien 
and]  a.  c. ;  om.  b.  d.  e.  18,  to  be  ranked  in]  om.  c  ; 
for  good,  V.  1 9,  And  if  it  was]  om.  b.  etc.  2 1 ,  puts 
on]  sells,  b.  etc  22,  lascivious]  a.  b. ;  for  forearms,  c 
d.  e.  v.         25.  30]  a.  b. ;  33,  c  ;  29,  d.  e.  v.          26,  A 


COLLATION  OF  THK  ETHIOMC  TEXT  379 

man  ....  concubine]  the  concubine  of  a  man,  b.  etc. 
shall  give  up  his  concubine  and]  om.  v.  2j,  of  the 
man]  om.  b.  etc.  29,  beside  him,  they  shall  receive  her 
....  rejected]  a.  {c  d.  e.) ;  he  shall  be  rejected,  b.  (c 
d.  e.).  30,  she  had  been  near  another]  there  was 
another,  c.  d.  e.  v. 

Page  150,  line  1,  or]  and,  v.  z,  to  desist]  a.  b.  c. ; 
om.  d.  e.  v.  6,  31]  a.  b. ;  34,  c ;  30,  d.  e.  v.  9, 
hearing]  om.  d.  10,  knows]  knows  not,  c  conduct] 
om.  b.  V.         14,  32]  a.  b. ;  35,  c  ;  30  again,  d. ;  31,  e.  v. 

17,  their  place]  om.  'their,'  b.  d.  e.  v, ;   one  place,  c. 

18,  shjUl  prayj  om.  c,  continuing  'the  female  believers 
and  fem2de  catechumens  with  the  believers.  And  not 
yet  was  pure  their  kiss.'  20,  one  another]  a. ;  om.  b. 
d.  e.  V.  22,  the  believers]  om.  b,  24,  their  heads] 
om.  d.  25,  pallium  (balinon)]  balinon,  d.  z6, 
sindon  (sandunon)]  a.  c. ;  sanyun,  b. ;  sandun,  d. ;  sandon, 
e. ;  sadunon,  v.  28, 33]  a.  b. ;  36,  c. ;  31,  d. ;  32,  e.  v. 
31,  them]  him,  b. 

Page  151,  line  2,  our  Lord]  God  our  Lord,  c.  9, 
34]  a.  b. ;  37,  c. ;  32,  d. ;  33,  e.  v.  16,  from  the  time] 

b.  c.  V. ;  from  those  who,  a.  d.  e.  17.  on  which  they] 
of  those  who,  d.  and  every  day]  every  day  and,  b.  v. ; 
om  'and,'  c.         29,  baptised] +' with  others,'  b.  e. 

Page  152,  line  i,  Saturday]  sabbath,  b.  c.  d.  e.  v. ; 
Friday,  a.  4,  the  unclean]  all  unclean,  b.  d.  e.  v. 
5,  enter]  return,  d.  7,  they]  b.  etc. ;  He,  a.  the 
Scriptures]  om,  b.  etc  9,  with  them]  from  them,  d. ; 
with,  e.  II,  to  bring]  to  those  who  bring,  c.  14, 
35]  a.  b. ;  38,  c.;  34,  d.  (33  omitted)  e.  v.  15.  at 
baptism]  om.  d.         18,  And  it  shall  be  water]  a.  c  v. ; 


380  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

om.  b.  d.  e.  flows]  flowed,  b.  20,  And  (cm.  d.)  it 
shall  be  thus,  unless]  a.  d.  e.  v.  If  it  was  being-  thus,  ii, 
b. ;  And  it  shall  be  as  thus,  if,  c  of  water]  om.  v.  22. 
naked]  om.  c.  25,  they  ....  them  ....  them]  he 
....  him  ....  him,  v.  speak,  i**  .  .  .  .  cannot]  om. 
c  homeot.  26,  the  word]  om.  b.  v.  27,  instead  of 
them]  om.  d.  one]  a.  d.  e.  v. ;  om.  b.  c.  30,  to  wear] 
om.  b.  d.  e.  31,  when  they  are  baptised]  om.  b.  etc 
of  them  (masc.)]  om.  b.  etc.     shall  go  down]  masc.  plur., 

a.  V. ;  fem.  plur.,  c.  ;  masc  sing.,  b.  d.  e. 

Page  153,  line  3,  which  is  ...  .  name  it  oil]  om.  c 
homeot.         4,  oil]  'kebe'a,*  elsewhere  in  this  passage 

*  zayet.'  5,  Satan]  om.  b.  etc.  which  has  been  exor- 
cised] pure,  which,  etc.,  e.  6,  shall  be]  shall  stand, 
V.         7,  the  oil]  that,  e.     in  which  (Satan)  was  exorcised] 

b.  c.  d.  e.  V. ;  which  was  charmed  in  which  Satan  was 
exorcised,  a.  8,  and  another  ....  having  taken] 
om.  c.  homeot.  1 2,  I  renounce  thee]  b.  c.  d.  e.  v. ; 
Renounce  thee,  a.  13,  works]  work,  b.  v.  And 
when]  om.  e.  14,  the  oil]  that,  c.  15,  him]  thee,  e. 
16,  him  who  shall  be  baptised]  om.  b.  v.  19,  shall  say, 
etc.]  shall  instruct  and  say,  c.  20,  in]  om.  d.  e.  only] 
trs.  after  Saviour,  v.     our  Lord  ....  Saviour]  trs.  after 

*  Christ,'  b.  d.  e.  V. ;  om.  '  our  Lord,*  c  22,  in]  om.  b. 
d.  e.  V.  23,  one  Lord]  in  one  Lord,  c.  24,  and] 
om.  c. 

Page  154,  line  2,  again]  om.  b.  c  v.  in  the  name,  etc.] 
in  one  God,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord,  etc.,  e.  our  Lord] 
a.  b. ;  om.  c.  d.  e.  v.  3,  Christ] +  *  our  Lord,*  b.  c 
d.  V.  our  lady]  om.  b.  etc.  the  virgin]  pref.  *  by  the 
holy,'  c.         7,  by  his  own  will]  om.  c.         8,  salvation] 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  381 

+  'entirely,'  b.  A  e.  v.  9,  heavens]  heaven,  b.  1 1, 
come  to]  cm.  c  1 2,  in]  om.  b.  1 5,  and]  + '  in,'  v. 
16,  he  who  is  baptised]  om.  b.  v.  18,  when  he  has 
come]  as  he  comes,  b.  19,  with  the  mystic  oil  ...  . 
oil]  with  holy  oil,  v.  20,  afterwards]  om.  b.  e.  23, 
God]  O  God,  d.  v.  these]  a.  d.  e.  v. ;  om.  b.  c.  24, 
and  of]  a.  V  ;  for,  b.  c.  d.  e.  26,  and  speed  ....  the 
Son  and  the  Holy  Spirit]  om.  c  homeot.  speed  forth 
and]  a. ;  om.  b.  d.  e.  v.  the  grace]  thy  grace,  d.  e.  of 
the  Holy  Spirit]  om.  b.  etc  27,  serve  thy  will]  a.; 
serve  in  thy  will,  b.  e. ;  serve  thee  in  thy  will,  d.  v.  to 
the  Father]  a.  d ;  to  thee,  O  Father,  b.  e.  v.  29,  unto 
age  of  age]  and  ....  of  age.  Amen,  b.  c.  d.  e. ;  and 
unto  age,  Amen,  v.     the  presbyter]  om.  b.  etc 

Page  155,  line  2,  Christ]  a  d.  v. ;  trs.  after  'Jesus,' 
b.  e.  Jesus]  om.  c-  only]  a.  c  d.  ;  om.  b.  e.  v.  3, 
all]  a.  b. ;  om.  c  d.  e.  v.  5,  With]  pref.  '  The  Lord,' 
b.  etc  6,  after  this  when]  a.  ;  after  this  after,  d.  v. ; 
after  this,  e. ;  after,  b,  c.  7,  all  ...  .  before]  '  they 
have  finished  '  then  om.  c.  homeot.  9,  they  have  done 
the  thing]  a.  c.  d.  v.  ;  they  have  done,  e.  ;  he  has  done, 
b.  10,  they  have  finished  praying]  a.  c  d.  v. ;  they 
have  done  they  shall  first  pray,  b.  e.  14,  and  the 
bread,  etc.]  a.  (c.)  d.  v. ;  om.  b.  e.  ;  and  (that)  may 
become  the  bread,  c.  the  Body  of  our  Lord  Christ]  a. ; 
the  Body  of  Christ,  c  d.  e.  v.  ;  the  Body  and  the  Blood 
of  Christ,  b.  16,  our  Lord]  om.  b.  etc  22,  our 
Lord]  om.  b.  etc.  23,  in  him]  om.  e.  29,  who  is] 
b.  d.  e.  V. ;  this  is,  a.  c     soul]  a.  d  ;  of  soul,  b.  etc 

Page  156,  line  i,  is  what  the  bishop  gives]  a  ;  the 
bishop  shall  give,  b.  d.  e.  v. ;  the  bishop  shall  go  into,  c. 


382  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTL£S 

3,  of  life]  om.  b.  etc.  4,  this  is]  e.  express] 
our  Lord]  om.  b.  etc.  9,  administers^  + '  the 
etc.  God]  a.  d. ;  pref.  '  in '  or  •  with  '  (hA)  h  cM  dr 
14,  he  shall  say]  a.  d. ;  he  says,  v. ;  om.  b.  a  e.  m  6, 
trinity  this  is  therefore  that  it  shall  bej  a.;  aw  7 
this  therefore  shall  be,  b.  e.  ;  he  says  a  trinity  it  U^  i 
(so),  c  ;  a  trinity  this  therefore  beings  d.  v. 
each  one]  om.  *  And/  b.  etc  1 7,  living]  a.  c  4 
going,  b.  e.  20,  to  be  said  openlyj  om.  v. 
finished]  a.  c.  d.  v.  ;  +  *  the  ordinance  of,'  b, ;  +  *i 
ordinance  and,'  e.  23,  as  it  was  written]  a.  d.  v.; 
it  was  finished,  b.  e. ;  om.  c.  24,  is  right]  om.  c ; 
after  *toId,'  d.  25,  and  give  it]  om.  b.  etc.  to 
who  are  communicated]  and  if  they  are  communicated, 
28,  communicated]  pref.  *  first,*  b.  etc.  And  they  shall 
first  receive]  om.  b.  etc. 

Page  157,  line  i  (which)]  b.  etc  express;  obs.  d 
omits  the  negative.  2,  receives]  the  same  word  as 
'  communicated  '  above.  3,  of  the  week  (/zi.  sabbath)] 
om.  c.  if  it  be  possible]  trs.  after  *the  bishop/  b.  etc 
4,  himself  shall  deliver]  trs.  after  '  bread,'  b.  etc  5, 
while  the  deacons  (deacon,  d.),  etc.]  trs.  before  'to  all,* 
b.  etc.  6,  delivered]  om.  c.  13,  36]  a  b. ;  30^  c 
by  error ;  35,  d.  e.  v.  15,  widows  and  virgins]  a.  c 
d.  e. ;  trs.  b.  v.  17,  And  ....  people  fast]  om.  d. 
18,  bishop]  bishops,  c.  ought  not]  ought,  c  21,  no 
one]  om.  negative,  e.  23,  and  they]  who,  fau  etc 
25,  before  they  partake]  om.  c  26,  which]  when  it,  e. 
which  ....  is  bread]  om.  c  homeot.  28,  our  Lord] 
a  d.  e.  V.  ;  God,  b.  ;  om.  c.  Christ]  a.  c  ;  om.  h.  d.  e. 
V.         30,  37]  a  b.  ;  40,  c  ;  36,  d.  e.  v. 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  383 

Page  158,  line  i,  not  proper]  om.  '  not,'  a.  2,  taste 
....  and  eat]  taste  and  they  eat  with  believers,  they 
drink  also  and  they  eat  of  it,  c.         4,  eat]  + '  of  it,'  a. 

6,  The  commandment]  om.  b.  etc.     concerning]  om.  c. 

7,  eating  ....  sitting  down]  om.  v.  homeot  10,  and 
gave  him  all  the  food]  om.  b.  etc.  1 5,  with  regularity] 
a.  d.  V.  ;  with  moderation,  b.  e. ;  om.  c.  19,  the  holy 
ones  may  enter]  may  enter  with  the  holy  ones,  c.  For] 
And,  b.  etc  20,  he  gave]  I  gave,  b.  21,  from 
him]  om.  b.  etc.  23,  but  eat]  a. ;  and  ye  shall  eat,  b.  ; 
eat,  c.  d.  e.  v.  25,  and  he  shall  say]  om.  b.  etc 
27,  your  going]  their  going,  b.  them]  him,  c.  28, 
what  ye  leave,  etc.]  what  ye  leave,  the  holy  ones.  Those 
who  are  invited  shall  rejoice  at  your  coming  as  they  eat, 
c         30,  those  who]  om.  c.         31,  shall  eat]  om.  v. 

Page  159,  line  i,  allows]  comes,  c.  2,  when  (one) 
has  finished]  a.  c.  d.  v.  ;  (one)  having  finished,  b.  e. 
3,  which  are  suitable]  om.  b.  4,  until]  that,  c  d. 
5,  at  the  supper]  om.  b.  c.  d.  e.  6,  either  .... 
deacon]  a.  ;  from  the  presbyter  and  if  not  from  the 
deacon,  b.  (deacons)  d.  (e.)  v. ;  the  presbyter  and  if  not 
the  deacon  therefore,  c  7,  they]  a.  expresses.  8, 
the  catechumens  shall  receive]  om.  c  9,  a  piece,  etc] 
of  blessing,  a  piece  mystic,  d.  10,  any  laity]  om.  b. 
among  them  ....  and]  om.  c  and  the  laity,  etc.]  let 
the  laity  eat  by  themselves  in  silence  and  the  laity  are 
not,  etc.,  c.  12,  eat]+  'one  with  another,'  d.  14, 
of  God]  his  name,  b.  etc.  Because]  om.  c  15,  the 
peoples]  the  people,  c.  16,  quiet]  sober,  b.  d.  e.  v. 
and  pure]  a.  (c.  d.  v.  singular) ;  om.  b.  e.  the  Father]  in 
us,  b.  etc.         1 7,  and  ....  work]  a.  b.  d.  e. ;  we,  c  v. 

25 


384  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

19,  in  time,  etc.]  trs.  after  'sealing/  e.  20,  the  sick] 
the  poor,  c  21,  If]  a.  d  e,  v.  ;  pref.  *And/  b.  c 
23,  of  them,  etc]  a.  c.  ;  b.  d  e,  v.  have  full  point  and 
continue   'And  (om.  v.)  concerning  them,'  etc  26, 

sick]  Add  the  following,  which  was  omitted  by  an  over- 
sight:  'And  let  him  who  is  occupied  with  the  church 
take  (it)  away.     And  if  he  did  not  take  it  away  (on  the 
day  and,  om.  b.  etc)  the  next  day,  having  added  of  that 
which  was  with  him,  he  shall  take  it  away  (he  shall  give, 
V.)  (having  added  he  shall  take  away  from  that  which  was 
with  him,  c  ;  e.  trs.  '  having  added  '  after  *  of  ...  .  him'). 
For  it  remained  (he  put  it  by,  e.)  with  him  as  bread  of 
the  poor.         27,  at]  upon,  b.         30,  all]  om.  c         31, 
the  bishop]  om.  b.  etc     shall  first  (give)  the  salutation] 
a.  d.  v.  ;  shall  first  give  thanks  and  the  salutation,  b.  e. ; 
and  shall  stand  at  the  door,  c 

Page  160,  line  i,  thus]  a.  c  d.  v. ;  om.  b.  e.  all]  a.  d ; 
om.  b.  c  e.  V.  2,  And  ....  say]  om.  b.  etc  3, 
the  people]  om.  b.  etc  6,  not]  om.  c  7,  the  time] 
om.  b.  etc  8,  saying]  om.  v.  9,  Jesus  Christ]  om.  c 
10,  revealing]  a. ;  om.  c;  trs.  after  'light,'  b.  d.  e.  v., 
therefore  the  length  of  a  day  and  having  come]  om.  c 
14,  now]  om.  V.  we  have  not  been  deficient]  om.  c 
1 6,  the,  I '']  om.  b.  only]  om.  b.  etc.  our  ....  Christ] 
a.  c;  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord,  b.  d.  e.  v.  17,  through 
whom  to  thee]  to  whom,  c  with  him]  om.  b.  etc  20^ 
and  virgins]  om.  b.  etc  21,  psalms]  a.;  +'and  the 
virgins,'  c  d.  e.  v.;  'of  the  virgins,'  b.  22,  Presfora] 
Prespora,  e.  23,  in  which]  om.  'in,'  c  24,  And 
....  commanded]  these  words  are  in  red  in  b.  25, 
And  ....  psalm]  these  are  in  black,  as  being  the  words 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  385 

said  by  the  presbyter,  b.  27,  he  shall  say  ....  which 
is  to  say]  he  shall  say  the  whole  psalm  of  Haleluya,  (.,  c) 
while  all  say,  when  (while,  c)  they  recite  the  psalms  all 
(shall  say,  om.  c)  Haleluya,  which  is  to  say,  b.  c.  d.  e.  v. 
29,  most  high]  a.  d.;  om.  b.  c  e.  v. 

Page  161,  Hne  i,  over]  om.  b.  etc.  fragments] 
+ '  there,'  c.  3,  the  believers]  pref.  '  those  who  are,'  b. 
etc.  4,  before  (while,  e.)  they  partake  of  their  own 
bread]  om.  v.  Eucharist]  pref. '  of,'  a.  as]+ '  the  Body,' 
b.  etc.  7,  38]  a.  b.;  41,  c;  37,  d.  e.  v.  8,  the 
bishop]  om.  d.  1 2,  a  word]  om.  b.  etc.  for]  until,  b. 
etc.         13,  (not)]  is  not,  b.  eta         14,  are  present]  om. 

b.  etc.  15,  if  he  is  there]  om.  b.  etc.  16,  the 
presbyter]  om.  c.  18,  their,  etc.]  a.;  the  bread  of 
blessing  a  mystic  portion,  b.;  the  bread  a  mystic  portion, 

c.  d.  e.  V.  19,  only]  amongst  them,  b.  etc.  20, 
laymen]  a.  c.  A;  layman,  b.  e.  v.,  and  singular  afterwards. 
23,  39]  a.  b. ;  42,  c;  38,  d.  e.  v.  24,  there  .... 
desires]  anyone  desires,  b.  etc.  25,  those]  all,  b.  etc. 
27,  because.  .  .  .  invited]  misunderstanding  of  the  Arabic 
'  because  of  the  lot  which  they  drew.'  30,  immedi- 
ately] om.  b.  etc. 

Page  162,  line  i,  40]  a.;  43,  c;  39,  d.  e.  v.;  om.  b. 
4,  our  Lord]  om.  b.  etc.;  b.  adds  'gave'  and  has  full 
point  after  'counsel,'  continuing  'Formerly  he  gave.' 
6,   bringing    near] +' men,'   v.         7,    Son]   om.  b.  eta 

9,  we  have  attained]  a.  v.;  om.  c;  b.  d.  e.  have  full  point 

10,  (men)]  a.  c;  those  who,  b.  d.  e.  v.  16,  as  they 
know] +' and  keep,'  b.;  om.  c  18,  in]  om.  b.  etc. 
20,  shall  do  thus,  etc]  thus,  etc.,  b.;  as  there  are 
baptisteries,  c;  om.  d.        21,  into  the  baptistery]  om.  d.; 


386  STATUTES   OF  THE  APOSTLES 

into  baptism,  v.  22,  their  names]  the  names,  d.  e.  v. 
first]  om.  b.  etc.  23,  if  they  read  the  Scriptures]  om.t 
25,  for  him  (them,  e.)  .  .  .  .  sponsor]  om.    c.  27,  for 

it]  trs.  before  '  at,'  v.  28,  they  shall  cause  to  follow". 
a.  c.  d. ;  they  shall  follow,  b.  e ;  is  proper,  v.  therefore] 
while,  a.         29,  saying]  om.  b.  etc 

Page  163,  line  2,  merciful,  2**]  om.  b.  etc  3,  and 
the  fountain]  om.  c.  4,  was  not  into  that  which]  om.  c 
5,  each]  d.  e.  V. ;  om.  a.  (b.)  c.  which  was  made]  which 
was  left,  c.  6,  remove  it,  etc.]  take  it  away  and  re- 
move it,  b.  etc.     Now,  Lord remove]  om.  b.  etc 

7,  this  thy  servant]  this  soul,  b.*^*  etc.     from  wickedness] 

a.  b. ;  pref.  *  O  Lord,'  c  d.  e.  v.  8,  goodness]  +  *  0 
Lord,*  b.  that  he  may  inherit]  om.  b.  etc.  sonship] 
and  doctrine,  b.         10,  may  abide  in  thy  obedience]  om. 

b.  etc.  1 1 ,  only]  om.  b.  e.  our  Lord  ....  might] 
om.  b.  etc.  14,  The  prayer]  om.  d.  v.  And  again] 
om.  b.  etc.  18,  their  mind]  a.  ;  our  mind,  d.  ;  the 
mind,  v.  ;  their  heart,  the  mind,  b.  ;  their  heart,  c.  ;  their 
hearts,  e.  23,  And  the  bishop  shall  say]  om.  b.  etc 
God] +*  our  God,'  c.  27,  thought]  hearts,  c.  law] 
+  *and  thine  ordinances,'  c.  28,  knowledge]  that 
they  may  know,  b.  etc.     which  is  seemly]  of  spirit,  b. 

Page  164,  line  i,  sin]  sins,  c  2,  the  temple]  a.; 
desirable,  b.  ;  desire,  c.  d.  e.  v.  Holy  Spirit]  the  holy 
ones,  c.  our  Lord]  om.  b.  etc.  3,  Christ]  thy  Son,  c 
with  the  Holy  Spirit]  om.  c.  4,  now  and  always]  for 
always,  c  d.  e.  v.  6,  water]  wine,  b.  7,  of  those 
....  baptised]  om.  d.  8,  my]  om.  c.  Jesus  Christ] 
a.  c. ;  trs.  after  '  man,'  b.  d.  e.  v.  9,  thou]  a.  expresses. 
and]  om.  v.         11,  thy]  om.  v.         12,  Thou]  om.  b.  etc 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  387 

every]  om.  b.  etc  i6,  to  become]  om.  b.  etc.  safety] 
medicine,  b.  etc.  i8,  to  us]  om.  b.  revelation]  for- 
giveness, d.  19,  and  sanctification]  om.  e.  And,  etc.] 
Through  thee  be  glory  to  thy,  b.  etc  ao,  always] 
+  'and  for  always,'  d.  e.  v.  21,  And]  c  ;  +' there- 
fore,' a.  etc.  24,  the  holy,  etc.]  b.  d.  e.  v. ;  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  and  that  it  may  be  to  him  for  atonement,  by 
eating,  a. ;  of  the  Holy  Spirit  the  atonement  of  grace,  by 
eating,  c.  At]  a.  c  ;  And  then  at,  b.  e. ;  Then  at,  d.  v. 
27,  imparted]  anointed,  c  that]  a.  (v.);  om.  b.  c.  d.  e. 
When]  a.  c.  d.  e.  v. ;  and  then,  b. 

Page  165,  line  i,  hands]  om.  b.  etc  2,  towards  the 
east]  a. ;  towards  the  life,  b. ;  om.  c.  d.  e.  v.  and  if 
....  speak]  and  if  he  has  (full)  stature,  b.  etc  5,  shall 
speak]  om.  b.  etc  6,  or  ...  .  women]  om.  c.  7, 
And] +  *  therefore,*  b.  v.  in  the  water]  om.  b.  etc 
8,  thus]  this  probably  refers  to  the  renunciation  given 
before.  12,   mortal]    trs.    before    'immortal,'    b.    etc 

16,  up]  om.  b.  etc.  thy]  om.  c  17,  those]  a.;  him, 
b.   c.  d.  e. ;   each,  v.  18,  work,    i",  etc.]    work    that 

they  may  become,  b.  etc.  19,  thy  holy  name]  the 
Holy  Spirit,  b.  20,  them]  om.  b.  etc  by  the  Holy 
Spirit]  om.  c.  21,  our  Lord]  om.  b.  etc  Christ]  om.  d. 
thy  Son]  om.  b.  etc.  22,  through,  etc]  with  whom  to 
thee,  b.  etc.  23,  now  and  always  and]  om.  b.  etc 
for  ever]  pref  'for  always  and,'  b.  etc,  except  c  e.  om. 
'  and.'  25,  Eternal]  om.  b.  c.  27,  Holy  .... 
power]  a. ;  Holy  Spirit,  b. ;  holy  power,  c  d.  e.  v.  28, 
sanctify]  trs.  before  '  change,'  c  d.  e.  v.  and  set  it]  om. 
b.  etc.  all  ...  .  against]  om.  c  homeot  30,  both 
....  or]  om.  c.        31,  cause  it]  om.  b.  etc 


388  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

Page  i  66,  line  i ,  of  it  in  faith  and]  a.  it,  b.  c  ;  om.  c 
e.  V.  2,  beloved]  om.  b.  etc  3,  vrith  the  Holf 
Spirit]  om.  b.  now  and  always  and]  om.  c.  v.  4,  dx 
prayer]  om.  v.  7,  of  sequence]  a.  c  d.  v.  ;  of  pro- 
priety, b.  e.  8,  prayer]  a.  c.  ;  +  *  twenty/  b.  d  e  f . 
12,  that  ....  live]  living,  c.  13,  by]  by  the  power 
of,  c  the  enemy]  trs.  before  'Satan/  b.  15, 
only]  om.  c.  16,  to  judge  the  world]  as  judge,  c 
17,  but  ....  world]  om.  d.  18,  birth]  kind,  c.  into, 
etc.]  in  this  water,  c.  20,  I  call  upon  thee]  om.  d. 
21,  mingledst  and  unitedst]  made  one,  v."*-  with]  and, 
b.  etc.  24,  to  dwell  (in  it)]  +  '  as  movement  (of  it),*c 
up]  om.    b.   etc         26,  and  also  Spirit]  om.   c.  28, 

and  purify]  pref.  *  sanctify  them,'  a.  29,  instruct  them] 
om.  e.  30,  our  Lord]  om.  b.  etc.  31,  May  .  .  .  . 
come  upon  them]  om.  d.  homeot. 

Page  167,  line  3,  to  come]  a.  c.  v. ;   and   will   come, 

b.  e.  4,  they  may  rise]  a. ;  they  may  take  away  (or 
raise  up),  c.  ;  they  may  take,  b.  d.  e.  v.  5,  and  may, 
etc.]  remove,  etc.,  b.  etc.  having  been  expelled]  +  *thc 
unclean  Spirit,'  b.         6,  according  ....  promise]  b.*** 

c.  d.  e.  V.  ;  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  thy  infallible  promise, 
a.  7,  with  ....  Spirit]  om.  c  9,  now  and 
always  ....  Amen]  om.  c. ;  om.  *  and  always,'  d.  e.  v. 
ID,  infinite]  pref.  *for  always,'  b.  d.  e.  v.  Amen] 
om.  d.  e.  12,  of  him  ....  baptised]  om.  b.  etc. 
17,  from  the  water]  om.  c.  d.  e.  v.  22,  in]  +  *  the 
river  and  in '  (baber),  b.  23,  he  who  baptises]  om.  b. 
etc.  shall  pour]  a.  d.  v. ;  shall  stand  and  pour,  c  ;  thou 
shalt  pour,  b.  e.  26,  once  and  not  ....  all]  and  the 
others  also,  they  who  are  with  them  likewise,  a. ;   om. 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  389 

'not,'  c.  28,  with  the  baptismal  (robe)]  om.  b.  eta 
29,  for  the  men]  om.  b.  eta 

Page  168,  line  3,  The  prayer]  om.  b.  etc.  the  holy 
....  chrism]  the  oil,  b.  etc.  6,  our  Lord]  the  Lord,  b. 
etc.  !0,  therewith]  among  them,  b.  11,  and  safety] 
om.  b.  etc.  15,  through  the  name  ....  (be)]  om. 
c.  homeot  16,  Christ]  om.  v.  17,  now]  a  d. ; 
pref.  '  before  the  age,'  b.  c.  e.  v.  18,  his  face]  '  him ' 
or  '  it,'  b.  eta  20,  God,  i']  om.  d  e.  v.  my  Lord] 
om.  c.  21,  thy  great  name]  om.  c. ;  om.  'thy  name,' 
b.  d.  e.  V.  22,  and  the  Holy  Spirit]  and  holy,  b.  eta 
The  real  reading  probably  was,  'thy  great,  and  all- 
powerful,  and  holy,  and  universal  name.'  33,  and  we 
beseech  thee]  om.  b.  etc.  24,  and  power]  a.  v.  ;  of 
power,  b.  a  d.  e.  25,  work  of]  om.  b.  eta  27, 
now  and  always  and]  a.  b. ;  om.  a  d.  e.  v.  28,  the 
holy  oil]  om.  v, ;  om.  '  oil,'  b.  c.  d.  e. 

Page  169,  line  1,  and  say]  om.  b.  etc.  2,  the  people] 
om.  b.  etc.  shall  say]  om.  d.  v.  3,  shall  say]  om.  v. 
4,  hearts]  heart,  d.  e.  v.  stand  by]  om.  e.  shall 
say]  om.  d.  v.  We  have  them]  om.  a.  our  God]  a.  c. ; 
om.  b.  d.  e.  V.  5,  shall  say]  om.  v.  7,  it  is  meet] 
om.  b.  etc  10,  invocation]  pref.  '  the  prayer  of,'  d. 
II,  and  say]  om.  b.  etc.  it  is]  om.  ad.  13,  and 
worship  thee]  om.  b.  eta  14,  mercy]  blessing,  b.  e. 
V. ;  thy  blessing,  a  d.  16,  Christ]  om.  a  17,  but 
to  save  the  world]  om.  c.  homeoL  and  gather  .... 
assemble]  and  we  therefore  (om.  a)  can  gather  together 
our  dispersion,  b.  eta  19,  the  one  true  God]  through 
thy  one  true  Son,  a  our  Lord]  trs.  after  *  Christ,'  b.  eta 
23,    upon     it  ...  .  Spirit]    om.     c.     homeot.  25, 


390  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

every  person  of]  om.  b.  etc.         26,    and    forgivencal 
om.   b.  etc         27,  and  may  ....  them]    om.  b.  m 
28,  and  a  holy  seal  of  unction]  and  may  it  seal  tbc&j 
with  a  seal  of  unction,  b.  etc.         31,  and  our  Saviour  | 
om.  c. 

Page    170,  line   3,   and  unto  the  agej   om.   b.   etc 

4,  with  which,  etc]  of  him  who  shall  be  baptised,  d.  v. 

5,  on  ...  .  anointing]  om.   c         6,   My    Lord]  pret 
*God,'  b.         7,    God,    2**]    Lord,    b.    etc.  8,  from 
....  Prophets]  a.  e.  v. ;  before  the  Prophets,  b.  c  4 
10,  our  Lord]  om.  b.  etc         11,  holy]  om.   b.  c  d  e. 
and  bless  it]  that  it  may  flow  down,  b.  c  d.   v.  ;  that  h 
may  live,  e.         14,  and  cause  it  to  destroy]  therefore 
(om.   c)   I  consecrate  {/it.  charm)  that  it  may  destroy, 
b.  c.  d.  V. ;  therefore  consecrate  that  it  may,  e.  15, 
evil  and]  om.  b.         16,  remove]  fly,  b.  etc           17,  be 
sanctified]  sanctify,  b.         24,  and  might]  +  *  from  before 
the  age,'  b.  etc.     now  ....  ever]  om.  c     and  always] 
+  *  and  to  generation  of  generation  for  always,*  b.  d.  e.  v. 
26,    baptised]  intelligent,  b.   etc.         27,  saying-j  om.  c 
The  oil  of]  a.  c. ;  the  holy  unction,  b.  d.  e.  ;    I  anoint 
thee  with,  v.         30,  and  say]  om.  d.  v.         31,   (this  is 
done)  by  him]  om.  b. 

Page  171,  line  i,  by]  om.  v.  2,  virgin] +  *  he  shall 
do  thus,'  a.  6,  their  heads]  om.  e.  7,  look  down] 
om.  c.         10,  the  power  of  the  word]  om.  b.  etc  11, 

sure]  om.  c.  15,  and  power]  om.  b.  etc  might] 
a.  c;  +*with  the  Holy  Spirit,'  b.  d.  e.  v.  now  and 
always] +  ' for  always,'  c  d.  e.  v.  16,  Concerning] 
om.  a.  c.  the  oil]  a.  b.  d. ;  the  unction,  c  e.  v.  16, 
chrism] +  *  holy,'  b.         18,  several]  om.   b.         21,    they 


COLLATION  or  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  391 

who  Stand  by]  those  who  are  present,  b.  c. ;  he  who  is 
present,  d.  e.  v.  22,  shall  say]  om.  throughout,  d.  e.  v. 
22,  who  are  present]  om.  c.  24,  our  God]  om.  b. 
etc.  26,  it  is  meet]  om.  b.  etc  29,  in  front]  om. 
b.  etc  carefully]  justly,  b.  etc.  30,  say]  make,  b.  etc 
of  the  coming]  rubric  down  to  'just,'  b. ;  rubric  to  'thus,' 
c  e. ;  repeats  '  the  coming '  as  rubric  and  down  to  '  thus,' 
V.  31,  the  bishop]  om.b.  etc  saying]  om.  b.  etc  just] 
+  'it  is  meet,'  c. 

Page  172,  line  3,  thou  savedst,  etc.]  thou  wiliest  not 
that  the  world  should  be  lost,  c.         4,  Son]  pref.  'only,' 

d.  V.  our  Lord]  trs.  before  '  Jesus,'  b.  etc.  5,  but  .... 
world]  om.  v, ;  rather  (dafimu),  etc. ,  b.  c.  d.  e.  him]  + '  and 
{om.  b.)  we  are  saved,'  b.  etc  6,  and  he,  etc.]  our  dis- 
persion we  gathered  together,  b.  etc.  7,  know]  + '  thee,' 
b.  etc  that  thou]om.  b.  etc.  8,  Christ  our  Lord]  om.  c 
12,  and  our  Saviour]  om.  c  13,  of  holiness,  a,  d.  e. 
(c)  V. ;  om.  b.  14,  of  it]  om.  b.  etc  19,  our 
Saviour]  a.  v. ;  trs.  after  '  Christ,'  b.  d.  e. ;  om.  c  20, 
glory]  a.  c. ;  pref. '  praise,'  e.  v. ;  +  'and  praise,'  b.  d.  might] 
a.  c  ;  + '  from  before  the  age  and,'  b.  d.  e.  v.  21,  into 
his  face]  om.  b.  etc.  22,  him]  them,  b.  etc.  23,  I 
give  to  thee]  om.  b.  etc  holy]  om.  d.  28,  baptismal 
(robe)]  om.  b.  etc         31,  elders]  a.  b. ;  sponsors,  c  d. 

e.  V.     likewise]  om.  b.  etc. 

Page  173,  line  i,  first]  trs.  after  'Satan,'  b.  saying 
....  Satan]  om.  d.  homeoL  3,  and  all  thy  work] 
om.  c  5,  saying]  om.  c  e.  v.  6,  above  all]  om.  b. 
etc.  8,  and  in  the  resurrection  of  the  body]  a.  c.  e.  v. ; 
trs.  after  'Church,'  b.  d.  9,  assembly]  om.  b.  etc 
10,  he  shall  say  thus]  om.  c         14,  Jesus  Christ]  cm.  c. 


392  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

15,  and  our  Saviour]  om.  b.  etc.  and  in  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  body]  a.  c  d  e.  v. ;  trs.  after  '  Church/  b. 
17,  Apostolic]    om.    c.      And  ....  believe  .'^]    om.    c 

20,  he  shall  speak]  om.  v.  21,  dumb  person  or]  om. 
c.  23,  that  child  or  instead  of]  om.  e.  homeot  24, 
word] +  *  or  instead  of  that  dumb  person,'  e.  v.  26, 
he  says]  om.  b.  etc.  27,  My]  pref.  *  God/  b.  28,  and 
our  Saviour]  om.  v.  30,  to  thee,  etc.]  therefore  the 
hardness  of  their  heart  and  their  flesh  they  subdued  from 
heaven  (omitting  *  look  down '),  c. 

Page  174,  line  4,  heavenly  (/eV.  that  which  is  in  the 
heavens)],  a.  c.  d  v. ;  of  the  heavens,  e.  ;  the  heavens, 
b.       for    them]    om.     b.  5,     these    persons]    their 

anathemas,  b.  etc.  that  they  may]  and  let  them,  b.  etc. 
thy]  om.  b.  etc  7,  in]  a.  d. ;  to,  b.  c.  e.  v.  8, 
through]  to,  c.  thee] +  *  with  him,'  d  9,  always] 
+  *and  for  always,'  c  v.  11,  anoint]  a  c  ;  shall  be 
anointed,  b.  ;  om.  d  e.  v.     his  heart]  om.  b.  etc  1 3, 

unction  of]  om.  d.  holy]  om.  v.  15,  firmly]  om.  d 
in  the  good]  of  the  good,  v.  olive  tree  ....  good] 
om.   c   homeot         19,   cut    oflf]  remembered    (zeker). 

21,  converted]  changed,  b.  etc  25,  always]  for  always, 
c  e.  v.  27,  and  as  he  baptises  him]  om.  v.  28,  he 
shall  look]  om.  b.  etc.  29,  The  presbyter  shall  first 
baptise  the  children]  a. ;  baptises  the  (female,  e.) 
children  first  the  presbyter,  b.  e.  v. ;  baptises  the 
presbyter  the  children  first,  c  ;  baptises  first  the  presbyter, 
d  (omitting  '  the  children '). 

Page  175,  line  2,  N  or  M]  om.  b.  etc.  14,  and  our 
Saviour]  om.  v.  15,  us]  om.  v.  16,  Holy]  om.  b. 
etc.         17,    which,  etc]  a.  c ;   who  grantedst  to  them 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  39} 

forgiveness,  b.  d.  e.  v.  1 8,  now]  a  ;  from  with  thee, 
b. ;  to  thee,  d.  e.  v. ;  cm.  c.  19,  Spirit] +  ' and 
power,'  b.  therefore]  om.  c.  20,  thy]  om.  b.  etc 
21,  thy]  om.  b.  etc.  through]  of,  b.  etc.  23,  might] 
trs.  before  'honour,'  b.  d.  24,  now  and  always]  for 
always,  d.  e.  v.         31,  with  ....  robe]  om.  b.  etc. 

Page  176,  line  i,  And ....  Presphora]  om.  c 
3,  of  oil]  om.  V.  4,  washing]  bread,  c  7,  invisible] 
a.  c.  e. ;  visible,  d.  v. ;  om.  b.  the  fruit,  etc]  a.  d.  e.  v. ;  this 
fruit,  c. ;  this  fruit  of  this,  etc,  b.  8,  thou  hast  given] 
give,  b.  9,  become] +' safety,'  b.  13,  of  sin] 
om.  b.  etc  15,    Lord] +' our    Saviour,'  c  e.  17, 

from  ....  age]  om.  b.  8,  therefore]  a. ;  trs.  after 
'  Before,'  d.  v. ;  after  '  thrice,'  b.  c  e.  20,  of  three 
kinds]  a. ;  three,  b. ;  three  and  three,  d.'' ;  three  in 
three,  c  e.  v.  22,  shall  say]  om.  d.  e.  v.  23,  Those 
....  depart]  om.  b.  etc.  25,  And ....  within]  a. ;  None 
of  the  catechumens  shall  be  here  within,  b. ;  None  of  the 
catechumens  here  within,  c  d.  e.  v.  subdeacon]  a.  b. ;  sub- 
deacons,  c  d.  e.  V.  shall  open]  make  fast,  b.  d.  e. ;  om. 
c.  v.,  which  has  'the  doors,  subdeacons.'  26,  and  further] 
om.  d.  v,  he  shall  say]  a.  e.;  thedeaconsshallcausetocome 
near  and  he  shall  say,  b. ;  cause  to  come  near,  deacons, 
c.  d. ;  cause  to  come  near,  cause  to  come  near,  deacons,  v. 
Those,  etc.]  a.  b.  ;  and  further  he  shall  say,  Those,  etc, 
c.  V. ;  om.  d.  e.  28,  shall  say]  om.  d.  v.  with  a  kiss  of 
holiness]  om.  b.  etc  29,  And,  etc]  And,  before  they 
receive,  the  archdeaccm  alone  shall  say,  b.  (d.  e.);  and 
when  they  receive  and  shall  say  alone  the  archdeacon,  c  ; 
and  when  they  receive  severally,  the  archdeacon  shall 


394  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


Page  177,  line  i,  Shut]  a. ;  make  fast,  b.  ;  cm.  c  d.  e. 
V.  2,  O  subdeacons]  a. ;  subdeacon,  d.  e. ;  cause  to 
come  near,  deacons,  c. ;  om.  b. ;  subdeacon.  Cause  to 
come  near,  deacons,  v.  This,  etc]  a. ;  This  indeed  is 
the  marriage  feast,  b.  etc.  6,  adversary]  who  does  not 
offer,  b.  here]  om.  v.  twice.  7,  baptism]  om.  b.  etc 
8,  and  the  milk]  of  the  milk,  b.  etc.  1 2,  the  bishop] 
om.  b.  etc  15,  Jesus]  om.  b.  17,  to  our]  om.  b. 
etc,  which  have  not  full  point  after  *  race.'  21,  of  the 
consolations]  a.  c  d.  e.  v.^* ;  and  by  the  consolation,  b. 
22,  hast  given]  om.  b.  etc.  to  us]  om.  c  23,  food]  a. 
c ;  for  food,  b.  d  e.  v.  (b.  has  full  point),  and  nourish- 
ment] and  in  nourishment,  c  d.  e.  v. ;  and  in  washing,  b. 
27,  by  her  breasts]  om.  b.  etc.  29,  that  it  may  become] 
om.  c. 

Page  178,  line  i,  fellowship]  bread,  e.  washing] -f  *  of 
thy  good,'  b.*^- ;  + '  and  for  thy  good,'  c  d.  e.  v.  2,  in  thy 
fear]  om.  v.  5,  This  is]  om.  b.  etc.  6,  he  who 
receives]  om.  v.  7,  And  thou  shalt  give]  a.  c  d. ;  And 
thou  shalt  give  of,  v. ;  And  thou  shalt  say  when  thou 
givest  of,  b.  e.  and  say]  om.  b.  8,  he  who  receives] 
om.  b.  etc.  10,  And  afterwards,  etc]  And  thus  having 
laid  on  thy  hand,  thou  shalt  pray  over  them,  c. ;  trs. 
'thou shalt  pray  thus,'  d.  v.  11,  and  say]  om.  b.  etc. 
12,  and  thy  handmaids]  om.  b.  13,  the  washing  .... 
servants]  om.  c  homeot.  14,  and  that  which  is  the] 
this,  b.  17,  and  be,  etc.]  and  may  thy  heavenly 
Mystery  be ...  .  divinity.  Cause  (this),  b.  d.  e.  v. 
20,  The  ordinance,  etc]  a.  b.  d.  e.  a.  b.  have  chief 
point  after  '  Amen,'  e.  v.  after  *  Baptism,'  d.  has  no 
full  point ;  Finished  here  is  the  ordinance  of  holy  baptism 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT 


395 


I 

a. 

* 

B 


of  Christendom  and  glory  to  God  for  ever  and  ever, 
Amen,  c,,  which  has  equal  full  points  at  the  two  Amens ; 
c.  and  V.  have  a  line  of  ornament  before  the  next  canon. 
22,  Statute  40]  b.  ;  45  Statute,  c. ;  om.  a.  d.  e.  v.  Con- 
cerning, etc.]  Concerning  that  it  is  seemly  to  offer, 
etc.,  c.  28,  hast  commanded]  pref.  *  and,'  b.  v.  29,  for 
satiety]  for  our  satiety,  b.  for  satiety  ....  fruit]  om.  c 
homeot. 

Page  i  79,  line  2,  causest  to  all  creation]  causest  to  us 
of  all  creation,  b.  3,  Jesus,  etc.]  our  Lord  and  our 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  c.  4,  with  him]  a.  d. ;  om.  b.  c 
e.  V.  and  with]  a.  v. ;  om.  *  and/  b.  c.  e. ;  and  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  glory  and  might  for  ever,  etc.,  d.  6,  con- 
cerning] pref.  *  46  Statute,'  c.  The  priest,  etc.]  Shall  be 
blessed  therefore  these  fruits,  b.  etc.  9,  Egyptian  figs] 
+  *  nor  figs,'  c.  e.  nor  garlic]  a.  d.  v. ;  om.  b.  c.  e.  14, 
the  fruits]  om.  b.  etc.         16,  41]  a.  b. ;  47,  c. ;  40,  d.  e.  v. 

2 1 ,  shall  fast]  he  shall  fast,  b.  c.  v. ;  he  shall  not  fast,  e. 

22,  fast]  a.  ;  stand,  b.  etc  26,  but]  because,  b.  etc. 
after]  om.  b.  etc.         31,  42]  a.  b. ;  48,  c  ;  41,  e.  v. ;  om.  d. 

Page  180,  line  3,  them]  the  sick,  b.  c. ;  c.  gives  the 
statute  thus :  *  Concerning  (that)  it  is  seemly  that  the 
deacons  should  wait  upon  the  bishop  to  tell  him  con- 
cerning the  sick,  that  he  may  visit  the  sick  diligently 
they  shall  be  consoled,  for  he  has  remembered  them.' 
7,  43]  a.  b. ;  49,  c. ;  41,  d. ;  42,  e.  v.  9,  from  sleep] 
om.  b.  etc.  work]  om.  b.  etc.  1 2,  thither]  om.  c.  13, 
where]  pref.  'the  place,'  b.  etc  18,  44]  a.  b. ;  50,  c; 
42,  d. ;  43,  e.  V.  20,  All]  cm.  d.  shall  accept ....  any- 
thing] om.  c  And  if .  .  .  .  £uth]iL^  and  if  lie  has  fiuth 
and  he  receives,  c  d.  e; 


396  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


26,  45]  a.  b. ;  51,  c  ;  43,  d.  ;  44,  e,  v.  28,   but]  om. 

b.  etc. 

Page  181,  line  2,  because  ....  blessedj  om.  c.  5, 
But]  om.  b.  etc.  therefore]  a. ;  exceedingly,  b.  c.  e.  v. ; 
om.  d.         6,  alien]  a.  c.  d.  v. ;  pref.  *  unclean  and/  h.  e. 

7,  and  ....  be]  om.  c.  9,  and  became,  etc]  and  it 
should  become  (it  became,  v.)  to  thee  a  charge  that  thoo 
denied  and  despised  Christ,  b.  etc. ;  d.  does  not  express 
'Christ*  II,  (any)]  a.;  a  little,  b.  etc  13,  with 
which]  om.  v.  15,  46]  a.  b. ;  52,  c. ;  45,  d.  c  v.  Con- 
cerning, etc]  Deacons  therefore  and  Presbyters,  c  ;  cm. 
*  concerning,'  v.  Presbyters]  trs.  before  *  Deacons,'  b. 
16,  it  is  seemly]  om.  b.  etc  with  the  bishop,  etc]  a  c; 
where  is  the  bishop,  b.  d.  e.  v.  1 7,  that  he  may,  etc] 
and  he  shall,  etc.,  c. ;  Presbyters  therefore  and  deacons 
(Deacons  therefore  and  presbyters,  d.  e  v.)  shall  assemble 
in  the  place  where  the  bishop  is  and  he  shall,  etc,  b.  (d. 
c  V.)  18,  according  to  order]  to  go  with  him,  b.  etc 
presbyters]  trs.  after  *  deacons,'  c  19,  with  the  bishop] 
om.  b.  etc.  20,  sickness]  om.  d.  of  body]  cm.  b.  etc 
21,  those  ....  churches]  the  churches,  b.  c  22,  hav- 
ing prayed]  a  ;  let  him  pray  :  and  when  they  have  prayed, 
b. ;  and  when  they  have  prayed,  c.  d.  e.  v.  25,  47]  a 
b. ;  53,  c.  ;  46,  d.  e.  v.  26,  by  his  command]  a  v. ;  by 
command  of  anyone,  c. ;  by  command,  d.  e. ;  om.  h. 

Page  182,  line  i,  48]  a  b. ;  54,  c. ;  47,  d.  e.  v.         3, 
the   sign]  om.    b.    etc.         5,  wash  their  hands]  om.  c 

8,  thither]  om.  c.  9,  all]  a. ;  that  that,  c  d.  e.  v.  ; 
concerning  that,  b.  10,  God]  a  ;  it  is  God  who,  b.  (c) 
d.  e.  V.  II,  dwells]  instructs,  e.  21,  Holy]  om.  d 
25,  to  do  in  thy  house]  om.  v.         27,  Holy]  om.  b.  etc 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  397 

rises]  causes  to  dwell,  c  30,  Scripture]  b.  d.  e  v. ; 
Spirit,  a.  c. 

Page  183,  line  2,  to  thee]  om.  b.  etc.  3,  stripped] 
'brought  near'  or  'offered,'  c.  Jesus]  pref.  'our  Lord,' 
d. ;  om.  V.  4,  upon  the  wood  of  the  cross]  to  his 
cross,  d.  e. ;  to  the  cross,  v.'^- ;  and  they  crucified  him, 
b.  c  6,  the  Body,  etc.]  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ 
holy,  b.  etc  9,  Bread] +' of  life,' b.  ro,  heavens] 
a.  b. ;  heaven,  c.  d.  e.  v.  And  again]  a. ;  om.  a  d.  v. ; 
And,  b.  e.  the  sixth]  om.  b.  11,  at  that  hour]  a. ; 
at  that,  b.  e. ;  om.  c.  d.  v.  our  Lord]  om.  b.  etc.  1 2. 
of  the  cross]  a.  d. ;  om.  b.  c.  e.  v.  14,  our  Lord 
Christ]  om.  b.  etc.  15,  prayed  and  made]  they 
prayed  and  they  made,  c  1 7,  shall  be  long  ....  a 
prayer]  he  shall  be  long  in  prayer,  b.  etc.  20,  who 
faileth  not]  + '  word,'  v.  who  remembered]  because  he 
remembered,  b.  21,  them]  upon  them,  e. ;  +'upon 
them,'  b.  26,  as  a  likeness]  a.  c  ;  and  make  a 
likeness,  b.  d.  e.  v.  resurrection]  b.  has  section  mark, 
but  a.  etc.  the  ordinary  point  27,  bed]  d.  has 
ordinary  point ;  the  other  MSS.  a  full  point  28, 
from  thy  bed]  om.  b.  etc.  29,  thy  hand]  thee,  c. 
with  water]  om.  e.         31,  from  her]  om.  b.  etc 

Page  184,  line  i,  again]  om.  a.  bed]  a.  has  full  point ; 
the  other  MSS.  ordinary  point.  Because]  om.  b.  etc. 
6,  hands]  hand,  b.  8,  all  over]  unto  thy  feet,  b.  c  (d.) 
e.  V.  ID,  which  is]  of  the  fountain  of,  b.  11,  and 
....  believers]  trs.  after  'At  this  hour,'  c  by  error. 
12,  carefully]  earnestly  {/ii.  thickly),  b.  14,  prays] 
are  (or  is)  silent  for  glorifying,  b.  etc  stand  up]  om.  b. 
etc.         15,  at  that]  b. ;  om.  a.  etc         16,  the  heavens] 


398  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

om.  b.  etc.         21,   go  forth]   om.    b,    etc.  23,   your 

Lord]  om,  b.  26,  Jesus]  a.  b.  e. ;  om.  c.  d*^  v. 
29,  the  Faithful]  om.  b.  30,  looking  forward  and] 
om.  b.  etc.         31,  this  wisdom]  om.  b.  etc 

Page    185,    line    3,   be   careful]  om.    c.    d.  7,  of 

righteousness]  om.  b.  etc.  18,  pure  and]  om.  b.  etc 
25,  ye  heard  and]  om.  b.  etc.  29,  to  them]  from  them, 
b.  etc  (v.  has  full  point),  they  teach  them  in  this 
manner :  and]  om.  b.  etc. 

Page  186,  line  i,  these  heretics  increased]  thus  many 
heretics  increased,  b.  d.  e.  v. ;  thus  increased,  c  2, 
and  of  course]   because,  b.  d.  e.  v. ;  om.  c  4,  they 

chose]  they  will  choose,  d.  and  that  which  .... 
heart]  and  it  was  that  which  was  suiting,  b.  etc  ;  a.  c  d.  e 
have  ordinary  point ;  v.  has  full  point ;  b.  has  break 
6,  doctrine]  om.  b.  etc.  God]  the  Lord,  d.  and  a 
harbour]  of  a  harbour,  v.  10,  49]  a.  b. ;  55,  c  ;  48,  d 
e.  V.  and  the  office]  literally  *  portion '  or  *  lot ' ;  om.  c 
d.  e.  V.  17,  on  him]  om.  b.  etc.  to  the  men]  om.  e. 
19,  himself]  us,  b.  etc.  20,  but  I  .  .  .  .  also  know 
thee]  om.  c  22,  concerning  ....  from  him]  con- 
cerning the  Spirit  which  should  be  given  from  him  as 
grace,  b.  d.  e. ;  concerning  the  grace  which  should  be 
given  from  him  through  the  Spirit,  (c)  v.  23,  This 
sign  then  to  them  who  believe  (believed,  v.)]om.  'this,'  h. 
etc.  24,  which]  pref.  'and,'  b.  25,  demons]  +  *and 
they  shall  make  the  dumb  to  speak,'  a.  shall  speak] 
shall  make  to  speak,  c  v.  26,  their  hands]  hands,  b. 
d.  e.  V. ;  hand,  c  28,  affect  them]  b.  etc  ;  +  *  and  it 
shall  not  hurt  them,'  a. 

Page  187,  line  i,  first]  om.  c         2,  in  his  name]  om. 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  399 

b.  etc.  the  Gospel]  a.  e. ;  the  holy  Gospel,  d. ;  with  the 
Gospel,  b.  c.  V.  3,  believed]  ont  c  4,  to  them] 
om.  b.  etc  10,  but  is  done  ....  teaches]  but  they 
{those  who,  b.  c  e.  v.)  become  pure  through  the  working 
of  Christ  as  he,  the  (our,  c  d.)  Lord  in  teaching,  b.  etc. 
1 2,  and  shows]  shows,  b.  c  e.  v. ;  om.  d  1 3,  submit 
to]  obey,  b.  etc  15,  faith]  trs.  after  'diligence  and,'  d. 
16,  by  him]  om.  c  18,  dead] +' and  make  the  dumb 
to  speak,'  a,  19,  but  ....  for]  but  the  grace  which 
was  his  gift  was  for,  b.  22,  is  connected  with]  is 
expedient  for,  b.  etc  24,  God]  our  Lord,  e.  testified] 
agrees,  e.  28,  the  prophet]  om.  b.  etc  nor  did  .... 
him]  and  most  of  the  Jews  (did  not  believe)  Christ,  b.  etc 
29,  though  ....  Muse]  he  who  like  Moses,  b.  etc 

Page  188,  line  i,  nor  did  they  believe  in  it]  om.  b. 
etc  3,  neither  ....  believe  him]  om.  b.  etc  8, 
But  this  one  ....  wonders]  This  further — nor  does 
the  sign  put  all  to  shame,  b.  etc.  1 4,  they  who  received 
....  sign]  a,  d.  e.  V.  (except  '  we '  for  '  I ') ;  they  who 
received  a  grace  as  we  say  (accompanied)  by  a  sign  may 
not  boast,  b.  ;  they  who  received  a  grace  which  we  say, 
etc,  c  17,  the  Son]  om.  b.  etc  18,  Holy]  a.  b. ; 
om.  c.  d.  e.  v.     the  Father]  om.  e.         21,  a  grace]  om. 

c.  22,  unbelief]  a.  c  d.  e. ;  covering,  v.  23,  (that) 
according  to]  that  through,  (b.)  etc  24,  in  the  last 
days]  om.  c  26,  with]  as,  b.  etc.  righteousness]  + '  of 
God,'  c.  27,  will]  permission,  b.  etc  crucified] 
+  'and  was  killed,'  b.         29,  from  the  dead]  om.  b.  etc 

Page  189,  line  2,  not  vaguely]  not  in  vain  nor  vaguely, 
b.  ;  not  vaguely  nor  in  vain,  c  d.  e.  v.  5,  and  miracle] 
om.  b.  &         6,  any]  om.  b.  d.         8,  through   Christ] 

36  ,^ 


400  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

pref.  *by  him/  b.  etc  lo,  the  word  of  prescient 
instruction]  foreknowledge  the  word  of  instruction,  h.  etc 
14,  Esrael]  om.  b.  etc.  19,  the  valley  of  Ailon]  Ailon 
of  the  valley,  a.  21,  Fenehas]  a.  d.  ;  Fenahas,  b.  c  v. ; 
Fenahas,  e.  23,  signs]  miracles,  b.  etc  25 
thousand] +*  elders,'  b.  e,  29,  keeping-  the  law 
om.  b.  etc  30,  his  assistant]  om.  v.  attended  tc 
him]  om.  b.  etc 

Page  190,  line  2,  who  went  forth]  om.  b.  etc  4 
they  knew]  they  knew  not,  b.  18,  50]  a.  b.  ;  56,  c 
49,  d.  e.  V.         20,  who  obey  him]  om.  c   d.   e.  21 

magistrates  would  be  useless]  om.  b.  22,  for  the  king 
om.  b.  etc.  24,  deacons] +* and  presbyters,'  a.   d.  v. 

pref  'presbyters  and,'  b.  c  e.  nor  the  presbytersj  c  e 
V.  ;  and  the  presbyters,  a  b.  d.  25,  who  are  belom 
them]  om.  b.  etc  26,  nor  shall  they  say]  a.  ;  for,  h 
etc.         28,  but  (to  be)  ....  ourselves]  om.  c 

Page  191,  line  6,  51,  a.  b. ;  57,  c  ;  50,  d.  e.  v.  the  son 
of]  he  of,  b.  etc.     Bi  or]  Be  or,  b.  etc.  10,  prophesied] 

•said  much,  b.  ;  much,  c  d.  e.  v.  13,  they  are  trusting, 

etc]  a  d.  e.  v. ;  they  are  from  corruption  through  the 
evil  will  of  their  thoughts,  b.  ;  c  confused.  19,  like, 

etc]  om.  'they  who  do  it,'  a.;  like  those  indeed  who 
bring  in  the  teaching  of  laughter,  they  who  do  it,  etc, 
b. ;  like  those  indeed  who  (bring  in),  etc,  as,  b.  d.  e.  v. ; 
om.  *like  those  ....  they  who  do  it,'  c  23,  52]  a 
b.  ;  58,  c;  51,  d.  e.  v.  25,  And  he  was  not,  etc]  for 

God  the  Father.  Because  he  was  ordained  by  man 
(only),  c  ordained]  a  d.  e.  ;  named,  b.  c  v.  28,  And 
Balaam]  pref  'These,'  b. ;  pref  'but,'  c  d.  e.  v.  29, 

the  people  of]  om.  b.  etc 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  40I 

Page  192,  line  2,  AskevaJ  Askuyas,  e. ;  Askavl,  v. 
3,  And  the  kings]  And  each  of  the  kings,  e.  6,  the 
punishment  of  God]  a. ;  punishment  by  God,  c.  d.  e.  v. ; 
punishment,  b.  9,  Sadeka]  a.  c. ;  Sedekyi,  b. ; 
Sedeka,  d. ;  Sadeka,  e.  12,  for  prophecies]  om.  b. 
etc.  22,  Maryam]  Marya,  c.  e.  v.  (b.  etc.  transpose 

before  '  sister ').  23,  and  Aster]  om.  b.  etc.  24, 
Yusyes]  Yusyis,  b.  d.  e.  v.  ;  om.  c.  28,  kept]  did  not 
overstep,  b.  30,  men]  trs.  '  women  or  men,'  b.  etc.  (om. 
'women,'  c). 

Page  193,  line  2,  and  gentle]  om.  b.  etc.  4,  keep 
yourselves]  om.  v.  and  from  gods]  om.  b.  etc.  5, 
keep]  a.  d.  v. ;  abstain,  b.  c.  ;  om.  e.  6,  shall  not  be 
broken]  they  shall  not  break,  c.  7,  Here  begins  the 
extract  from  the  Didache.  12,  who  speaks  in  the 
spirit]  is  he  who-  speaks  in  the  spirit — he  is  prophet,  c 
shall  be  proved  and  he  shall  be  examined]  a. ;  shall  be 
proved,  he  shall  be  examined,  d.  (e.);  shall  be  proved 
he  shall  cause  to  examine,  b . ;  shall  be  proved,  he  shall 
not  be  examined,  c.  v.  13,  that  there  may  be  no  sin] 
because  all  sin  shall  be  forgiven,  b.  etc.  15,  if  he 
lives  (lit.  upon  him)  the  life  of  God  he  is  a  true  prophet] 
if  ( +  '  then,*  v.)  he  has  the  life  of  the  Lord,  b.  etc.  God] 
the  Lord,  b.  etc.  1 6,  by  his  life  hitherto]  by  his  life 
then,  b.  c.  d.  e.  v.     every]  om.  b.  etc.  17,  And  every 

prophet  {  +  'then,' c.)  who]  a.  c.  d.  v.;  he  who,  b.  (e.). 
18,  shall  not  eat]  all  MSS.  have  'and  shall  not  eat': 
'  and '  is  probably  due  to  the  Arabic  idiom.  20,  And 
every  prophet  ....  does  not  the  truth]  a. ;  om.  '  the 
truth,'  c. ;  and  every  prophet  then  who  teaches  true, 
then  is  he,  he  who  teaches  and  does  not,  b. ;  and  evi 


402  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

prophet  then  who  teaches  (is)  true  and  that  (one)  who 
teaches  and  does  not,  d. ;  and  every  prophet  then  who 
teaches  and  does  not  what  he  teaches,  e. ;  ajid  every 
prophet  then  who  teaches  is  true,  he  who  teaches  and 
does  not,  v.  22,  proved  in  truth]  who  (is)  proved 
who  (is)  true,  b.*"'  23,  in  the  assembly]  om.  'in,'  h 
and  acts]  a.  d.  (c)  e  v. ;  om.  'and,'  b.  for  his  judg- 
ment ....  God]  all  of  his  judgment,  c  from  God]  a 
b.  ;  with  God,  d.  e,  v.  24,  did]  (a.)  b.  c.  e.  v.  ;  do,  d; 
trs.  after  'prophets,'  a.  26,  And  he  who  says]  he 
then  who  says,  b.  etc.  28,  give  to  him]  that  he 
should  give,  b.  etc.  29,  shall  examine]  examined,  v 
31,  our  Lord]  the  Lord,  b.  etc. 

Page  194,  line  i,  and  so  (to  speak)]  om.  b.  etc.  4, 
And  if,  etc.]  a.  c  d.  ;  trs.  *  wished  and  had  need,'  b.  e.  v. 
5,  if  he  has  a  trade  to  work  at]  if  ...  .  which  he  works 
at,   d. ;  because   he   was  working  at  (a  trade),   c.  7, 

and  works  not]  om.  b.  etc.         8,  remain]  live,  b.  etc.  9, 

of  the  name]  a.  d.  ;  om.  b.  c.  e  v.  11,  prophet]  a  v. ; 
om.    b.    c    d.    e  16,    bread]  +  'having    taken,'    b. 

etc.  17,  according  to  the  commandment]  om.  e. 
1 8,  and  of  honey]  or  honey,  b.  etc.  1 9,  having  taken] 
om.  b.  20,  and  everything]  om.  c.  21,  which  thou 
wishedst]  having  taken,  v.  24,  the  hypocrites]  ace.; 
pref  '  that  of,'  b.  d.  v.  28,  the  Lord]  God,  b.  29, 
And  in]  om.  '  and,'  b.  etc.  The  division  of  the  text  is 
taken  from  v.,  which  has  fullest  point  at  '  Gospel* 
churches]  church,  v.  ye]  om.  a  and  all  the  congregation] 
at  all  teaching  of  the  congregation,  b.  d.  e.  v. ;  at  all 
sign  of  the  congregation,  c.  30,  on  the  sabbaths]  b. ; 
om.  *on,'  a  etc 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  403 

Page  195,  line  2,  because,  etc.]  because  our  Lord 
compared  the  church  to  his  dwelling,  b.  etc  5,  if .  .  .  . 
and  then]  b. ;  and  if ...  .  and  if,  a.  d.  (v.) ;  if .  .  .  .  and 
if  there  is,  c. ;  and  if,  e.  9,  and  if  they  have  .... 
by  themselves]  and  the  women  shall  sit  by  themselves, 
c         14,  married]  + '  women,'  b. 

Page  196,  line  i,  of  sisters]  b. ;  om.  a.  etc  2, 
having  risen]  b.  etc  have  the  singular,  adding  '  or  an 
elder  man.'  3,  elder  men]  elder  man,  v.  8,  church] 
c. ;  house,  a.  etc  10,  to  make]  to  think,  b.  etc  12, 
poor  man  or  woman]  a.  c  v. ;  poor  woman,  b.  d  e.  19, 

quiet  and  a  harbour]  quiet  of  a  harbour,  b.  20,  word] 
om.  V. 

Page  197,  line  i,  and  not  neglect]  ont  b.  v.  2,  our 
Lord  ....  ordinance]  om.  c  4,  he  who  heard  from 
Christ]  om.  a.  8,  53]  a.  b. ;  59,  c ;  52,  d.  e.  v.  the 
ordination]  om.  c  Bishops]  Bishop,  c  10,  bishops] 
bishop,   b.  etc.  12,   that   he  may  be]  om.   b.    etc 

15,  all  (pref.  'and,'  b.  etc)  ....  who]  om.  c.  the 
presbyters]  pref.  'and,'  b.  etc.  and  the  deacons]  om.  b. 
etc  19,  saying]  and  say,  b.  etc  that  he  should  be] 
om.  c  20,  he  shall  ask]  pref.  '  and,'  b.  etc  21,  to 
them]  om.  b.  etc  22,  and  has  he  done  rightly]  b.  etc  ; 
if  he  has,  etc,  a.  the  Holy  Spirit]  om.  d.  29,  the 
Spirit  of  righteousness]  om.  c 

Page  198,  line  r,  being  judge]  and  judge,  c  2, 
even]  om.  d.  and  say]  om.  b.  3,  in  truth  ....  right] 
om.  d.  from  the  mouth]  pref.  '  because,'  b.  5,  Yes] 
that,  b.  etc  they,  shall  all]  and  shall  all,  b.  etc  7, 
there  shall  be]  pref.  'and,'  b.  etc  9,  with  the  rest] 
and  not  the  rest,   v.         11,   Gospel]   Gospels,   b.   etc 


404  STATUTES  OF.^THE  APOSTLES 

13,  and  they  shall  say  :  He,  etc.]  it  is  worthy  of  them,  b. 
etc     And  then]  a,   d.  ;   and   when,   b.   etc.  18,    our 

Lord]  a.  d.  e. ;  God,  b.  c. ;  the  Lord,  v.  Jesus  Christ] 
om.  c.     of  God]  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  c.  19,  be] 

om.  b.  etc.  20,  When  he  has  finished  saying]  c ; 
when  he  has  finished  then  he  says,  a.  d.  v. ;  when  they 
have  finished,  b. ;  when  he  has  finished  then,  e.  22, 

when  it  is  finished,  then  he  shall  give]  a.  v. ; 
when  they  have  finished  giving,  b.  c.  d.  e  and  speak] 
om.  b.  etc.         23,  (and  the  deacon)]  om.  a.  etc. 

Page  i  99,  line  i ,  all]  om.  b.  etc.  and  of  the  lay  people, 
etc.]  a. ;  and  (om.  c.  d.)  the  laymen  kiss  the  male  people, 
b.  c.  d.  e.  ;  the  laymen,  the  male  kiss  the  male  people,  v. 
3,  shall  stand]  shall  kiss,  d.  4,  below]  om.  b.  etc 
5,  with  one  another]  om.  b.  etc.  6,  other  deacons]  a. 
b.  d.  e.  ;  deacons  other,  v. ;  om.  c.  to  guard]  and  guard, 
b.  etc.  men  and  women]  trs.  c.  9,  go  to  sleep]  stand, 
d.  door]  a.  b.  ;  doors,  v.  thrice ;  doors,  2**,  3*",  d.  e. ; 
doors,  3**,  c.  13,  enter]  om.  b.  etc.  doors]  a.  e.  v. ; 
door,  b.  c.  d.  14,  water]  om.  b.  etc.  and  (that)  we 
....  up]  a  d.  e.  V. ;  and  he  is  lifting  up  to,  b.  ;  and 
they  are  lifting  up,  c.  17,  the  deacons]  a.  c.  ;  another 
deacon,  v. ;  the  deacon,  b.  d.  e.  shall  close  the  gates  and 
no  other  shall  come  in]  shall  chant,  b.  etc.  1 8,  and  he 
shall  say]  om.  b.  etc.  22,  guard  lest  your  children] 
guard  your  children  lest  they,  b.  etc.  27,  of  this  work] 
of  this,  b.  30,  presbyters]  priests,  b.  31,  stood] 
stand,  b.  etc. 

Page  200,  line  3,  of  beautiful  appearance  ....  little] 
in  small  writing  over  erasure,  b.  7,  descend  and 
dwell]  trs.  b.         8,  upon,  2**]  a  e.  v. ;  and  upon,  b.  d. ; 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  4OS 

om.  c.  14,  presbyters]  a.  d.    e.  v. ;    presbyter,   b.   c. 

1 5,  deacons]  deacon,   c.     subdeacons]  a.  d.  v. ;  om.  b. 

c.  e.  18,  saying]  and  say,  b,  etc  19,  which  came 
down]  om.  c.  21,  and  say  this  is]  om.  e.  22,  is  the 
blood]  a.  d. ;  is  the  cup,  the  blood,  b. ;  om.  '  is,'  c.  v.  and 
this  is]  a.  c.  v.  ;  om.  '  and,'  b.  d.  e. ;  om.  '  is,"  d.  24, 
until  ....  and  when]  a.  ;  until  they  are  being  com- 
municated and  until  they  have  all  finished  communicating 
and  when,  b.  v. :  c.  also,  except  '  afterwjuTis '  for  '  when ' ; 
until  they   all  have  finished  communicating,  and  when, 

d.  e.  25,  all  the  people  and  afterwards]  om.  c.  27, 
singing  the  psalms]  praising,  b.  c.  e.  v. ;  + '  and  praising,' 
d.  28,  shall  praise]  om.  d.  of  the  Body  precious  (holy, 
d.)  which  is  (of,  b.)  the  Body  of  Christ]  b.  etc. ;  the  Body 
of  Christ  which  is  the  Blood  of  Christ,  a. 

Page  201,  line  2,  precious  and  holy]  trs.  b.  shall  give 
thanks]  shall  pray,  b.  etc  3,  and  pray]  and  give 
thanks,  b.  etc.  the  Body]  a.  b. ;  pref  'of,'  c.  d.  e.  v. 
6,  head]  a.  b. ;  heads,  c.  d.  e.  v.  10,  the  presbyters  and 
deacons,  etc.]  pref.  '  and '  .  .  .  .  remain  much  at  all,  v. ; 
and  the  presbyters  and  deacons  shall  guard  strictly,  and 
that  there  remains  not  much  at  all,  b.  e. ;  thus  also  d., 
except  om.  '  presbyters  and  deacons ' ;  the  presbyters 
and  deacons  shall  guard  that  there  remains  not  any  of 
the  If  uerban,  and  the  presbyters  and  deacons  shall  guard 
that  there  should    not    remain  strictly,  c  13,  great] 

a.  d.  e.  v. ;  om.  b.  c.  14,  like]  upon,  a.  of  'Ela]  om. 
a.  e.  by  error.  15,  profaned]  despise,  b.  etc  r6, 
precious]  a.  d.  ;  om.  b.  c  e.  v.  17,  whereas  it  is 
spiritual  to  those  who]  and  (om.  b.  e.)  not  spiritual, 
(being)  spiritual  in  him  who,  b.  etc         18,  in  purity]  om. 


4o6  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


b.  etc.         19,  bishops]  pref.  *  O,'  b.  etc  22,  54]  a.  b. ; 

60,  c. ;  53,  d.  e.  V.  23,  concerning  subdeacons  and 
concerning  deaconesses]  concerning  deacons  and  sub- 
deacons,  b. ;  and  concerning  deaconesses,  d.  v.  ;  and 
subdeaconesses,  e.  ;  om.  c.  24,  and  subdeaconesses] 
a,  d.  e.  V. ;  om.  b.  c.         25,  And  thou  (  + '  O,'  v.).  Bishop] 

a,  d.  e.  V.  concerning  the  bishop,  b.  c,  by  error,  ordain] 
shall  ordain,  b.  c,  by  error.  26,  upon  his  headj  upon 
them  on  their  (his,  e.)  head,  b. ;  upon  the  head  of  the 
presbyters  who  stand  by,  c,  by  error;  upon  them,  d 
28,  lay  hand]  pref.  'ordain  and/  b.  etc 

Page  202,  line  i,  55]  a.  b. ;  61,  c  ;  54,  d.  e.   v.  2, 

thing]  trs.  after  *is,*  a. ;  before  'is,'  c.  3,  great]  a.  c 
d. ;  and  greatness,  b.  e. ;  om.  v.  4,  God]  a.  c  ;  pref. 
*  the  name  of,'  b.  d.  e.  v.  6,  and  likewise  this  ordin- 
ance, etc]  And  when  he  obtained  such  an  ordination 
(ordinance,  c  d  v.)  because  of  his  confession,  b.  etc 
9,  because  not  only  (is  he  one)  who  denied]  because  it  is 
not  only  because,  b.  d.  e.  v. ;  because  he  denied,  c 
Christ]  the  commandment  of  Christ  (the  Lord,  c),  b.  etc 
12,  56]  a.  b. ;  62,  c  ;  55,  d  e.  v.  15,  of  a  man]  om. 

b.  etc  (c  confused),  17,  and  concerning  the  Widow] 
Statute  63  concerning  the  widow,  c  He  shall  not  lay 
hand  upon  a  widow]  om.  b.  23,  all  good  things]  om. 
b.  etc.  like  Yudit]  om.  b.  etc  time]  om.  d  26,  into 
the  Order  of  the  widows]  om.  b.  etc. 

Page  203,  line  3,  Concerning  male  virgins]  64  Statute 
concerning  a  male  virgin,  c  male  virgins.  They  shall 
not  ordain  male  virgins]  om.  d  7,  and  healing  .... 
grace]  a  b.  e. ;  of  healing,  etc.,  d  v.  ;  om.  c  11,  they 
shall  lay  hand]  and  he  shall  not  lay  hand,  b.  etc     57]  a. 


^ 


COLLATION   OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  4D7 

b. ;  65,  c. ;  56,  d  e.  v.  17,  three,  two]  om.  b.  19, 
because  of  the  ferocity  of  men  ....  assembly]  om.  v. 
20,    bishop]    a.    c.  ;    om.    b.    d.    e.    v.  2$,    many] 

a  c  d.  V. ;  who  has  power,  b.  e.  24,  their  command- 
ment] the  commandment,  b.  2S,  58]  a.  b. ;  66,  c  ; 
57.  d.  e.  V. 

Page  204,  line  6,  and  shall  be  blessed]  on^  c.  9, 
shall  not  depose]  om.  '  not,'  d  1 2,  shall  not  bless]  om. 
b.  1 5,  or  the  presbyter]  a.  c  d  v. ;  or  when  the  pr. 
offers,    e. ;   om.    b.  16,  the  priests]  the  priest,  b.  v. 

19,  59]  a.  b.  ;  67,  c  ;  58,  d,  e.  v.  24,  of  the  church] 

om.  b.  etc.  25,  the  ministering  to  the  presbyters] 
om.  c.         29,  and  the  deaconesses]  of  the  deacons,  v. 

Page  205,  line  i,  for  him]  for  them,  b. ;  +'the  in- 
hibiting him,'  a.  is  not  present]  a.  c.  e.  v. ;  was  not  able, 
b.  3,  Scripture]  a.  c  v. ;  Scriptures,  b.  d  e.  7,  60] 
a  b. ;  68,  a  ;  59,  d  e.  v.  8,  they  shall  bring]  bring, 
b.   etc  9,    But  all  ....  for  the  support]  om.   b. 

15,  61]  a.  b. ;  69,  c. ;  60,  d  e  v.  16,  Oblations]  a  b. 
c  V. ;  Oblation,  d  e.  The  Eulogia]  ont  e.  25,  in 
the  church]  a  c.  d  ;  om.  '  in,'  b.  e.  v,  26,  a  sign 
except  he  performed  it]  om.  v.  30,  62]  a  b. ;  70,  c  ; 
61,  e.  V. ;  d  uncertain. 

Page  206,  line  i,  holy]  om.  v.  ;  of  holiness,  d  e. 
He  who  desires  ....  holiness]  ohl  b.  2,  of  God] 
pref  '  of  the  holy  ones  and,'  b.  3,  to  the  bishop]  a  d 
e.  V. ;  by  the  bishop,  b.  c  5,  stand]  om.  b.  etc 
II,  63]a  b. ;  71,  c  ;  62,  d.  e.  v.  12,  with  firmness] 
om.c  i3,oftheirmen]om.  c  i6,if.  .  .  .  received] 
cm.  U  etc  19,  master]  masters,  b.  etc  32,  the  word 
of]  om.  d         25,  not  to  commit  adultery  and]  cm.  b.  etc 


408  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


30,  he  shall  give,  etc.]  and  if  he  does  not  give  themi 
marriage  according  to  law  that  slave,  and  if  he  does  m 
give  in  marriage  that  handmaid  that  master  of  skvGj 
shall  be  rejected,  b.  d.  e. ;  and  if  he  does  not  give  themk 
marriage  according  to  law  let  that  master  be  rejected,  c 
and  if  he  does  not  give  in  marriage  that  handmaid.  Ai»i' 
that,  etc.,  V. 

Page  207,  line  4,  if  there  is  a  man  who]  he  who,  v. 
5,  into  the  church]  om.  b.  etc.  9,  heretics  and]  om. 
b.  etc.         10,  with  them]  om.  b.  etc.  13,   this  halnij 

om.  b.  etc.  1 4,  or]  a.  d. ;  and  if  not,  b.  c.  e.  v.  i8» 
and  they  come]  om.  b.  etc.  19,  they  shall  leave 
....  rejected]  a,  ;  he  shall  leave,  b. ;  om.  c.  d.  e  v. 
24,  they  shall  not  do  it]  om.  *  not,'  c.  26,  an  instru- 
ment] pref.  *  a  horn,'  c.         27,  and  the  games  J  om.  b.  etc 

Page  208,  line  6,  the  way]  the  law,  b. ;  om.  c  9, 
and  know  ....  came]  a.  c.  d.  v. ;  and  know  and  left  off 
and  if  he  came,  e.  ;  om.  b.  12,  he  shall  be  received] 
om.  b.  16,  an  interpreter]  a.  v. ;  +  'and  he  interprets,' 
b.  c.  e. ;  + '  of  dreams  and  he  interprets,'  d.  unluckyj  om. 
b.    c.  days]  +  'and   unlucky   days,'   b.    etc.  21, 

drunkard]  preacher,  d.  22,  in  deed  and]  om.  b.  etc 
24,  who  makes  little  marks]  om.  c.  27,  he  hears  or]  om. 
b.  etc  men]  +  *  out  of  doors,'  b.  29,  what  is  known]  a. 
d.  e.  V. ;  what  is  not  known,  b.  c  30,  fraudulent]  a.  d.  v.  ; 
trs.  after  'impious,'  b.  c  e  31,  and  they  are  like]  for 
they,  etc.,  b.  d.  e.  v.  ;  for  they  know  them  who  are  like,  c 

Page  209,  line  2,  into  our  law  until  they  humble 
themselves]  om.  e.  3,  concerning  their  occupations] 
om.  b.  etc  examined,  etc]  examine  their  occupations 
and  try  them  whether,  c         8,  64]  a  b. ;  73,  c  ;  63,  d 


COLLATION   OK  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  409 


e.  V.     If  there  is  ....  unbeliever]  Concerning  a  woman 
who  is  not  a  believer,  b.  lo,  she  took  another]  an- 

other took  her,  b.  1 1,  like  us]  thus,  b.  12,  having 

.  .  .  .  law]  om.  c.     keep  himself  and]  a.  d.  ;  om.  b.  c.  e.  v. 
15,    first]  om.  d.  16,  and  afterwards]  om.  d.         20, 

wickedly]  thus,  e.     virtuously]  om.  b.  etc.         31,  devotion 
and  prudence]  knowledge,  b. 

Page  210,  line  i,  aright]  a.  d. ;  om.  b.  c  e.  v.  2, 
He  shall  not  boast]  He  preaches,  b.  3,  Then  .... 
of  them  by  God]  Then  he  shall  teach  after  that,  b. ;  then 
he  shall  teach  men,  c.  d.  e. ;  then  he  shall  teach  men 
after  that,  v.  5,  The  prophet  says]  trs.  after  *God,'  2"*, 
b.  etc.  8,  65]  a.  b.  ;  74,  c.  ;  64,  d.  e  v.  9,  at  the 
time]  om.  b.  etc.  of  prayer]  and  prayer,  c.  v. ;  at  prayer, 
d. ;  for  prayer,  e. ;  om.  b.  n,  their  hands]  a.  c  ;  om, 
b.  d.  e.  V.  1 2,  above  (every)  thing]  om.  c  1 5,  of 
service]  om.  b.  etc.  16,  Scripture]  Scriptures,  b.  etc. 
66]  a.  b.  ;  75,  c.  ;  65,  d.  e.  v.         22,  towards]  om.  c 

23,  already]   a.   d.    e.    v.;    +' commanded   and/   b.    c. 

24,  epistle]  law,  c. 

Page  211,  line  5,  night.  .  .  .  moon]  trs.  'day'  after 
*  sun,*  *  moon  *  after  *  night,'  v.  6,  the  sun  and]  om.  e. 
10,  seventh]  sabbath,  c.  v.  13,  glory] +' and  his 
resurrection,'  b.  etc.  15,  might  grant  to  us]  might 
make  (it)  beautiful,  c.  1 6,  honour]  + '  and  exalt,'  v.  his 
sabbath]  om.  b.  etc.  1 7,  on  it  ...  .  day]  from  all  his 
work  on  that  seventh  day,  c.  1 9,  blessed  ....  pure]  a ; 
honourable  and  blessed  and  pure,  d.  v. ;  pure  and  blessed,  c. ; 
honourable,  b.  e.  he  said]  pref.  *he  rested  and/  c  21, 
seventh  day  ....  his  work]  the  seventh  and  hallowed 
it  all  his  work,  c.        22,  he  rested]  God  rested,  b. 


• '^'' 


4IO  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTL£S 

Page  212,  line  i,    I  am]  +  *God/   c  5,  our  Lori 

Jesus]  om.  b.   etc.         8,    in  my  law   and]  om.  b.  a 
10,  to  him]  to  God,  b.  etc         11,  Verily  those]  andlij 
etc         12,  honour]  keep,  b.  etc  16,  acceptable]  (ml 

c     and  pleasing]  om.  c  d.  e.  v.         18,  peoples]  people,  v. 
my  commandment  and]  b.  etc     wish]  choose,  e.       sal 
give  them]  give  you,  b.         21,  a  place  which  he  namc4]| 
a.  d.  e.  v.;  the  place   which    is  beautiful,   b.;  which  be 
nameth  the  place  which  is  beautiful,  c  24,  perish]  tis 

before  *  pass  away,'  b.  etc         29,  our  Lord]  om.  b.  etc 

Page  213,  line  4,  67]  a.  b.;  77,  c  d  e.   v.  5,  the 

first  week]  om.  *  week,*  b.  etc  9,  and  our  Saviour] 
om.  b.  etc  10,  the  first  week]  om.  '  week/  v.  our 
Lord  ....  in  it]  our  Lord  was  crucified,  c  and  our 
God]  om.  b.  etc.  1 5,  the  day  of  the  feast]  a.  d. ;  om. 
*  the  feast,'  c  e.  v.;  om.  b.  16,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ] 
our  Lord,  b.;  Christ,  c  d.  e.  v.  20,  our  Lord]  om.  h 
etc,  22,  the  day]  the  feast,  v.  which  is]  om.  b.  etc 
our  Lord]  om.  b.  etc  23,  of  God]  om.  h.  etc 
24,  was  born]  came  down  for  us,  v.;  +  *  for  us/  b.  c  d.  e. 
God]  om.  c  who  is  our  Lord]  om.  b.  etc  25,  of  our 
Lady]  om.  b.  etc     Mary]  +  *  the  virgin,'  b.  etc  2T, 

of  the  day]om.  b.  etc  28,  divinity]  pref  'our  Saviour,* 
c     our  Lord]  om.  b.  etc         29,  to  his  Son]  a  c;  om.  b. 

d.  e.  V.         31,  people]  om.  b.  etc 

Page  214,  line  2,  the  Son  of  God  in  truth]  a;  pref. 
*and  in,'  c;  pref  *and,'  e.  v.;  om.  b.  3,  of  the  feast] 
om.  b.  etc  5,  our  Lord]  om.  b.  etc  9,  martyrs] 
pref  *and,'  b.  etc         10,  our  Lord]  om.  b.  etc  11, 

honour,  etc]  om.  b.  etc         13,  68]  a.  b. ;  78,  c  ;  67,  d 

e.  V.     The  prayers  are  inserted  before  this  statute  by 


COLLATION   OF  THE   ETHIOPIC  TEXT  4II 

•  D.  and  V.  of  prayers]  of  prayer,  c;  which  are  seemly  for 
;  jprayer,  b.  14,  third]  om.  b.  15,  sixth]  om.  b.  and 
l^jpray  at  the  ninth  hour]  om.  b.  16,  pray  at  the  time 
_.  .  .  .  midnight  and]  om.  b.  etc.  20,  the  night]  a.  d. 
j-jC,  v.;  the  darkness,  b.  c.  22,  Jesus  Christ]  om.  b.  etc. 
.  crucified]  a.  c;  +*in  that  hour,*  b.  d.  e.  v.  23,  gave 
^  up]  a.  c;  gave  back,  b.  d.  e.  v.  25,  blood]  a.  c.  e.  v.; 
-  trs.  after  *  water,'  b.  d.  29,  at  the  time  of)  om.  b.  etc. 
,    31,  And  also  at  cockcrow,  etc.]  om.  c. 

Page  2 1 5,  line  4,  69]  a.  b. ;  79,  c.  ;  68,  d.  e.  v.  6, 
with  the   assembly  of]   with,  e.         7,   which   sanctifies 

impious]  om.  c.         1 3,  shall  sing  psalms]  om.  b. 

14,  the  Scripture]  om.  b.  etc.  17,  I]  a,  d. ;  not  ex- 
pressed, b.  c.  e.  v.  19,  that  he  who  partakes,  etc.]  that 
he  who  partakes  should  defile  the  holy  mystery  with 
those  who  do  not  partake,  b.  d.  e.  v. ;  as  b.  except  om. 
'  not,*  c.  22,  light]  trs.  after  *  darkness,'  b.  etc.  23, 
and  believers  with  doubters]  om.  b.  etc  27,  70]  a.  b. ; 
80,  c.  ;  29,  our  Lord]  om.  b.  etc.  31,  days]  a.  b.  ; 
om.  c  d.  e.  V. 

Page  216,  line  2,  ordinance]  om.  b.  etc  8,  as  ...  . 
soul]  om.  b.  etc.  10,  they  gave]  thou  gavest,  b.  etc 
12,  being  alive]  om.  b.  of  God  ....  enemy]  om.  d. 
14,  He  finds  no  mercy]  om.  b.  etc.  17,  and   to,  2*" 

....  (good)]  om.  b.  etc.  19,  eat]  a  c  ;  om.  b.  etc 

20,  those  who]  om.  b.  22,  who  are]  om,  b.  etc  our 
Lord]  om.  b.  etc  26,  should  be  drunken  and]  om.  b. 
etc.  28,  as  administrators]  om.  b.  and  the  only]  om. 
*and,*  b.  29,  our  Lord]  om.  b.  etc  Jesus  Christ] 
om.  e.  V.         31,  wine]  a  c  d. ;  om.  b.  e.  v. 

Page  217,  line  1,  we  cannot]  we  can,  v.         3,  And 


412  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

....  drunkenness]  om.  e.         4,  they  say]  a. ;  conoen- 
ing  that  which  it  says,  b.  e. ;  what  does  it  say  ?  c  d  1] 
They  shall  not  drink]  Drink  not,  v.  5,  it  says]  1  c 

om.  b.  d.  e.  v.  6,  of  a  man]  om.  b.  etc.  7,  (oP 
concerning,  b.  etc.  9,  Christ]  om.  v.  those  concot- 
ing  whom  he  spoke]  b.  c. ;  those  concerning  whcMn  kl 
was  spoken,  d.  e.  v.  and  said]  cm.  b.  etc  ic' 
sorrow]  a. ;  +*and  disturbance,*  b.  d.  ;  disturbance  and' 
sorrow,  c.  e.  ;  +  *  and  disturbance  and  murder,'  v.  11 
of  bones]  om.  b.  etc  13,  ask]  inquire,  b.  and  go] 
om.  b.  etc.  15,  71]  a  b.  ;  80  (again),  c.  ;   70,  d.  e  v. 

for  the  faith  and]  a  d.  ;  om.  b.  c  e.  v.  1 7,  our  Lord] 

a  d.  e.  V. ;  God,  b.    c         21,  help]  they  \irill   help,  e. 
22,  fulfil]  they  shall  fulfil,  v.         23,  God]  cm.    b.  e.  v.; 
our  Lord,  c  ;  Christ,  d.     our  Lord]  om.   b.   etc         26, 
shall  not  step  out  of]  shall  continue  in,  c     commandment] 
ordinance,  b.  etc.         27,  this  commandment]  om.  b.  etc 

28,  the  Father]  or,  b.  (aw  =  ab).     for  he]    who,    b.  etc 

29,  and  he  who  heard  me]  om.  c  30,  rejected  me, 
and  he  who  rejected  me]  a  e.  ;  om.  b.  c  d.;  om.« '  and  he 
who  rejected  me,*  v. 

Page  218,  line  i,  Do  not]  pref  *and  when,'  b.  c  d ; 
pref.  *  when,'  e.  ;  om.  v.  soul]  spirit,  b.  4,  and  days] 
om.  b.  etc  5,  to  them]  om.  b.  etc  at  the  beginning] 
om.  b.  etc  6,  and  he  said]  om.  b.  etc  9,  against  it, 
etc.]  for  it  a  barrier  against  it  a  gate,  b.  1 2,  according  to 
the  will  of  God]  om.  c  1 3,  and  confuse]  ace.;  and 

make,  b. ;  and  confuse  not,  d.  v.  16,  an  ordination 
....  you]  om.  b.  1 7,  pass  beyond]  a  ;  + '  by  your- 
selves,' c  d.  e.  V. ;  om.  b.  18,  is  not  yours  but] 
om.   b.  etc.         20,  God]  a   c  ;    our  Lord,   b.   d.    e,   v. 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  413 


.4,  Jesus  Christ]  om.  c.  31,  who  are  not  worthy] 
.^m.  b.  etc. 

ft 

Page  2 1 9,  line  i ,  of  honourable]  a.  c.  ;  worthy,  b.  d  e. 
/.  3,  this  (work)]  it,  b.  etc.  6,  God]  om.  b.  7, 
God]  om.  b.  etc.  (not)]  this  seems  required  by  the 
sense,  but  is  not  expressed  in  the  MSS.  13,  what  was 
suitable  for  the  priests]  om.  c.         14,  separated]  created, 

c.  16,  not  proper]  a  b.  v. ;  proper,  c.  d.  e  17, 
suid  not  by  the  decree,  etc.]  and  by  the  decree  of  the 
law  that  which  the  priests  were  commanded,  b.  20,  of 
God] +*  his  own,'  b.  etc.  24,  what  happened]  a.  c.  d. 
e.;  om.  b.  v.  25,  he  thought] +*  wickedly,'  c  of  his 
own  will]  om.  b.  etc.  27,  came]  om.  b.  etc.  27,  him- 
self] a.  c.  d.  e.  ;  om.  b.  v.  curse]  +  *of  confusion,'  b.  (by 
error  for  *  eska,'  *  until ').  28,  the  prophet  ....  afraid] 
a. ;  he  did  not  fear  the  prophet,  b.  c.  d.  e. ;  he  fears  not 
the  prophet,  v.         31,  thing]  om.  c.     king]  a  c. ;  om.  b. 

d.  e.  V. 

Page  220,  line  2,  because  ....  aspired]  om.  d.  5,  72] 
a  b.  d.  (71  omitted)  ;  80,  (again)  c  ;  71,  e.  v.  6,  what  we 
have  ordained  for  you,  and  further  ye  know]  om.  b. ;  om. 
*  for  you '  and  *  further,'  v.  7,  there  are  some  whom] 
om.  V.  10,  upon  them]  om.  b.  etc.  Order]  ordination, 
d.  e.  12,  a  filling  ....  wishes]  om.  e.  13,  wishes] 
b. ;  exceeds,  a.  etc.  of  priesthood]  om.  b.  etc  15,  God] 
a.  b.  d.  ;  our  Lord,  c.  e.  v.  20,  and  for  the  presbyters 
the  priesthood]  trs.  after  *  man  comes,'  v.  ;  om.  *  priest- 
hood,' c.  24,  great]  trs.  before  'small,'  v.  27,  a 
god]  om.  b.  etc.  so  that]  pref.  'but,'  a  29,  make] 
make  not,  a 

Page  221,  line   3,  net]  bar,  b.         5,  Christ]  om.  c 


414  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

6,  A  chief  priest]  elders,  v.     priest,  priestsj  om.  v. ;  ot 

*  priests,*  e.  Moses]  God,  b.  7,  and  we,  etc]  at] 
were  ordained  the  twelve  Apostles  of  our  Saviour,  K  t| 
8,  our  Lord  and]  om.  c  v.  Jesus  Christ  J  cm.  v.  ic| 
that  we  might  send]  that  we  might  not  send,  b.  v.  wiil 
them]  with  us,  b.  11,  withal]  om.  b. ;  trs.  aferl 
'deacons,*  c  13,  our  Lord]  om.  b.  etc  16,  k 
was  crucified]  om.  c  20,  of  ordinationj  om.  c.  v.  like 
us]  om.  b.  etc.  23,  and  amongst  them]  with  whom,hi 
25,  Jesus  Christ]  a.  c  ;  Christ  Jesus,  v.  ;  onu  *  Jesus,' h 
d. ;  Jesus,  e.  26,  love]  knowledge,  d.  27,  wicked] 
om.  b.  etc.         28,  for  his  name]  om.  b.  etc. 

Page  222,  line  1,  our  Lord]  om  b.  etc.  2,  heavens] 

heaven,  b.  etc.  4,  that  he  offered,  or  laid]  a.  c  v.; 
om.  b.  d.  e.     martyr]  ordinance,  b.  etc  6,  our  Lord] 

om.  b.  etc.  13,  he  obtained  it]  he  shall  obtain,  h.  etc 

16,  ordination]  om.  b.  etc.  our  Lord  Christ]  a.  ;  Grod,  h; 
Christ,  c.  d.  e.  v.         17,  of  God]om.  *of,'b.  etc.  with 

whom]  pref.  *most  high,*  b.  18,  comf>aredJ  + '  The 
Senodos  was  finished.  Rejoice,  chief  of  the  earth  :  and 
glory  to  God  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen,  Amen,  and 
Amen,'  b.         20,  Prayer  of  early  morning]  a   b.  ;  pref 

*  And,'  d.  ;  The  first  prayer  of  early  morning,  v.  ;  The 
statute.  The  first  prayer  of  early  morning,  c.  ;  Statute 
67.  The  first  prayer  of  early  morning,  e  22,  our  Lord] 
the  Lord,  b.  etc.         29,  blessing]  om.  e 

Page  223,  line  i.  The  deacon  shall  say]  a  c.  ;  pref. 
'  and,'  e.  v.  ;  om.  b.  d.  2,  O  Lord]  May  the  Lord,  v. ; 
O  Lord  ....  may  he,  b.  c.  d.  e.  4,  night] +*  now 
guard  us  throughout  the  day,*  b.  5,  to  us]  om.  v. 
8,  an  alien   and]   om.   b.      and  a  backslider]  om.  e  v. 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  415 

J,  name]  great  name,  b.  etc.  12,  to  us]  om.  b.     thy 

Son]  om.  e.  glory]  om.  v.  and  might]  + '  greatness  and 
lonour,'  b. ;  +  '  and  greatness,'  d. ;  + '  and  greatness  and 
jreat  honour,'  e.  v.  now  and  always]  a. ;  now  and  for 
Uways,  d.  ;  om.  b.  c.  e.  v.  16,  God]  + 'our  God,' b. 
iie  Father,  etc.]  om.  b.  21,  The  deacon  shall  say] 
L  c.  V. ;  The  deacon,  e. ;  om.  b.  d.  23,  brethren]  pref. 
our,'  e.  25,  Speedily  ....  Lord]  a.  b.  c. ;  om.  d.  e. 
I.  27,  The  deacon  shall  say]  om.  b.  etc.  Let  us  all 
say]  a.  b.  ;  om.  c  d.  e.  v.  29,  The  people  ....  us] 
>m.  b.  etc     thou]  physician,  d.  v. 

Page  224,  line  i,  from  this  (  +  'every,'  c.  e.  v.)  house] 
L  d. ;  and  all  suffering  from  us  and  from  all  thy  people 
md  from  this  house  and  from  all  those  who,  b.  2,  and 
rom  those]  for  those,  c.  v,  3,  and  blessed]  om.  b.  etc. 
[5,  The  deacon  shall  say]  a.  e.  v. ;  om.  b.  c.  d.  Pray] 
+  'for  those  who  make  a  journey,'  b.  c  e  v.  ;  om.  d. 
[6,  Lord  ....  almighty]  om.  d.  18,  abroad]  om.  v. 
to,    speedily  ....  upon  us]  om.  v.  21,  The  deacon 

ihall  say]  Pray,  b.  e. ;  om.  c.  d.  v.  Let  us  all  say] 
>m.  b.  etc.  22,  The  people  ....  upon  us]  om.  b.  etc. 
!4,  peace]  rejoicing,  b.  e.  25,  causing  to  rejoice]  om.  b. 
[6,  Rains]  Rain,  b.         30,  the  place]  om.  v. 

Page  225,  line  i.  The  deacon  shall  say]  a.  e.  v.  ;  om.  b.  c. 
i  Pray]a.v.  ;  + 'for  the  rains,' b.  c.  d.  e.  7,  Speedily 
.  .  .  upon  us]  om.  d.  e.  v.  8,  The  deacon  shall  say] 
}m.  b.  etc  Let  us  all  say]  a.  b. ;  om.  c  d.  &  v.  9, 
The  people  shall  say  ....  us]  om.  b.  etc  10,  who 
lope  in  thee]  who  call  upon  thy  holy  name,  b.  12, 
Joctrine  of  the  (thy,  b.  d.)  Godhead]  Godhead  and  with 
:he  doctrine,  v.         13,  and  always]  om.  b.         15,  Prayer 


4l6  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTL£S 


for  the  fruit]  And  the  deacon  shall  say  :  Pray  for  the  fni 
e.  22,  The  deacon  shall  say]  a  v.  ;  om.  b.  c  d  (t 
confused).  25,  increase  the  fruit  of  the  earth]  c  d  ?.: 
om.  *  of  the  earth/  a. ;  om.  b.  e.  26,  which  is  from  thy 
goodness]  a.  c  ;  om.  b.  d.  e.  v.  27,  Speedily,  etc]a  t; 
om.  b.  d.  e.  v.  28,  The  deacon  shall  say,  etcj  cm.  h.  elt 
29,  The  people,  etc.]  om.  b.  etc  31,  and  blessed] 
om.  b.  etc  name] +*  work  with  us  according  to  thy 
clemency  and  nourish  our  heart  with  the  doctrine  of  the 
Godhead  and  with  understanding  which  is  from  thee,'  c 
Page  226,  line  i,  Prayer  for  the  waters,  etc.]  c  ha 
altered  and  confused  title  *  fruit  of  water,'  and  after  thi 
usual  beginning  repeats  the  first  prayer  for  the  fruit  c 
the  earth,  continues  '  Pray  for  the  fruity  etc.,'  giving  th 
second  prayer  again,  concluding  with  '  For  the  poor,  etc 
7,  Make  to  rejoice]  a.  d. ;  may  he  make,  etc,  v.  ;  an 
may  the  rivers  fill  up  the  waters  in  their  limit,  grant  ric 
favour.  Lord  our  God,  b. ;  e.,  under  title  of  *  Prayer  forth 
king,'  om.  *  our  God,'  has  the  second  prayer  for  the  waten 
nearly  as  a.  11,  The  deacon  shall  say]  a.   v.  ;  om.  I 

d.         17,   Speedily,    etc.]  om.    v.         19,   The    deacoi 
shall  say]  om.  b.  etc     Let  us  all  say]  a  b.  d. ;  om.  c  e  v 
20,    O    Lord  ....  upon   us]   om.    b.    etc         22,   an( 
blessed]  om.  b.  etc         24,  Prayer  for  the  king]  a  b.  v. 
— kings,  d.  e. ;   Prayer  for  the  waters  of  the  rivers,  c 

27,  king]   kings,    v.     lyasu]    a    c    d ;    N,    b.    e.    v 

28,  his  kingdom]  their  kingdoms,  v.  without  trouble 
om.  V.  righteousness]  purity,  v. ;  trs.  before  *  peace, 
d.  30,  The  deacon  shall  say]  a  v.  ;  om.  b.  c  d.  e 
31,  our  God]  a  b.  d.  ;  om.  c  e.  v. 

Page  2^7,  line  i,  the  king]  the  kings,  e.  v.     this]  om 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  417 

e.  V.  2,  our  king  lyasu]  a.  c  ;  our  king,  N,  b.  d. ;  om. 
e.  V.  for  him]  a.  b.  c.  d. ;  om.  e.  v.  3,  his  enemy] 
the  enemy,  v.  4,  his  walls]  a.  b.  d. ;  our  walls,  c  e  v. 
speak]  a.  e.  V. ;  + '  righteousness,'  b.  c  d.  holy]  om.  e.  v. 
5,  Speedily  ....  say]  a.  b.  c. ;  om.  d.  e.  v.  6,  The 
deacon  shall  say]  om.  b.  c.  etc  Let  us  all  say]  a.  b. ;  om. 
c.  etc  7,  The  people  ....  him]  om.  b.  etc  8, 
Grant  him]  Grant  them,  V.  12,  Prayer  for  those  .... 
offering]  a.  c  d.  (e.  title)  v. ;  Prayer  for  those  who  have 
fallen  asleep,  b.  18,  a  thanksgiving]  trs.  before  'first- 
fruits,' c  d.  19,  who  have  nothing  and]  om.  V.  zo, 
to  give,  I ']  om.  b.  v.  (though)]  and,  h.  v.  to  give,  2'] 
om.  V.  21,  accept]  a.  c;  may  he  accept,  b.  their 
desire]  om.  v.  having  accepted]  om.  v.  and  having  .... 
of  them]  om.  b.  22,  Spirit]  kingdom,  b.  23,  And 
as  ...  .  good]  a.  c  ;  om.  b.  d.  e.  v,  27,  The  deacon 
shall  say]  a.  e.  v. ;  om.  b.  c  d.  who  offer  an  offering]  who 
have  fallen  asleep,  e.  30,  to]  a.  c;  in,  b.  one]  om.  a 
3t,  to  the  honour  ....  tithes]  om.  v.  to  the  honour 
of  thy  name]  om.  b. 

Page  228,  line  i,  thanksgiving]  trs.  after  'tithes,'  then 
+ '  memorial,'  b.  offering  ....  tithes]  om.  e  2,  And 
as  for  those  ....  drink]  a  c  d. ;  And  as  for  those  who 
wish  to  give  (om.  v.)  and  have  not  (  + '  to  give,'  v.),  accept 
them  all,  having  accepted  their  desire  grant  to  all  of 
them  a  reward  of  (in,  v.)  blessing  to  be  a  portion,  b.  e.  v. 
10,    and    always]  om.    b.  iz.    Prayer    for  the   cate- 

chumens] Prayer  for  peace,  e.  19,  The  deacon  shjill 
say]  a.  e.  V. ;  om.  b.  c  d.  pray,  etc]  pray  for  those  who 
offer  an  offering,  e.,  but  the  prayer  is  for  the  catechumens. 
20,  the  Lord]  my  Lord,  b.  v.    The  Father,  etc])  am.  U 


41 8  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

we  pray  and  beseech  thee]  a.  d. ;  om.  b.  c.  e.  v.  22, 
Be  kind]  Be  kind  always  and,  c.  (worship)]  b.  expresses 
23,  hearts]  mind,  b.  c.  v.  24,  and  thy  righteousness] 
om.  c.  25,  ordinance] +*  and  thy  holy  fear,'  b. ;  trs. 
before  *  commandment,'  c.  Speedily  ....  Lord]  om. 
c.  d.  e.  V.  26,  The  deacon  shall  say]  om.  b.  c.  d.  e.  v. 
Let  us  all  say]  om.  c.  d.  e.  v.  27,  The  people  .... 
upon  us]  om.  b.  c.  d.  e.  v.  28,  (impart)]  b.  etc,  express. 
Page  229,  line  i,  Prayer  for  those  who  have  fallen 
asleep]  a.  e.  (but  prayer  for  offerers  follows)  v.  ;  Prayer 
for  peace,  b.  c.  d.  a.  c.  d.  have  the  same  prayer  for  the 
departed,  e.  v.  have  a  different  prayer,  as  follows  : — 

Again  we  pray  and  beseech  the  almighty  God,  the  Father,  etc,  for 
those  who  have  fallen  asleep,  that  he  may  deliver  their  soul  into  (the 
place  and,  om.  e.)  the  pasturage  where  is  the  water  of  rest,  and  unite 
and  cause  to  rise  (their)  body  in  the  day  which  his  unl3dng  promise 
has  ordained  (he  has  ordained  according  to  his  unlying  promise,  t.\ 
that  he  may  bestow  the  heavenly  kingdom,  he  who  has  authority  over 
all  rest,  the  Lord  our  God. 

And  the  deacon  shall  say  :  Pray  for  those  who  have  fallen  asleep 
(for  peace,  e.  by  error). 

God,  the  almighty,  give  rest  to  the  soul  of  our  brethren  who  hiie 
fallen  asleep  in  the  place  of  pasturage,  by  the  water  of  rest,  grant  pass- 
ings of  their  soul  without  hindrance  and  without  suffering.  In  due  time 
having  united  the  body,  raise  it  up,  bestow  the  heavenly  kingdomi 
rewarding  with  that  which  eye  saw  not  and  ear  heard  not  and  into  the 
heart  of  man  ascended  not — how  much  thou  hast  prepared  God,  for 
those  who  love  thee.  Bestow  consolation  and  comfort  upon  us  tbdr 
people,  through  thy  (only,  e.)  Son,  through,  etc. 

b.  has  a  third  form,  as  follows  : — 

God  of  the  spirits  and  of  all  flesh,  Lord  of  lords,  God  of  comfort,  who 
hast  abolished  death  and  taken  away  its  authority,  thou  hast  granted 
life  to  the  race  of  man,  thou  hast  authority.  Lord  our  God. 

Pray  for  those  who  have  fallen  asleep. 

God  of  our  fathers,  God  of  the  holy  ones,  rest  of  the  tormented,  give 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ETHIOPIC  TEXT  419 

rest  to  the  soul  of  thy  holy  servants,  give  rest  to  the  soul  of  thy  servant 
N(Sgalg)  in  the  bright  place,  in  the  place  of  pasturage,  in  the  place  of 
delight  where  there  is  no  sorrow  or  groaning  or  lamentation,  in  the 
bosom  of  our  holy  fathers  Abf  eh3m,  Yashak,  and  YS'elcob,  grant  them 
to  be  ranked  with  all  the  holy  ones.  And  to  those  who  mourn  grant 
refreshment,  to  the  tormented  a  saviour,  guard  us  in  this  world  and  in 
that  which  is  to  come,  for  thine  is  the  glory  for  ever  and  ever.    Amen. 

Many  of  the  phrases  of  these  three  forms  occur  in  the 
prayer  for  the  departed  in  the  Liturgy  of  the  Coptic 
Jacobites  (Brightman,  Litt.  E.  and  W.,  vol  i.  p.  170). 

Page  230,  line  4,  Prayer  for  peace]  Prayer  for  those 
who  have  fallen  asleep,  e.,  but  prayer  for  offerers  follows. 
II,  The  deacon  shall  say]  a.  e.  v. ;  om.  b.  c.  d.  Pray  for 
peace]  Pray  for  the  congregation,  e.,  but  prayer  for  peace 
follows.  12,  our  God]  om.  b.  etc  God]  om.  e. 
13,  the  peace  of]  om.  c  holy]  om.  v.  15,  and 
reward  us,  for]  a.  c  d. ;  om.  b.  e.  v.  17,  and  we  in- 
voke] om.  b.  c  V.  impart,  etc]  crown  thy  heavenly 
peace  upon  the  soul  of  us  all,  b.  etc.  19,  condition] 

and  to  the  life,  b.  etc  give]  grant,  b.  etc  20,  king] 
kings,  b.  etc  through  thy  holy  name]  om.  v.  Guard] 
grant,  b.  etc         23,  in  the  fear  of  God,  etc]  om.  b.  etc 

Page  231,  line  i,  The  deacon  shall  say]  a.  c  v. ;  om. 
b.  d.  e.  for  our  (the,  d.  v.)  congregation]  adv.;  om. 
b.  c  d.  e.  2,  God] +' our  God,' c  3,  for]  om.  b. 
etc.  this,  etc  (  +  'our,'  d.)]  a.  d. ;  our  congregation, 
this  and  all  our,  etc,  b.  e.  v. ;  our  congregation  this  as 
this,  c.  4,  where]  a.  c  d. ;  and  where,  v. ;  and  accord- 
ing to,  b.  e.  5,  service]  om.  v.  we  do  ...  .  con- 
gregation] a. ;  we  make  our  congregation  this  congr,  b. 
d.  e.  V. ;  we  make  our  congr.  this  our  congr.,  c  6, 
make  it]  om.  K  etc     of  prayer]  om.  v.         8,  (come)]  om. 


420  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

ad  V. ;  come,  b.  c.  e.  ?  salvation]  a.  ;  habitation,  h 
e. ;  days,  c.  d.  v.  lo,  before  thy  face]  a.  d.  ;  om,  b.  c 
e.  V.         II,  and  blessed]  a  d. ;  om.  b.  c  e.  v.  i8,  an( 

holy]  om.  b.  etc.  Aba]  a  c. ;  om.  b.  d.  e.  v.  2C 
priesthood]  a  c  e.  v. ;  pref  *the  ordination  of,'  h.  d 
21,  thee]  him,  v.  23,  The  deacon  shall  say]  a  e  v. 
om.  b.  c.  d.  for  the  Papas]  om.  b.  N]  om.  h.  v.  2^ 
our  God]  om.  b.  etc         25,  for]  om.  d.  e.   v.  26,  fo 

us]  a  c.  d. ;  om.  b.  e.  v.  29,  and  with  all  the  fulness 
and  all  the  fulness  of  the  congregation,  b.  one]  trs.  afte 
'catholic,*  V.  31,  hear  and]  om.  v. ;  have  mercy  anc 
d.  (e.  confused). 

Page  232,  line  i,  clemency]  blessing,  b.  c.  d.  v.  (( 
confused).  2,  pour  down  ....  thy  grace  of  th 
Holy  Spirit]  a.  c. ;  grant  the  (thy,  d.)  grace  of  thy  Hoi 
Spirit  and  (om.  d.  v.)  pour  down,  b.  d.  e.  v.  to  them 
to  him,  b.  etc.  6,  in  glory,  through]  a  c.  d.  ;  to  th 
glory  of,  b.  v.  (e.  confused).  7,  through  whom]  a  c 
e. ;  for,  b.  c.  v.  b.  continues  with  Statute  68.  e,  v.  cot 
tinue  with  Statute  67.  c.  d.  continue  with  prayer  fc 
the  departed. 


COLLATION  OF  MS.  BODLEIAN,  HUNTING- 
TON 458,  PROBABLY  OF  CENTURY  XIV., 
RESTORED  a.d.   1667. 

The  canons  forining  the  seventh  section  of  the  codex  aie  called  '  the 
second,'  as  being  the  second  book  of  Clement,  '  the  Testament  of  our 
LoTd '  being  the  first  boolL  They  are  also  called  '  the  first '  because 
they  are  the  first  71  of  the  ray  Canons  of  the  Church. 

AfS.  Vat.  150-0.     MS.  Bod.,  Buni.  458-*. 

Hunt.  458,  fol.  46,  headed  'The  first  part' 

Page  233,  line  5,  eternal]  om.  b.  glory  to  him  .... 
mercy]  om.  b.  6,  These,  etc.]  We  begin  with  the  help 
of  God,  adoration  to  him,  and  may  he  be  exalted,  to 
write  the  apostolic  kuanin  transmitted  by  the  hand  of 
Clement,  the  disciple  of  Peter  the  apostle,  and  their 
number  (is)  seventy-one  kanunan :  and  they  appointed 
them  for  the  ordering  of  the  holy  Church.  In  peace 
from  God.  Amen.  The  first  kanfln  and  the  mention 
of  the  names  of  some  of  the  apostles,  h.  10,  sons] 
+ '  daughters,'  b.  11,  and  Lord]  + '  our  God,'  b.  Christ] 
+ '  to  him  the  glory,'  b.         12,  The  first  chapter]  om.  b. 

Page  234,  line  16,  chapter]  kannn.  This  heading  is 
in  red,  b.  thus  throughout  17,  not]  b.  and  Paris, 
251.         19,  O,  2°]  om.  h. 

Page  235,  line  1 1,  The  fourth]  The  fourth  kanOn,  b. 
thus  always. 


422  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

Page  236,  line  5,  The  sixth]  The  sixth  kanun,  Qa- 
cerning  the  forsaking  of  lust  Said  Philip,  b.  lustful 
said  Philip]  om.  b.  1 7,  very  great]]  the  very  greatest, 
b.  21,  over]  at,  b.  26,  by  this]+  '  state,'  b.  28, 
or  by  magic]  om.  b. 

Page  238,  line  14,  Kafa]  Kaifa,  *  another  copy  has 
Kafa,'  b. 

Page  239,  line  5,  the  exhortation]  about  the  exhorta- 
tion, b.  16,  Said  Peter,  etc.]  This  is  not  a  fr^ 
paragraph,  b. 

Page  241,  line  2,  to  be  rejected]  of  the  rejection,  h, 
which  gives  the  other  reading  as  of  another  copy.  1 5, 
that  the  duty,  etc]  that  he  should  do  what  he  reads 
b.  18,  Is  not,  etc.]  Is  this  not  a  sin  before  God,  b 
2 1 ,  Let  them]  The  deacons,  so  let  them,  b.  be  tested]  hi 
appointed  according  to  that  which  is  written,  that,  fron 
two  witnesses  or  three  shall  every  word  be  established 
Let  them  be  tested,  b.  25,  irritates]  depraves,  b 
29,  the  cheering]  om.  b. 

Page  242,  line  29,  anything] +*  to  give  to  the  pooj 
and,'  b. 

Page  243,  line  i,  Verily  ye  saw  me  hungry,  so  ye  fee 
me]  Hungry  I  was,  so,  etc.,  b.  4,  the  pasture]  the  gooc 
pasture,  b.  10,  ye  shall  not  learn  to  be  quarrelsome" 
and  they  shall  not  be  quarrelsome,  b.  1 5,  for  them] 
for  you,  b.  17,  It  reminds  that]  concerning  that,  b. 
18,  and  what  comes  after  it]  and  his  Blood,  b.  23,  in 
which] +*  the  Teacher  was  delivered  to  the  Jews,'  b.  in 
margin. 

Page  244,  line  i,  The  Teacher]  Arabic  corrected  from 
'the  doctrine.'     (that)   the  sick]  for  the  sick,  b.         3, 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  423 

:  The  twenty]  The  twentieth  kanOn,  b.  4,  that  they] 
om.  'that,'  b.  6,  it]  that,  b.  27,  at  the  beginning 
of  the  Kiddas]  this  part  of  the  heading  in  red,  b. 

Page  245,  line  10,  the  deacons]  the  deacon,  b.  12, 
say  and  give  thanks]  give  thanks  and  say,  b. 

Page  246,  line  i,  upon  him]  om.  b.  15,  in  placing] 
and  place,  b.  16,  It  is  the  one  spirit  which  comes] 
The  one  spirit  comes,  b.  20,  The  presbyter  is  only 
ordained,  etc]  he  only  ordains  the  presbyter,  who  is  the 
bishop,  b.  24,  of  the  deacon  and  the  presbyter]  of 
the  priesthood,  b. 

Page  247,  line  i,  upon  him]  om.  b.  5,  he  is  worthy 
of]  so  he  is  worthy  of  ('  of  not  expressed),  b,  10,  and 
carefully]  om.  b.  1 2,  fluently]  calmly,  b.  24,  grow 
old]  the  unpointed  Arabic  can  yield  a  sense  agreeing  with 
the  Coptic,  a. ;  come  upon,  b. 

Page  248,  line  11,  name]  b. ;  hand,  a.  17,  proper] 
the  red  heading  in  b.  extends  to  '  proper.' 

Page  250,  line  21,  desist] +' from  her,'  b,  30,  (is)] 
b.  expresses  'is.' 

Page  251,  tine  5,  in  the  church]  om.  b.  6,  and  the 
female]  or  the  female,  b.  11,  the  women]  the  females 
and  not  the  men  (kiss)  the  females,  b.  16,  catechumens] 
the  red  heading  ends  at  *  catechumens  b.' 

Page   252,   line   3,   day]   b. ;    om.  a.  27,  to  the 

water]  b. ;  om.  a.  29,  to  bring,  etc.]  lit.  '  to  enter 
with  his  Korban ;  to  enter  in  the  hour  of  his  Korban, 
a.-«-  b. 

Page  253,  line  6,  water,  2°]  + 'in  which  he  shall  be 
baptised,*  b.  either]  om.  b.  running  (down)  upon  it]  fall- 
ingupon  it,  b.         11,  little]  om.  h.         16,  of  gold  which 


424  STATUTES  OF  TH£  APOSTLES 

they  wear]  om,  b.         19,  over  the  oilj  b.    a."^      2(1 
we  call  it]  he  calls  it,  b. 

Page  254,  line  i,  them]  hun,  b.  2,  And  the  bishop, 
etc]  or  the  bishop  who  is  standing,  b.,  but  the  senses 
bad         5,    instructs] +' and    says,*    h.  7,    and  our 

Saviour]  om.  b.  his  Holy  Spirit]  the  Holy  Spirit,  h. 
9,  and  one  Faith]  om.  'and/  b.  one  Baptism^  andooe, 
etc,  b.         ID,  Life]  for  Life,  b.     etemalj  of  the  age,  b. 

15,  our  Lord,  the  only]  om.  b.  17,  miracle]  mystery, 
b.  18,  crucified] +  *  for  us,'  b.  22,  Father]+*iB 
the  height/  b.         24,  Dost  thou]  And  dost  thou,  b. 

Page  255,  line  10,  for  ever]  +  *  and  ever/  b.  12,  say- 

ing] om.  b.,  which  adds  in  the  margin  'Verily'  to  *of 
them/         13,  the  Father]  om.  b. 

Page  256,  line  6,  then  let]  om.  b.  14,  and  (he)  who 
administers  the  cup  (shall  say)]  b.  expresses  *he* 
and  'shall  say/  17,  what  is  pleasing  toj  he  shaU 
please,  b. 

Page  257,  line  5,  (in)  what  time]  b.    expresses   *ia 

16,  a  Blessing]  the  Blessing,  b.  20,  to  eat  {/i^.  the  eat- 
ing)] that  they  eat,  b.  26,  Concerning  ....  Faithful] 
this  is  red  in  b. 

Page  258,  line  i,  that  he  eats]  om.  b.  2,  his  roof] 
the  roof  of  his  house,  b.  3,  Concerning  ....  drunken] 
this  is  a  red  heading  in  b.  17,  for  this  reason] 
because  for  this  reason,  b.  20,  But  if]  And  if,  h 
allow  anyone  to  ask]  asks  anyone,  b.  21,  address 
him] -t-*  at  pleasure,*  b.  24,  He  said]  om.  b.  25, 
silent] -f*  in  quiet,'  b.  26,  a  bishop]  the  bishop,  b. 
28,  viz.  Blessing]  b.  adds  this  in  the  margin. 

Page  259,  line  3,  Chapter]  kanOn,  b.  as  usual         6, 


!! 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  425 

then  let  them  invite]  b. ;  cm.  a.  13,  and  he  shall 
name  them]  cm.  b.  29,  The  Eulogia  of  the  fruits] 
instead  of  this  b.  has  red  title,  '  The  names  of  the  fruits 
which  are  blessed.'  30,  and  figs]  b.  om.  *and' 
throughout. 

Page  260,  line  6,  Chapter]  kanun,  b.  as  usual.  Con- 
cerning that  it  is  not  proper]  om.  b.  7,  that  any]  that 
none,  b.  8,  to  eat]  b.  has  red  title  to  'eat.'  10,  the 
time  of]  om.  b.  12,  two  days] +*  together,'  b.  16, 
this  one  ....  not]  om.  b.  20,  Concerning  .... 

deacons]  b.  has  red  title,  *  Concerning  the  deacons  that 
they  should  obey  the  commands  of  the  bishops.'  22, 
report  to]  come  to,  b.  24,  the  rest  of  the  people]  b. ; 
om.  a. 

Page  261,  line  5,  the  Spirit]  the  Holy  Spirit,  b.  6, 
That  it  is  not  proper,  etc.]  b.  has  red  title,  *  Concerning 
the  Eucharistia,  that  they  shall  not  receive  it  except  they 
are  fasting  and  tasting  nothing.'  1 3,  that  it  is  proper 
to  guard]  the  guarding,  b.  14,  carefully]  om.  b.  and 
it  is  not  proper,  etc.]  and  the  cup  that  they  let  nothing 
flow  from  it,  b.  21,  Concerning,  etc.]  b.  has  red  title, 
*  Because  it  is  not  proper  that  any  should  be  spilt  from 
the  cup.'  23,  in  the  name  of  God]  in  the  name,  b. 
adds  above,  'of  the  Lord.'  27,  blasphemer  of  the 
Blood]  a  cause  of  pouring  out  the  Blood,  b. 

Page  262,  line  i,  The  deacons  and  the  presbyters 
shall  assemble]  Concerning  the  presbyters  and  the 
deacons,  that  it  is  necessary  for  them  to  assemble,  b. 
9,  each  one]  om.  b.,  but  added  in  the  margin.  14,  to 
him]  om.  b.  16,  them,  2**]  him,  b.  18,  Concern- 
ing] om.  b.         19,  prayer]  prayers,  b.         20,  the  fore- 


426  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

head]  om.  b.  22,  necessary]  business,  b.  26,  is 
God  speaking]  om.  b.,  but  added  in  the  cut  margia 
28,  in  the  church]  in  him,  b.  the  evil]  all  evil,  b,,  which 
joins  *  every  day '  to  next  sentence. 

Page  263,  line  13,  what  he  knows  to  be  good]  what 
is  good,  b.*  b."*-  gives  the  reading  of  a.  17,  God] 

+  *  adoration  to  him,'  b.  1 8,  (hour)]  b.  expresses  '  hour.' 
21,  and  Blood  of  the  holy  Christ]  of  Christ  and  his  pure 
Blood,  b.  22,  pierced]  slain,  b.  24,  camej  descended, 
b.  31,  Let  him  teach]  Let  it  be  taught,  b.,  and  above 
is  added  *  how.' 

Page  264,  line  2,  (and)]  b.  expresses  'and.'  7,  thou 
finishedst   the   day]  the   day  was   finished,     b.  16, 

baptised] +*  with  the  water  of  Baptism,'   b.  25,   the 

elders  were  before  to  us]  om.  b.,*  added  by  later  hand, 
b."*-  And  verily]  It  is  proper  because,  b.  26,  with  the 
souls]  and  the  souls,  b.  28,  The  Lord,  etc.]  because 
the  Lord — revered  be  his  name — ^said,  b. 

Page  265,  line  2,  and  said]  saying,  b,  3,  the  day, 
etc.]  the  day  in  which  will  come  the  Lord  of  the  house; 
and  also  he  said,  Nor  in  what  hour,  b.  4,  when  the 
cock  crows]   at  cockcrow,    b.  9,    This]    These,   b. 

ID,  ye  shall  do]  let  them  do  it,  b.  13,  and  it  is  known 
....  by  this,  etc.]  and  by  this  thou  shalt  be  knowa 
This  is  that  by  which  Eblis  is  defeated,  b.  25,  the 
door-posts]  the  two  door-posts,  b.  26,  in  us]  +  '  now,' 
b.,  omitting  *  for.' 

Page  266,  line  10,  the  Church]  the  holy  Church,  b. 
14,   anyone]  another,    b.,   whose  red   title  extends  to 

And  he  spake,  etc]  And  he  was  speak- 
^Itther,  b.         25,  now]  verily,  h. 


COLLATION   OF   THE   ARABIC   TEXT  427 

27,  who  believed  in  me]  the  believers,  b.  languages] 
+  *  of  the  tongues/  b. 

Page  267,  line  i,  and  if  they  drink]  and  they  shall 
drink,  b.  poison  of  death]  a. ;  deadly  poison  in  my 
name,  b.  5,  in  order  to  give  it]  that  we  might  give  it, 
b.  15,  obey  you]  submit  to  you,  b.  18,  in  the 
heavens,  2*]  in  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens,  b.  24, 
produces  it]  reproves  with  it,  b.*^-  25,  all  the  more] 
and  all  the  more  and,  b.  27,  and  the  Son]  in  the 
Son,  b. 

Page  269,  line  i,  without  the  seed  of  men]  om.  b. 
2,  or]  and,  b.  18,  and  they  know]  or  they  know,  b. 
26,  nor  was  his  heart  exalted]  om.  b.,  which  adds  it  in 
the  margin.         29,  did  not  suffice  him]  om.  '  him,'  b. 

Page  270,  line  6,  the  idol]  om.  b.  7,  Liyush'a] 
Alish'a,  b.  that  they]  that  they  two,  b.  8,  and  Elias 
did  not  ....  signs]  om.  b.  homeoteleuton. 

Page  271,  line  i.  Chapter]  kanun,  b.  Let  not  the 
chiefs]  It  is  not  proper  that  the  chiefs  should,  b.  The 
red  title  continues  to  'below  them,*  then  the  text  con- 
tinues, *  And  the  chiefs  shall  not  despise  those  who  are 
below  them.  The  chiefs  would  be  nothing  if,  etc'  13, 
from  this  time]  om.  *  time,'  b.  14,  by  God]  it  is  God,  b. 
1 8,  The  fifty]  b.  red  title,  *  Verily  not  everyone  who 
prophesies  is  a  servant  of  God,'  then  continues  with  the 
repetition  of  a.  as  the  beginning  of  the  canon.  22,  the 
devils]  his  devils,  b. 

Page  272,  line  4,  henceforth]  pref.  'but,'  b.  8, 
malice]  the  red  title  ends  with  this  word.  10,  Han- 
aniya]  Haniniya,  b.  19,  his  grace]  om.  'his,'  b.  two] 
om.  b.,  which  crossed  out  a  word  in  the  place  of  two,  and 


428  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


margin   adds   'prophets,'  mentioned     in    the    Al 
(Acts).         22,  women  also]  om.  'also,'  h.  25, 

tarsis]     'Asratarsis,     b.         26,     Dariusj     Dariush,  \\ 
27,  the  Lord] +  *  prophesied,'  b.     Alish'aJ  Alisabatk 

Page  273,  line  12,  and  we  conrniandj  by  the  commas^ 
b.  23,  When  they  have  recorded  their  consent  astt 
this  (man)]  When  all  the  people  have  been  pleased  wic 
this  (man),  b.  24,  let  all,  etc]  let  the  bishops  and  d 
presbyters  and  the  deacons  and  all  the  people  assemb 
on  the  first  day,  b.  5,  kept]  b.**'*  adds  this  in  tl 
margfin.  8,  said] +' yea,'  b.  16,  a  great  one  fro 
the  great  bishops]  a  great  (one)  of  the  bishops,  b.  : 
(with)]  b.  expresses  *  with.'  in  the]  from  the,  b.  : 
what  should  be  read  in  the  Gospel]  from  the  reading 
the  Gospel,  b.  12,  and  the  laymen  shall  kiss  t 
laymen]  and  the  laymen  shall  kiss  one  another,  h. 

Page  275,  line  19,  And  the  subdeacon  shallj  And  1 
the  subdeacons,  b. 

Page  276,  line  2,  Prospherin]  Nrswran,  a.  :  Nzswran, 
This  word  is  red  in  b.  N  and  z  are  due  to  wrong-  poii 
ing.  W  represents  ph.  ph  =  p  =  b  =  w.  29,  honou 
able]  trs.  after  *  holy,'  b. 

Page  277,  line  5,  the  deacons]  pref.  *the  presbyte 
and,'  b.  7,  the  priests]  om.  b.  13,  This  we]  Th 
is  that  which  we,  b.  1 8,  and  the  women  readers]  on 
b.  21,  his  head]  the  head  of  the  presbyter  whom  tho 
ordainest,  b.  and  all  the  presbyters]  +  *  touched  him  nc 
and  they  are,'  b. 

Page  278,  line  14,  Concerning  the  widows]  b.  give 
fresh  title  for  the  widows,  *  And  concerning  the  widows 
29,  men]  all  men,  b. 


i: 


COLLATION   OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  429 

Page  279,  line  i,  Concerning,  etc bishops]  How 

many  of  the  bishops  shall  be  present  (at)  the  ordination  of 
the  bishop,  b.  6,  And  if  it  was  ....  excommunicated] 
om.  b.  1 2,  The  fifty-seventh]  continuing  with  red  title, 
'  Concerning  that  the  bishop  blesses  and  excommunicates 
him  who  is  worthy  (of  it),'  b.  13,  and  he  shall  excom- 
municate, etc  ....  blessing]  om.  b.  17,  blessed] 
+  *  by  him  who  is  inferior  to  him,'  b.  30,  and  the  pres- 
byter] or  the  presbyter,  b. 

Page  280,  line  4,  The  fifty-eighth]  This  Canon  is 
omitted  by  a  and  supplied  from  b.  1 9,  for  the  clerg^y] 
om.  *  for,'  b. 

Page  281,  line  10,  and  the  presbyters]  or  the,  etc,  b. 
II,  to  come]  to  begin,  b.  18,  is]  among  them  is,  b. 
21,  to  him]  om.  b. 

Page  282,  line  8,  world] +*  and  eats  with  the 
adulterers,'  b."**  10,  idols]  the  idol,  b.  12,  a 
theatre]  the  theatre,  b.  23,  the  astrolabe]  an  astro- 
labe, b. 

Page  283,  line  6,  The  sixty-third]  +  *  And  this  is  from 
the  saying  of  Paul  the  Apostle,'  b."«'  25,  God] 
+ '  adoration  to  him  ....  according  to  what,'  b.  26, 
The  sixty-fourth]  *  From  the  words  of  Paul  the  Apostle,' 
b."**         28,  or  woman]  and  woman,  b. 

Page  284,  line  5,  The  sixty-fifth:  Every  .  .  .  . 
Sunday]  The  sixty-fifth  kanQn,  concerning  the  vacation 
of  the  servants  on  the  day  of  the  Sabbath,  b.,  and  in 
margin,  *  From  the  words  of  Peter  and  Paul'  16,  The 
sixty-sixth  ....  feasts]  The  sixty-sixth  kanQn,  con- 
cerning the  week  of  the  Pascha  and  the  mention  of  the 
feasts,  b. 


430  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

Page  285,  line  i,  for  us]  om.  b.  4,  on  that  dayjoni 
day,  b.  5,  bore  witness]  and  he  was  plain  who  bore 
witness,  b.  8,  God] +  *  and  the  Son  of  God,'  b. 
15,  the  times]  pref.  *  concerning,'  b.  16,  pray] +  ' and 
pray,*  b.  18,  (in)  the  evening]  b.  expresses  *ia* 
22,  being  the  hour  in  which]  om.  'the  hour,'  b.  24, 
(in)  the  ninth]  b.  expresses  *in*'  26,  his  side]  om.  b.; 
the  ancient  text  ends  here,  and  the  last  two  leaves  of 
the  canons  have  been  restored. 

Page  286,  line  2,  he  has  given  to  you  rest]  he  has  given 
to  you  the  night  (as)  rest,  b'.  6,  that  ye  may  do  them] 
and  ye  shall  do  them,  b'.  7,  The  sixty-eighth]  The 
sixty-eighth  kanun,  from  the  saying  of  Paul  the  Apostle, 
b'. ,  red  title.  1 6,  flee]  flee  thou,  b'.  21,  wherever 
he  is  by  himself]  om.  b'.         29,  of  God]  of  the  Church,  b'. 

Page  287,  line  i,  her  house]  a  house,  b'.  slaves]  +  'of 
the  sin/  b'.         5,  the  days]  what  days,  If.  6,  slept] 

+  'from  the  saying  of  Paul  and  James,'   b'.  7,  for 

those  who  slept]  om.  b'.  11,  in  likeness  of  the 
ancient  (practice)]  because,  b'.  12,  thus  they  shall 
keep]  om.  b'.  1 3,  in  likeness  of  their  memorial]  om. 
h\  14,  the  goods  of  him  who  died]  the  riches  of  the 
dead,  b'.         15,  as  a  memorial  for  him]  om  b'.  17,  to 

the  poor]  om.  b^         20,  There  is  indeed]  Because  there 

is,  b'.         22,  and  loveth,  etc work]  om.  b'.  28, 

ye  yourselves  and  others  (also)]  om.  b'.  31,  lest  they 

should  drink]  om.  b'. 

Page  288,  line  2,  God]  the  righteous  dealing  of  God, 
b'.  3,  We  say  this  (but)  we  do  not  forbid]  We  do  not 
say  this  in  order  that  we  may  forbid,  b'.  5,  because, 
etc men]  om.  b'.         7,  The  Scriptures,  etc 


COLLATION  OF  THE  ARABIC  TEXT  43 1 

all  the  lay  people]  om.  l/.,  which  has  'and  this  we 
say  to  all  who  are  Nazarenes.'  12,  our  Master]  om, 
I/.  18,  chapter]  kanun,  b'.  19,  Faith] +*  the  say- 
ing of  Peter  and  Paul,'  b'.,  the  end  of  the  red  title,  and 
concerning  him]  concerning  the  Faith  and  him,  b'.         20, 

because  of  the  Faith,  etc to  city]  om.  b'.         24, 

(and)]  so,  b'.  25,  from  place  to  place]  om.  b^  27, 
of  Christ  and]  om  b'.         29,  of  the  Lord]  of  God,  b^ 

Page  289,  line  i.  Order  which  is  g^ven  him]  his  Order, 
b'.         2,  the  limits,  etc.]  that  which  is  limited  to  him, 

b'.         3,    It  is   not,  etc sent  me,    2**]   Because 

God  said  he  who  obeyed  you  obeyed  me,  and  he  who 
despised  you,  he  did  it  to  me,  b'.         9,  the  day]  like  the 

day,  \f.         10,  and  the  elements,  etc beyond]  and 

the  seas  and  all  things,  b'.  17,  much  more]  om.  b'. 
27,  king]  om.  If.  29,  and  the  latter  had  his  forehead, 
etc Page  290,  line  27,  not  go  from  it]  om.  b'. 

Page  290,  line  28,  Order  and]  om.  b'. 

Page  291,  line  i,  and  high  priest]  om.  b'.  2,  sin  and 
curses]  the  curses,  b'.  10,  chapter]  kanUn  If.  limits] 
+  *  Peter  and  Paul,'  b'.,  the  end  of  the  red  title.  14, 
whom  we  have  named]  om.  b'.  22,  a  law] +  *  also,'  b'. 
27,  the  service,  the  service]  to  the  service,  b'.  30,  the 
Oblations]  Oblations,  b'.         31,  the  Eulogia]  Eulogia,  b'. 

Page  292,  line  i,  a  presbyter]  the,  etc.,  b'.         11,  The 

lover  of  God,  were  chief  priests]  om.  b'.         14,  Clement] 

I  and  Clement,  \f.         15,  that  we  should  not  describe] 

that  he  should  not  send,  b'.         16,  withal]  with  us,  b'. 

18,  only  true]  true,  Jesus,   b^.         23,   and  there   were 

others]  and  if  there  were  others,  b'. 

Page  293,  line  2,  that  he  even]  it  seemed  good  that 

28 


432  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

he,  b'.  5,  gushed  with]  followed,  b'.  i 
eunuch]  +  *  of  Candace/  b'.  The  *  Apostolic 
Amin]  Were  finished  the  Canons  of  the  Church, 
our  fathers  the  Apostles  laid  down  by  the  h 
Clement  whom  they  sent,  and  they  are  sevei 
Canons.     In  the  peace  of  the  Lord.     Amen,  If. 


ri 


m. ' 


COLLATION  OF  SAIDIC  FRAGMENTS  IN 
PARIS,  OXFORD,  AND  LONDON  WITH 
LAGARDE'S  TEXT  IN  ^GYPTIACA. 

Paris,  Bibl.  Nat.,  Copte  I29'^  f.  93. 

Page  301,  line  23  begins  (Canon  16)  stay  with  her. 
24,  have]  have  had  (eaf).  all] +*  good.'  25,  well  the 
Scriptures]  the  holy  Scriptures.  If]  But  if.  26,  let] 
particle  of  apodosis  (eie)  omitted.  28,  a  matter]  one 
heart.  30,  (Canon  17)  ordained]  Saidic  not  Greek 
word.  31,  attend  to  knowledge  and  patience]  know 
attention,  i.e.  know  how  to  give  his  mind  to  the  work. 

Page  302,  line  3,  after  having,  etc.]  these  whom  they 

will  prove  =  who  will  be  proved.         4,  (Canon  1 8)  And] 

om.     there]  for  there.         7.   me]  om.     brethren]  pref. 

*my.'     8,  the]  om.     offer]  conjunctive  tense,  probably 

the  same  meaning.         12,  doers  of  good  in]  being  of. 

14,  with,  etc.]  This  is  the  order  of  words  in  the  fragment ; 

Lagarde  inverts.         1 6,  Then]  om.         1 7,  shall  provide] 

let  them   provide,  thus  again.         19,  and]  conjunctive 

tense  without  conjunction.         22,  and  that  there  .... 

subjection]  and  not  make  disturbance,  loving  discipline 

before  everything,  (and)  to  be  subject  (hypotasse)  in  all 

subjection   (hypotake).         24,  Further]  om.     whenever 

they  correct  anyone]  if  there  is  one  whom  they  correct* 

433 


434  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

25,  audacity]  Saidic  word«         26,   within  J  at,  lit.  up(x. 
27,  of  one  heart]  one   of  one,  i.e.   unanimous,    andd 
....  desert]  and  do  to  such  an  one  with    one  woti 
(according)  to  that  in  which  they  condemn  him.       2I 
and  all  the  rest]  that  the  rest.         29,  lest]  mepote.    seei 
to  please]  continue  (tcho)  to  accept  the  person  of  ok 
among  them.         30,  and  (the  sinner)  ....  cancer]  and 
(the  sinner)  should  continue,  (moun  ebol)  as   a  cancer 
consuming. 

Page  303,  line  i,  (Canon  19)  They  shallj  Let  than. 
appoint]  kathista.  2,  after  proving]  having  pro\'ed 
(eau).     great]  om.     proof]  Saidic  word.  3,  whether 

....  tongfue]  not  one  of  many  words.  4,   a  scoffer 

in  his  speech]  a  railer  {lit.  a  speaker  of  disgrace),  not  a 
scoffer,  but  of  respectable  appearance]  having-  a  good 
appearance.  5,  obedient]  desiring  (epithymei)  that 
which  is  good,  being  good  in  his  thoughts,  being  first 
.  .  .  .  minister]  being  quick  to  hasten  to  the  place  in 
which  (are)  those  who  assemble  because  of  the  Lord: 
reading  well  (kalos).  knowing  ....  preacher]  knowing 
that  (it  is)  the  place  of  the  preacher  which  he  holds,  Ht. 
does.  For  ....  God]  For  he  who  fills  the  ears  of 
others  and  understands  (noi)  not  himself  what  he  reads  it 
will  be  reckoned  to  him  for  a  sin :  it  is  written  thus 
before  the  Lord.         1 2,  kathista]  The  fragment  ends. 

Brit.  Mus.,  Or.  3580,  A.  and  B.,  f.  28. 
The  same  MS.  as  P.  130^,  f.  50,  etc. 

Page   307,  line  22   begins  Canon   32.     23,  all]  om. 
25,  we  said]  we  said  before. 


COLLATION   OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  43S 

Page  308,  line  5,  (Canon  33)  command  him]  be 
commanded  by  him.  Uncertain,  but  perhaps  thus. 
Neither  ....  ordained]  He  was  not  being  ordained 
(khirodonei).  17,  to  give  Orders]  om.  19,  He 
....  presbyter]  the  presbyter  only  seals. 

Page  309,  line  3,  (Canon  34)  with  ....  house]  thus 
also  the  fragment,  confessed,]  confessed,  (full  point), 
hand  ....  worthy]  But  any  (lit  every)  kind  of  clergy 
(klerikos)  which  he  is  worthy  to  be,  hand  is  to  be  laid 
upon  him,  and  he  is  to  be  made.  7»  not]  om.  8» 
the  same]  these.         9,  learning]  The  fragment  ends. 

Brit.  Mus.,  Or.  3580,  A.  and  B.,  f.  29'. 

The  Canons  are  in  the  following  order  :  37,  35,  38,  36. 

Page  310,  line  2  begins  Canon  37.  5,  And  (de)]  thus 
also  the  Codex  of  Lagarde.  8,  But  (even)]  And.  9, 
by  time,  lit.  the  time]  in  a  time.  1 3,  with]  to.  1 5, 
litourgia]  leitourgei.  And]  pref.  *  which  belongs  to  the 
{lit.  in  the)  clergy  (peklerikos)  for  the  sake  of  public 
worship  (litourgeia).'         18,  But  indeed]  om. 

Page  309,  line  20,  (Canon  35)  shall  be  appointed] 
whenever  he  is  appointed.  21,  to  him] +  *  first.'  of  the 
.  .  .  .  even  him]  om.  28,  his  ...  .  he]  plural. 
29,  deacon]  The  fragment  ends. 

Brit.  Mus.,  Or.  3580,  A.  and  B.,  f.  29,  30. 

Page  310,  line  26  begins  Canon  39.  28,  Further] 
om.         29,  gifts]  a  gift.         30,  him]  om. 


436  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

Page  311,  line  5,  (Canon  40)  faith  J  om.  6,  the 
people]   pref.  *all.*      inquire] +  *  of  them/  7,  of  the 

thing]  om.  8,  they]  ye*  9,  bring  them]  + '  to  us.' 
12,  or  whether  ....  believer]  or  whether  he  is  a 
servant.  If  indeed  he  is  a  servant  of  a  believer.  15, 
let]  then  let  If]  but  if.  18,  however]  om.  24, 
according  to  the  law]  as  he  is.     But]  om.  25,  he  shaD 

not]  let  him  not. 

Page  312,  line  2,  (Canon  41)  kathista]  kathekei 
4,  leave  off  ]+*  doing  the  thing.*  6,  either  ....  or] 
but  if  he  is  not  willing  to  leave  off,  then.  8,  pydecis] 

epeideixis.  10,  If]  but  if.  11,  leave  off] +  * the 
thing.'  if]  but  if  no]  no  other.  25,  if]  but  if.  26, 
nor]  let  him  not.         27,  let]  then  let 

Page  313,  line  10,  who  make]  The  fragment  ends. 

Paris,  Bibl.  Nat.,  Copte  129",  f  9,  Paper  Fragment. 

Page  321,  line  20,  (Canon  49)  begins,  Let  not  the 
catechumens]  catechumen.  27,  and  moderately]  om. 
29,  becomingly]  discreedy  (epistemei).  30,  so  as  to 
be  drunken]  to  the  being  drunken. 

PAGE322,  line  i,thathe  ....  him]  that  he  may  rejoice 
that  ye  hasten  unto  him.  5,  also]  om.  6,  ye  shall] 
thou  shalt.  6,  what  is  sufficient,  lit  your  sufficiency] 
thy  sufficiency.  7,  thee]  you.  9,  at  your  coming  in] 
that  ye  came.  1 2,  but  when  ....  speaks]  but  when 
the  bishop  or  the  presbyter  wishes  to  speak  a  word  or 
ask  something.  15,  only]  om.  16,  presbyter] 
presbyters,  if  he  is  there]  om.  17,  a  deacon]  the 
deacons.         21,  laymen]  The  fragment  ends. 


collation  of  the  saidic  text  437 

Paris,  Bibl.  Nat.,  Copte  1313. 

Page  328,  line  13,  begins  (Canon]62)  'thou  thinkest  not/ 
14,  by  the  things]  by  that.  Holy]  om.  1 5,  Thus]  And 
thus,  the  things]  pref.  'all.'  17,  And]  om.  19, 
then]  om.  one]  +  *  of  you.'  hasten]  Saidic  word.  20, 
Church]  +  *  of  the  true  God  Jesus  the  Christ.'  Holy]  om. 
breaks  forth]  teaches  daily.  2 1,  If]  But  if.  23,  take] 
+  *to  him.'  in  it]  out.  24,  And]  om.  27,  time] 
hour,  to  God]  om.  28,  the  Christ]  +  *our  God.' 
29,  For  this  cause  ....  Page  329,  line  4,  heaven]  om. 

Page  329,  line  4,  Pray]  But  pray,  likewise]  om. 
hour] +*  of  the  day.'  6,  that  day]  the  day.  and 
.  .  .  .  happened]  it  became  dark.  7,  let  them]  let  us. 
8,  a  prevailing  prayer]  a  great  prayer  prevailing,  the 
voice  of]  om.     prayed] +*  with  his  voice.'         9,  all]  om. 

10,  the  unbelieving  Jews]  the  eyes  of  the  unbelieving. 

1 1 ,  great]  om.  and  a  great  blessing]  om.  1 2,  hour] 
+  'with  a  blessing.'  13,  the  Lord  the  true]  om. 
14,  God] +  *  daily. '  15,  his  Son  ....  Word]  his  holy 
Word.  16,  For]  om.  side]  pref.  *holy.'  18,  and] 
om.  20,  thou  shalt  begin  ....  day]  thou  shalt  begin 
going  to  sleep  of  another  day.  21,  also]  om.  22, 
thyself  ....  place]  thy  body  (soma)  in  a  bed.  and] 
but.  23,  upon  thy  bed]  om.  thyself] +*  in  water. 
24,  and  ....  water]  om.  25,  also]  om.  pray  .... 
together]  let  her  arise  with  thee  and  pray  ye.  28, 
both  one  with  the  other,  to  thy  place]  and  lie  down  in 
thy  place,     thou]  O  thoa 

Page  330,  line  i,  washed] +  *  by  the  baptism.'  2, 
and  ....  clean]  om.     Further]  For.         4,  hand]  hands. 


438  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

6,  unto]  down  unto.  7,  Holy]  om.  drops]  drop. 
9,  fountain]  pref.  •holy.'  10,  him  who  believed]  om. 
But  also]  om.  11,  for  us  to  pray]  in  causing  you  to  pray, 
hour]  The  fragment  ends. 

Oxford,  Bodl.,  Woide*s  Fragments,   vii.  and  51. 

Page  335,  line  22,  begins  (Canon  63)  *day.  And  that' 
27,  either]  om.         29,  the  Father]  om. 

Page  336,  line  8,  continence]  good  continence.         11, 
his]  the.         12,  Jesou]  iys.         18,  all]  om.  22,  who 

kept  themselves]  om.  23,  Bahal  (fem.)^  masculine, 
or  any  other]  om.         26,  and  wonders]  om.  30,  holy] 

om. 

Page  337,  line  i,  burning]  om.  2,  were  saved] 
escaped,     all]  om.         3,  and  wonders]  om.  6,  signs 

and]  om.  11,  and  wonders]  om.  12,  energia] 
energei.  16,  stratoigos]  strategos.  19,  and]  for. 
21,  deacon  or  presbyter]  the  deacons  or  the  presbyters 
24,  For]  But.  25,  laeikos]  laoikos.  29,  those]  the. 
Lo]  om. 

Page  338,  line  2,  nor]+*  also.'  3,  Baior]  Beor, 
corrected.  6,  daimdnion]  daimon,  thus  ag^in.  7, 
though]  pref  *  and.'  10,  The  thing]  +  *  therefore' 
12,  prophecy]  trs.  after  'ungodliness.'  17,  (and)] 
expressed.  22,  and]  om.  24,  also]  om.  Achia] 
Acheias,  trs.  before  *  Zedekeias.'  26,  dimoreij  dimore, 
thus  again.         27,  all]  om.         29,  plyge]  plege. 

Page  339,  line  i,  all]  om.  5,  just]  om.  6,  again] 
now.  7,  holy]  om.  9,  Jeremias]  Jeremias.  saith] 
+ '  but  these  we  are  saying.'         10,  For]  om.  1 1,  of 


COLLATION   OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  439 

God]  trs.  after  *  Spirit'  22,  Debbora]  Tefbora.  and] 
om.     Olla]  Ouolda.         24,  also]  om.         29,  indeed]  om. 

Page  340,  line  5,  holy]  om.  7,  poUakis]  pollagis. 
8,  and  wonders]  om.  17^  ever] +  *  and  ever.'  23. 
(Canon  64)  a  chosen  man]  om.  holy]  trs.  after  '  choice.' 
26,  all]  om. 

Page  341,  line  i,  man]  om.  3,  this  ....  truth] 
om.  6,  and  holy]  om.  8,  all  men]  the  men.  9, 
conducted]  conducts.  10,  house]  household,  whole] 
om.  II,  as  ...  .  household]  om.  15,  Jesus  the 
Christ]  om.  1 7,  again]  om.  20,  stand]  The  frag- 
ment ends. 

Paris,  Bibl.  Nat.,  Copte  129",  f.  7.     The  same 

MS.  as  130^,  f.  50. 

Page  348,  line  27  begins  Canon  72.  30,  All]  But 
all         3I1  to  eat]  they  shall  eat  them. 

Page  349,  line  1,  all]  om.  2,  the  other  clergy]  the 
clergy  (kleros).  3,  and  ....  poverty]  om.  For] 
om.  10,  (Canon  73)  The  mystery]  the  holy  mysteries. 
12,  at  the] +  ' time  of  the.'  15,  and]  or.  presbyters] 
presbyter.  16,  three]  + 'parts.'  21,  tima]  epitima. 
22,  The]  For  the.  23,  taxis]  eudaxia.  29,  (Canon 
74)  Further]  om.  to  partake  of]  first  to.  30,  first] 
om.         3 1 ,  presbyters]  presbyter,     deacons]  deacon. 

Page  350,  line  i,  by  what  cause  ....  and  for]  for  the 
cause,  namely,  for.  2,  ye]  they.  4,  deeds]  +  *  con- 
cerning the  crafts.'  9,  (Canon  75)  Let]  But  let.  life 
(bios)]  form.  10,  whether,  i**]  pref  *and.'  and]  or. 
1 1 ,  And  if  it  is]  If  one  is.     let  them]  the  fragment,  printed 


440  STATUTES  OF  THE   APOSTLES 


also  by  Maspdro,  ends,  but  also  continues  as  printed  by 
Leipoldt  13,  until  ....  17,  received]]  om.  ic, 
And]  om.  22,  let  them  be  taught]  let  them  guarc 
them.  24,  And]  and  (de).  26,  to  his  slave]  to  the 
woman.  27,  Further]  om.  28,  indeed  J  om.  piety* 
om.         30,  unless]  until. 

Page  351,  line  2,  his  wicked  form]  om.  5,  If  one 

....  rejected]  om.,  but  see  below.  7,  who  is  .  .  .  • 

come  in]  If  a  man  or  a  woman  come  into  the  theatre 
(theadron),  either  let  them  leave  off  or  let  them  be  rejected 

8,  or,  I**]  om.  9,  monomakhos]  monakhos,  thus 
again.  15,  rejected]  +  *  If  one  who  makes,  etc.,'  IL  5, 6. 
If  a  soldier  should  come]  A  soldier  coming.  16. 
anyone  ....  taught]  om.  18,  then  (de)]  thus  also  the 
fragment.  19,  but]  om.  21,  abomination]  anomia. 
namely  ....  male]  or  sodomites,  or  a  voluptuary 
(malagos).  22,  or  a  lascivious  man]  or  a  stranger, 
magician]  +  *or  an  exorcist  *  (exorgistes).  27,  or  .  .  .  . 
vessel]  om.  or  an  interpreter  of  the  movement]  or  he 
who  binds  the  movement         29,  and  (hi)]  or. 

Page  352,  line  i,  watches]  listens,  Saidic  word.  5, 
indeed]  but  6,  but]  om.  not  be  persuaded]  here 
begins  Brit  Mus.,  Or.  3580,  A.  and  B,  f.  31  =  1  (London), 
Paris  =  p.         8,  unbeliever]  believer,  p.     indeed]  om.  p 

9,  scholaze]  dokimaze,  p.  to  him]  herself,  p.  lo,  but] 
om.  1.  II,  But]  om.  p.  12,  indeed]  om.  p.  a  slave] 
his  slave,  p.  let  him  ....  away]  let  him  leave  ofT  from 
her,  p.  13,  marry]  +  *to  him,'  p.  1.  but]  p.  L  ;  om. 
Lagarde.  1 4,  her]  +  *  according  to  the  law, '  p.  willing] 
+  *to  do  this,'  p.  15,  hethnos]  hellfin,  p.  16, 
Jewish]  like  the  Jews,  p.         17,  who  ....  gaze]  who 


COLLATION   OF  THE  SAIDIC   TEXT  44I 

laughs  or  who  gazes,  p.  i8,  the  hunt]  a  hunt,  p. 
the  horse- racings]  a  horse  racing,  p.  22,  diligent] 
more  diligent,  p.  23,  being  eager]  om.  p.  without 
delay]  in  (ehoun),  p.  L  24,  for]  Saidic  conjunction. 
25,  And]  om.  p.  26,  instructs]  +  *in  the  word,*  p. 
if]  but  if,  p.  instructing]  but  instructing,  p.  27,  his] 
the,  p.  all]  +  'said  he,'  p.  30,  early]  at  the  early 
hour,  p.         31,  hands]  *in  water,'  p. 

Page  353,  line  3,  anything  else,  lit.  every  thing]  the 
thing  (or  *  the  work '),  p.  6,  you]  om.  p.  1.  behind] 
pref.  *  in  those  which.'  them]  om.  p.  1.  7,  the  Epistles] 
our  Epistles,  1.  10,  that  they  may  be  instructed]  for 
the  sake  of  instructing,  p.  piety  of]  om.  p.  1.  11, 
the  Lord]  God,  p.  12,  on  it]  om.  1.  13,  day] 
+  'also,*  p.  15,  week]  g^eat  week,  p.  16,  which  is 
the  festival]  which  belongs  to  the  festival,  p;  om.  1. 
19,  they]  ye,  p.  by]  in,  1.  the]  this,  1.  20,  died] 
om.  p.  rose]  +  'from  them  who  are  dead,'  p.  And 
....  line  22,  day]  om.  p.  22,  Nor  let  them  work]  And 
(de)  let  them  not  work,  p.  23,  because  of  the]  The 
London  fragment  ends  here.  24,  us  ...  .  all]  them. 
25,  Let]  but  let.  26,  the  Christ]  the  Lord.  27, 
grace]  +  *of  the  Lord.'  29,  the  holy  Theodokos] 
om.  virgin]  holy  virgin.  30,  race  of  men]  world 
(kosmos). 

Page  354,  line  1,  that  was  the  day  when]  on  that  day. 
the  Christ]  pref.  'our  Lord  Jesus.'  2,  manifested] 
+  *at'the  Jordan.'  bore]  having  borne,  at]  by.  3, 
And]  om.  came]  having  come,  likeness]  form.  4,  to 
....  by]  om.  6,  in  truth]  om.  Let,  etc]  But  let  them 
not  work  also,     days]  day.         9,  partake]  obtain.         10, 


442  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

Let,  etc]  as  line  6.  ii,  martyr]  protomartyr.  and 
chief  deacon]  om.  other  holy  martyrs]  all  the  martyn 
of  the   Christ       13,    Further]  om.  14,    Pray]    Bii 

pray.         15,  evening]  the  hour  of  evening.  16,  The 

hour]  At  the  hour,     the  light]  the  morning.  1 7,  the 

night] pref.  'the  darkness  of.'  18,  alsoj  om.  And  the 
third]  And  at  the  third  also,     because]  om.  20»  at  that 

hour]  om.  And  the  sixth]  And  at  the  sixth  also.  21, 
the  Christ]  pref.  *  the  Lord  Jesus.'  23,  the  ninth]  at  the 
ninth.         24,  trembling]  and  trembled.  25,  godless] 

om.  they]  it  their  Lord]  the  Lord  of  the  glory.  26, 
derided]  contemned.  28,  And  at  the  hour]  At  the 
hour  also,  ye  shall  pray]  om.  in  which  ye  shall  go]  that 
ye  may  go. 

Page  355,  line  2,  the  synaxis]  thy  synaxis  (plural).  4, 
impious]  unbelievers.  8,  For  as  .  .  .  .  itj  cm.  9, 
If]  if  also.  II,  let  him  ....  three]  and  pray  and 
read.  But  if  also  there  are  two  together  or  three  let 
them  pray.  13,  he]  the  Lord.  15,  in  the  houses  of] 
with.  16,  he  who  com.]  ye  should  communicate 
should  touch  those]  with  those.  19,  in  the  house,  etc] 
with  the  heretics  in  house.  21,  or  ...  .  Belear] 
om.         23,  either]  om.     be  separated]  separate  them. 

Page  356,  line  i,  from  the  dead]  om.  2,  And]  om. 
have  fallen  asleep]  are  dead.  4,  on]  according  ta 
the  ancient]  of  the  ancients.  7,  for  a  sign,  eta]  for 
remembering  them.         8,  of  him  ....  him]om.  10, 

even  if  (kan)]  if.  11,  poor] +*  and  the  orphans 
(orphanos).'  them] +  *  as  alms  on  oblation  (prosphora).* 
12,  them]  him,  thus  again.  14,  after  they]  if  they, 
from  this  world]  from  body.         15,  The]  for  the.  17, 


COLLATION   OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  443 


on  their  days]  on  a  day.  to  eat]  om.  i8,  in  comely 
fashion]  discreetly  (epistemei).  19,  intercede]  pray. 
20,  being]  for  being.  21,  of]  under,  therefore]  om. 
22,  by  yourselves  and  with]  better  *for  yourselves  and 
for.'  p.  has  'for  yourselves  but  for.'  23,  For]  But. 
24,  These  ....  wrathful]  The  wrathful  mighty  ones 
(dynastes).  25,  lest  (mepote)]  mepds.  27,  God] 
+  *the  Father.'  28,  beloved]  only  (monogenes).  29, 
bishops  and  the  presbyters]  presbyters  and  the  deacons, 
great  ones]  dynastes. 

Page  357,  line  i,  these]  this.  3,  cheerftdness] 
profit  (ophelei).  4,  we  are  commanding  them  not  to 
drink]  that  they  may  not  drink.  6,  at  all]  om.  what 
does  it  say]  it  says,  it  says]  om.  7,  And  .... 
drunkard]  om.  11,  Christ  ....  Lord]  Christianity. 
12,  also]  om.  And  to  whom  confusion  ....  conten- 
tions] To  whom  shall  be  contention  and  quarrelling.^ 
15,  bloodshot]  +  *or  to  whom  shall  be  gratuitous 
wranglings,'  lit.  rubbings.  21,  from]  likewise 
(homoios)  from.  26,  and  pursued]  and  flee.  27, 
words]  word,  indeed]  om.  29,  For  this  cause]  For 
(gar). 

Page  358,  line  i,  for  them]  om.  2,  not  having 
denied]  so  as  not  to  deny.  3,  them] +*  therefore.' 
6,  all]  om.  8,  that  ye  should  not]  not  to.  the 
measure  and]  om.  10,  you]  him.  15,  order] 
orders,  perfect]  om.  1 6,  the  stars]  pref  *  and '  the 
changes]  of  the  year.  18,  the  weeks]  pref  'and.' 
19,  the  hours]  pref  'and.'  are] +' all'  20,  them]  it 
22,  He  says  also]  And.  a  limit]  her  limit  23,  and 
(de)]  om.         24,  and]  om.         25,  If  ...  .  them]  cm. 


444  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

Page  359,  line  i,  God  defined]  they  defined.  2, 
holy  will]  the  will  of  God.  Since  many  have  reckoi 
since  we  have  reckoned  3,  namely  to  confuse 
orders]  in  our  condition  (hexis).  The  passag^e  is  con 
and  to  dare  to  change]  and  to  change.  5,   were] 

6,    And    allowing  ....  authority]  om.  10,    O 

Oseias.         1 2,  For  this  cause]  And.  1 3,  and  he  ; 

and  this  other.         17,  truly]  om.     danger  .   .   .  .  wc 
danger    of    such    things    (or  people),     sacrifices] 
(thysiasterion).         23,  the  Christ]  om.  26,   Furt 

For  (gar).  28,  face  to  face]  mouth  to  mouth,  on 
man.  29,  Who  ....  to  mouth]  Who  saw  him  fa 
face.         30,  by  his  ...  .  enigmas]  om. 

Page  360,  line  i,  indeed]  om.  2,  he  ....  L 
he  gave  to  him  his  law.  4,  priests]  chief  priests, 
om.  were  the  works  of  the  levites  ....  service' 
things  which  were  to  be  done  by  the  levites,  and  1 
was  to  be  done  by  the  priests ;  he  manifested  to  < 
according  to  his  service.  7,  chief  priestsj  tl 
10,  But  each  ....  Page  362,  line  6,  readers]  om. 

Page  362,  line  7,  the  true  ....  Christ]  the  > 
begotten     Jesus     the     Christ  8,      himself]      *j 

expressed.         9,  the  Father]  his  Father.  17,  .   . 

taken  up]  The  fragment  ends. 


COLLATION  OF  THE  TRANSLATION  OF 
THE  SAIDIC  WITH  TATTAM'S  TRANS- 
LATION OF  THE  BOHAIRIC  VERSION. 

'  boh  *  tneans  that  the  Bohairic  is  the  same  as  the  Saidic, 

Page  295,  line  14,  after  we  had  assembled]  that  we 
should  assemble.  15,  Ye  have  not  ....  you]  whereas 
we  had  not  ....  us.  16,  before  that  ye]  Ye  shall. 
18,  the  dignity  (plur.)  of  the  Bishops]  the  orders  for 
Bishops.  19,  the  councils  of  the  Presbyters]  stations 
for    Presbyters.  21,    the    wisdom    (plur.)]    prudent 

persons. 

Page  296,  line  i,  the  sinlessness  (plur.)]  blameless, 
sc.  persons.         1 1 ,  revealed  to  him]  given  him  grace. 

Page  297,  line  23,  take  an  evil  counsel]  speak  an  evil 
word. 

Page  298,  line  5,  a  female  demon]  boh.  12,  look  up] 
meditate.  13,  after  a  little  interval]  a  little  with 
knowledge  (epistime).  14,  and  draw  it  back  to  you] 
that  you  may  cast  it  behind  yoa  18,  they  swell]  they 
change,  and  it  becomes  under  derision]  and  become 
under  a  great  work.  27,  assigner  of  hours]  boh. 
maker  of  potions]  boh.     wizard]  idolater  } 

Page  299,  line  i,  theft]  blasphemy,    brass]  silver.         9, 

unmalicious]  boh.         10,  words] +*  of  God.'         12,  the 

proud]  boh.         13,  pure]  humble.         20,  like  the  Lord] 

445 


446  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


boh.         21,  For  where,  etc]  For  where  the  word  of  the 
Lordship  is.         23,  the  other  holy  ones]  boh. 

Page  300,  line  3,  threshing]  boh.  6,  for  peace,  etc] 
boh.  8,  For  riches,  etc]  Suffer  not  riches  to  prevail 
before  God,   neither  justify  the  unworthy.  10,  but 

etc]  but  righteous  judgment  before   alL  17,  wbea 

etc]  boh.         19,  that  God,  etc]  this  rewajxl  is  of  God 

Page  301,  line  5,  as  for,  etc]  all  the  remaining  precepB 
of  the  holy  scriptures  are  sufficient  7,  say  to  them, 
etc]  boh.  II,  and  the  multitude  ....  twelve  men] 
boh.  14,  where,  etc]  boh.  15,  from]  perhaps 'in,' 
as  boh.  17,  Whether  ....  heathen]  boh.  2} 
one    wife]    a    wife.  24,    having    a    share]    layii^ 

hold  on. 

Page  302,  line  2,  appoint]  boh.  8,  vials]  boh.  m 
shall  have  power]  shall  lay  hold  on.  11,  adorned]  is 
the  world  (kosmos).  with  the  character,  etc.]  in  a  fom 
of  old  age.  22,  quiet]  upright  26,  sanctuary]  boh. 
27,  take  vengeance,  etc]  receive  the  reward  of  this 
honour  (time),  thus  boh.,  corrupt  29,  seek  to  please] 
deviate,  boh.  corrupt 

Page  303,  line  7,  preacher]  the  preaching.  14,  Lrt 

them  be  made  after,  etc]  boh.  18,  pure]  boh.  21, 
(men)  pleasers]  hypocrites.  23,  to  be  sentj  to  toil 
(reading  *  hisi '  for  *  tchisi ').  24,  ready  to  encourage] 
ready  for  the  place  (topos),  probably  corrupt  25,  And 

being  ....  with  others]  boh.  29,  attending  .  .  . . 
unruly]  boh. 

Page  304,  line  2,  exhorting]  prohibit  (erkolin),  probably 
corrupt  for  parakalei.  8,  to  ask  for  revelations,  etc] 
to  ask  for  graces  concerning  that  to  which  they  devote 


COLLATION   OF  THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  447 

hemselves.         lo,   is    to    be    appointed]    boh.         24, 
ibundance]  boh. 

Page  305,  line  7,  seek,  etc.]  boh.  11,  deacons] 
)oh.  12,  we  have  ....  but  oblations.]  boh.  19, 
Vfartha  ....  Maria]  boh.  21,  Not,  etc]  Said  Mary  : 
!  laughed  not         22,  healed]  boh.         27,  Where]  om. 

Page  306,  line  7,  we  are  not,  etc.]  for  an  authority  over 
myone  (we)  are  not :  probably  corrupt  The  Bohairic  here 
;tates  the  finishing  of  the  first  (second)  and  the  beginning 
)f  the  second  (or  third)  book.  19,  from]  boh.,  it  may 
nean  'by.'  21,  pleased]  boh.  24,  who  have  laid]  and 
aying.  25,  waiting]  quietly.  28,  And  they  request 
>ne]  he  who  is  worthy,     axiou  has  been  translated  axios. 

Page  307,  line  i,  that  he  should  lay]  layeth.  2,  is 
o  be  made]  boh.  5,  the  oblation]  boh.,  thus  again. 
),  Boh.  gives  the  same  Greek  words  throughout.  29, 
Further,  etc.]  boh. 

Page  308,  line  6,  fellow-councillor]  boh.  10,  share] 
eceive.  11,  entrust]  boh.  14,  sharing  with  him] 
)m.  they]  boh.  18,  give  orders]  boh.  19,  He 
)nly  seals,  etc.]  boh.  26,  ministry  or  presbyterate] 
)oh.,  thus  again.         29,  who,  etc.]  boh. 

Page  309,  line  i,  with  any  sentence]  in  any  injustice. 
)ut  in  a  casual  way,  etc]  boh?  3,  of  house]  boh. 
|.,  though]  and.  hand,  etc]  he  is  worthy  of  every  office 
kleros)  hand  shall  be  laid  on  him.  7,  It  is  not 
Jtogether]  boh.  recite]  boh.  9,  as  if,  etc]  boh. 
mspode  for  apostethos.  12,  grand]  boh.  13,  But 
f,  etc.]  boh.         21,  the  Apostle]  boh. 

Page  310,  line  10,  with  him,  etc]  boh.         14,  offer, 

ttc]  boh.         1 7,  public  worship,  boh. 

29 


448 


STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 


cover]  bok.! 

(alia).       u; 

15,  is  an; 


Page  311,  line  13,  and  his  master,   etc]  and  diat 
hath  pleased  his  master,  let  him  hear.  17,  tbat 

may  be,  etc.]  boh. 

Page  312,  line  i,  whom,  etc]  boh.  5,  images]  bdl 

7,   an   actor]  boh.         8,    or  again,  etc. J  boh.        iy\ 
charioteer,  etc.]  boh. 

Page  313,  line  30,  the  character]  boh. 

Page   314,   line    10,    their   kiss]   they, 
omitting    'not,*  which  is  implied  in   *but 
pallin]  boh.     in  any  article  of  linen]  boh. 
boh. 

Page  315,  line  6,  seriously]  boh.  13,  daily]  on  tta 

day.  19,  because  he  did  not  hear,  etc.]  boh.  2j 
wash  themselves]  boh.  the  fifth,  etc.]  boh.  25. 
direction]  boh. 

Page  316,  line  4,  in  their  face]  boh.  5,  and  their 

noses]  boh.  9,  any  other  vessel]  anything  among  tbe 
things  which  are  within.  10,  Eucharists]  boh.  12. 
then]   boh.  19,  flowing  ....  upon  it]  boh.         21, 

continuous  and  sudden]  om.  22,  use]  pour  in.  28, 
adult]  boh.         3 1 ,  alien  thing]  boh. 

Page  317,  line  12,  I]  I  will.  16,  And  thus,  etc] 
And  thus  let  the  Bishop  receive  him  naked,  or  the 
Presbyter  to  set  him  in  the  water.  22,  only]  boh. 
23,  our  Saviour]  boh.     and  his]  and  the.  24,  to  the 

universe]  om.         25,  one  Godhead]  om.     Lordship]  boh. 

Page  318,  line  8,  salvation]  boh.  withal]  boh.,  it  may 
mean    *once.'      those    who    were    bound]    boh.  13, 

purifying  the  universe]  boh.  23,  unto  the  age  which 
comes]  in  the  coming  world.  26,  glory,  Father,  etc] 
glory.     The  Father,  etc. 


COLLATION   OF   THE   SAIDIC   TEXT  449 


^^     Page  319,  line  12,  oblation]  Eucharist         13,  form] 
'  similitude. 

Page  320,  line  2,  and  he  who  has  the  milk,  etc.]  and 

^  the  milk,  etc.         4,  Jesus  the  Christ]  Christ  Jesus.         8, 

,'^,  and  to  live]  boh.  12,  oblation]  boh.  17,  quietly] 
boh. 

Page   321,  line   i,  to  the  church]  boh.         2,  to  be 

denied]  boh.         3,  the  bread,  he   shall   certainly]   boh. 

'  5,  one  piece  of  a  loaf]  boh.         10,  Concerning  that]  boh., 

■*  thus  again.  12,  a  cup]  boh.  13,  in  that  way.  And 
let]  boh.  20,  sit  down]  come  in.  21,  believers]  a 
believer.  27,  discreetly  and  moderately]  boh.  29, 
becomingly]  seriously. 

Page  322,  line  3,  all]  all  of  you.         4,  then,  etc.]  thou 

'  shalt  come,  taking  only  thy  part.  7,  may  send]  may 
do  (stc).  to  whom  he  will]  boh.  8,  as  the  leavings, 
etc.]  since  they  remain  for,  etc.  and  that  he  may  rejoice] 
and  he  is  rejoicing.  9,  And  let,  etc.]  /ti.  And  (de) 
those  who  were  invited  let  them  [de]  eat,  thus  also 
boh.,  except  *Iet  them  therefore  (dje).'  11,  permits] 
boh.  12,  speaks]  boh.  16,  the  Eulogia]  boh.,  thus 
again.  21,  discreetly]  boh.  29,  for  godliness]  boh. 
30,  sober]  boh. 

Page  323,  line  7,  And  if  ...  .  drawn]  boh.  17, 
the  first  fruits  ....  growth]  boh.  28,  creatures] 
boh.  29,  having  garnished]  boh.  31,  through 
whom,  etc]  boh. 

Page  324,  line  7,  the  pear]  boh.  10,  nor  the  leek 
....  cucumber]  boh.  1 7,  to  his  glory]  giving  glory 
to  him.  24,  The  fast  ....  greedy]  boh.  28,  of 
necessity]  boh. 


450  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

Page   325,   line    i,  a  voyage]   boh.  4,  for. 

passed  by]  boh.         5,  we  said]   boh.  10,  to 

upon]  to  telL         14,  attend  upon,  etc.  J  be  constant 
tell.         29,  breaks  forth]  boh. 

Page  326,  line  4,  early  at  the  time  whenj  boh. 
there]  boh.  15,  diligently]  searchingly,  thus  aga: 
20,  or  ...  .  fall]  boh.  and  be  lostj  having  been  ks 
the  price]  (the)  gift     earthen  vessels]  boh. 

Page  327,  line  19,  But  those,  etcj  boh.  20,  li 
any  ....  burdened]  boh. 

Page  328,  line  3,  in  him  who,  etc]  boh.  for  havi 
....  day]  boh.         5,  the  pious  man]  boh.  6,  Ic 

sin.          15,  from  him  who  instructs]  boh.  21,  bre 

forth]  boh.         26,  thou  comest  by  chance  to]  thou  1: 
leisure  at.         30,  at  every  hour]  boh. 

Page  329,  line  8,  likening  themselves  to]  boh.  read 
*eutonten.*         10,  for  the  unbelieving  JewsJ  boh. 
blessing]  boh.         1 2,  that  thou  mayest  know  how]  I 
13,  the  soul,  etc.]  the  souls,    etc.     the   true  J    boh. 
enlighten]  he  who  enlightened.         19,  when  thou  g 
to  sleep]  boh.         20,  thou  shalt  begin]  boh.  29 

not  unready]  forbid  not. 

Page  330,  line  5,  spittle]  boh.  11,  for  even,  t 
boh.  1 2,  delivered  this  work]  boh.  and  they  tauj 
etc.]   boh.         15,  are  as   those,  etc.]  boh.  17,  « 

hymns]  boh.         28,  him  {/ii.  this),  etc]  boh. 

Page  331,  line  2,  teaching,  etc]  boh.  4,  ever  i 
etc]  ever  mourn,  remembering,  etc  5,  Make  pn 
Receive  this  name.  9,  with  which  thou  art  confide 
boh.  ID,  like  a  shield]  boh.  12  that  he  is  sensil 
boh.         15,  pursued,   etc]  boh.         18,  and  the   lai 


COLLATION   OF   THE   SAIDIC   TEXT  4$  I 


etc.]  boh.         24,  kill  us]  boh.         25,  ye  will  be  edified] 

ff 

boh.  and  eternal,  etc.]  and  they  {sc.  these  things)  will 
be  to  you  for  eternal  life.  26,  These  things,  etc.] 
These  are  the  things  (which)  we  have  written  to  you. 
27,  who  have  sense]  boh.  28,  For  ....  keep  them] 
boh. 

Page  332,  line  3,  prohairesis]  prosharesis.  5,  not 
what,  etc.]  boh.  6,  will  reveal  them]  will  grant  (them). 
7,  steering  ....  haven]  boh.  The  Bohairic  as  before 
adds  here,  *  The  second  book  of  the  canons  of  our  fathers 
(the)  Apostles  is  finished :  it  is  the  third  book,  in  peace 
of  God  most  high.  Amen.'  Then  comes  a  heading, 
'With  God  the  strong  (iskhyros).  The  third  book  of 
the  canons  of  our  holy  fathers  (the)  Apostles  which  were 
in  the  hands  of  Aklemes,  which  (book)  indeed  is  the 
fourth  book.'  18,  the  true  God,  etc]  boh.  25,  It 
is  now  proper  ....  gifts]  boh.  29,  follow]  appear 
in,  by  error  of  *  ouonh '  for  *  ouoh.* 

Page  333,  line  5,  These  gifts  then,  etc]  And  (de) 
these,  etc  8,  to  give]  perform,  by  error.  11,  for 
the  unbelievers]  they  who  believe  who  are  among  us,  by 
error.  1 3,  of  the  signs]  and  the  signs,  might  put  to 
shame]  boh.  21,  rather]  boh.  22,  your  names  are] 
boh.  Since,  etc]  boh.,  except  'the  power'  for  'our 
power,'  by  error.  24,  but,  etc.]  boh.,  except  '  belongs 
to.'  25,  being  assisted,  etc]  a  help  by  him  as  is  plain. 
26,  It  is  not  then]  But  it  is  not 

Page  334,  line  i,  for  a  useful  reason]  without,  etc,  by 
error.  2,  who  are  convinced  through  it]  boh. 
probably.  4,  was  sent  to  them]  was  required  for  them, 
convinced]  boh.         25,  only  those  of  good  disposition] 


452  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

their  judgments  alone.         26,   for  their  sake]  boh. 
willing]  has  pleased     that  mighty  works  should  be 
boh.         28,  These  things  then]  But  these  things. 

Page  335,  line  6,  For  the  freedom,  etc.]  For  it  (is) 
us  the  freedom  from  the  variety  of  the  service  of  mM 
gods.         7,    And   the   entrance]  And  (that)  this  (nal 
shall   enter.         8,  the  Son]  his  Son.  9,  is  a  gift  a] 

God,  etc.]  boh.         10,  the  veil]  boh.   probably,    and  v\ 
have  believed  that]  boh.,  reading  *dje'  for  *de.'      r' 
by  the  will,  etc.]  boh.         25,  So,  etc]  boh.  probably,  W 
the  text  is  corrupt         27,  by  a  calling^]  boh.         30,  tk| 
same]  boh. 

Page  336,  line  4,  and  another  another]  boh.  Aoil 
one]  boh.  15,  Elom]  Eilon  (Gr.  Ailon),  18, 
count  ....  nothing]  boh.  19,  and  yet]  boh.  23, 
or  any  other,  [for]]  nor  do  anything,  for,  boh  having 
traces  of  a  better  reading  as  Tattam  conjectures,  *ciid 
not  even  anything,'  sc.  any  mighty  work.  27,  despise] 

answer,     his  youth]  boh.         31,  children]  boh. 

Page  337,  line  7,  For  if  it  was  given,  etc]  boh. 
reading  *ash*  for  *laau'  8,  how  ....  use]  boh. 
9,  for  the  man  ....  heart]  boh.  reading  •  pa '  for  *  a' 
ID,  but  for  him  ....  efficacious]  boh.  reading*  *pa'  for 
'a.*         12,    And   (of)   these  ....  works]  boh.  14, 

Because,    etc.]  boh.         16,    the    officers]    the    armies 
1 7,  for  rulers  ....  rule]  boh. 

Page  338,  line  7,  though  ....  in  them]  boh.,  except 
'the  signs'  for  *sign.'  8,  for  they  persuade  them- 
selves] for  they  are  only  doing  them.  11,  they  will 
not  be  able  ....  ungodliness]  boh.  14,  by  the 
former  ....  latter]  boh.         15,   for  they  deceive  one 


COLLATION   OF   THE  SAIDIC  TEXT  453 


fjiother]  for  they  subject  themselves.        i6,  who  feigning, 

jc]  boh.         18,  who  will  support  them]  boh. 

p.  Page  339,  line  13,  boastful  pride]  boh.         14,  such] 

ph.  probably.          17,  in  our  time]  from  us,  thus  again. 

^,  and  after  them  OUa]  and  after  her   many  others. 

.9,  Wherefore]  And.         31,  may  have  pleasure  in  him] 

oh. 

Page  340,  line  i,  except]  boh.  The  Bohairic  adds 
lere,  *  The  third  book  of  the  canons  of  our  fathers  (the) 
Vpostles  is  finished :  it  is  the  fourth  book,  in  peace  of 
lod.  Amen. '  Then  comes  the  heading,  *  With  God  the 
trong.  The  fourth  book  of  the  canons  of  our  fathers  (the) 
Apostles  which  were  in  the  hands  of  Aklemes:  which 
ndeed  is  the  fifth  book.'  2,  In  the  first  part,  etc.]  first 
ndeed  we  have  declared  this  word.  7,  is  often  wont] 
las  been  pleased.         28,  the  eldest]  boh. 

Page  341,  line  2,  ye  asked,  etc.]  ye  make  ruler  for 
rou.  6,  And  when  they  have  established]  And 
whether  he  is  pure  (katharos).  7,  his  piety]  in  his 
)iety.  18,  of  so  great,  etc.]  of  this  great  liturgy  of  this 
lacrifice,    reading    'shot'   for    *tch6t'  31,   Oblation] 

)oh. 

Page  342,  line  10,  to-day]  boh.  11,  hold]  boh. 
8,  To  offer]  boh.         27,  stoles]  boh. 

Page  344,  line  i.  Oblation]  boh.  2,  and  make] 
naking.  14,  while  they  are  giving]  boh.  15,  until 
ill  have  finished  communicating]  boh.,  reading  *  synagoge ' 
)y  error  for  *  synage.'  16,  and  when  all  the  women]  let 
Jl  the  women.  22,  belonging  to]  boh.  31,  being 
rery  careful]  to  receive  or  take  them. 

Page  345,  line  10,  of  the  Mysteries]  and  {lit.  with)  the 


\ 

454  STATUTES  OF  THE  APOSTLES 

M.  by  error.         1 8,  pray  and  ordainj  thou  prayii^, 
ordaining.         20,   same]  boh.  27,    is    not  ortkis:] 

Ordain  not 

Page  346,  line  4,  deposed]  anathematised,  thus 
16,  pious  observances]  boh.         25,  venerable]  boh. 

Page  347,  line  4,  the  trial]  boh.  7,  when  .  .  .  .  Fa^ 

boh.  9,  in  causing  the  grace]  in  the  grace,  boh  pri- 
ably  by  error.  24,  warrant]  boh.,  reading  *  psykhos'fe 
*  psyphos.'  25,  permitting  this  to  him  J  doing  this  whk 
is  proper  for  him,  reading  *  euerphai  eterprepi  naf '  i 
*euepeitrepe  naf  pai.'  The  Bohairic  adds,  *  The  four 
book  of  the  canons  of  our  holy  fathers  (the)  Apostles 
finished  which  was  from  the  hand  of  Aklemes  :  it  is  thefi 
book,  in  peace  of  God.  Amen.  1 5  20  of  Diokle(tian). 
was  translated  from  the  language  of  the  South  into  the  L 
guage  of  the  North  by  the  presbyter  Georg-e  the  (son] 
Kosma,  in  the  collection  of  our  honoured  father  and  gr 
among  all  the  bishops,  the  holy  Athanasius,  the  bishof 
the  city  Abutig  (the  apotheke).  May  God  g-uard  his  q 
copate  until  the  consummation.  Amen.*  Then  comes 
title,  *  With  God  the  strong.  The  fifth  book  of  the  cam 
of  our  fathers  the  Apostles  which  were  from  the  hand 
Aklemes  :  it  is  the  sixth  book.'  27,  offers  the  Oblati 
boh.,  thus  again.  28,  Eulogia]  boh.,  thus  again, 
to  be  deposed]  of  an  anathema. 

Page  348,  line  2 1 ,  if  the  matter  concerns  themj  boh 

Page  349,  line  8,  of  the  Oblations]  boh.         1 3,  whi 
were  not  offered]   boh.         22,  The  Church,  etc]  be 
29,  74]  the   Bohairic   transfers   this   and   Canon    75 
the   sixth   book,    with   title    *  The    sixth    book    of    t 
canons  of  our  holy  fathers  (the)   Apostles  which  we 


COLLATION   OF   THE  SAIDIC   TEXT  455 

from   the   hands   of  Aklemes :   it  is  the  seventh  book.' 
30,  of  godliness]  boh. 

Page  350,  line  22,  joined]  boh. 

Page  351,  line  2,  form]  boh.  has  exactly  the  same 
plural  form.  22,  lascivious  man]  boh.  the  same  un- 
:ertain  word.  24,  an  appointer  of  hours]  boh.  26, 
who  bewitches]  boh.         29,  avoids  meeting]  boh. 

Page  352,  line  i,  or  cats]  boh.  4,  is  very 
liard  to  wash  off]  is  hard  to  depart  from  him,  probably 
by  error.  16,  fables]  the  doctrines.  29,  prophet] 
the  Bohairic  adds,  *  The  sixth  book  of  the  canons  of  our 
fathers  (the)  Apostles  is  finished,  in  peace  of  God.  Amen.' 
Further,  etc.]  boh.  continues  thus  in  Canon  75. 

Page  353,  line  4,  behave  towards,  etc]  let  their 
servants  pray,  by  error  of  '  proseukhe '  for  *  prosekhe.' 
10,  in  piety  of  godliness]  boh.  11,  The  Sabbath  in- 
deed because]  And  (de)  the  Sabbath,  etc  12,  from 
finishing,  etc.]  from  all  the  creation  which  he  finished. 
13,  because,  etc.]  boh.  16,  the  one  indeed  because, 
etc.]  boh.  27,  suddenly]  richly.  29,  Theodokos] 
boh.         31,  the  washing]  boh. 

Page  354,  line  30,  in  which,  etc.]  boh. 

Page  355,  line  3,  the  godly]  boh.,  thus  again.  12, 
or  otherwise,  etc.]  boh.  19,  is  godly]  boh.  22, 
Belear]  the  Sa tanas.         23,  servant]  servants. 

Page  356,  line  5,  ancient]  of  the  ancients.  15,  The 
Lord  is  righteous]  boh.  23,  ignorant  ones]  boh. 
26,  the  right]  boh.     Wherefore]  wherefore  but,  by  error. 

Page  357,  line  14,  Contentions]  boh.         15,  bloodshot] 

boh.         26,  and  pursued]  boh.         29,  and  they  suffer] 

boh. 

30  ^ 


it 

for 

8, 

the 

19. 

30, 

456  STATUTES   OF  THE  APOSTLES 

Page  358,  line  2,  not  having  denied  him]  boh.  12, 

despises]  denies?  boh.  15,  the  changes]  the  firma- 
ment 17,  namely  the  variation]  boh.  omits  'the 
changes.'  25,  If]  boh.  adds  'therefore*  by  error. 
29,  to  move]  boh. 

Page  359,  line  6,  allowing  themselves]  doing 
themselves.         7,    to  grant   to  others]   boh. 
things,  etc.]  boh.         16,  despising]  denying  ?  boh. 
the    eucharists]    boh.         25,    henceforth]    boh. 
resemblance]  boh.         31,  not  in  signs]  boh. 

Page  360,  line  i,  enigmas]  hidden  things.  5,  separ- 
ated] made  evident.  6,  and  suitable,  etc.]  boh.  8, 
it  was  against  the  law,  etc.]  boh.  9,  the  levites,  etc.] 
let  the  levites  approach,  by  error.  10,  But  each  was 
keeping,  etc],  boh.  12,  took  upon  him]  om.  18, 
everlasting  curse]  boh.  21,  evident,  etc.]  boh.  22, 
in  taking  vengeance]  boh.  23,  having  put,  etc]  boh. 
25,  And  it  will  be,  etc.]  boh.  27,  For  ....  from  us] 
For  many  love  him  who  is  willing  to  fill  our  hands  to  be 
able  to  receive  from  us.  *  Mere '  confused  with  '  menre  * 
and  the  meaning  lost 

Page  361,  line  9,  having  been  taught]  they  were  taught 
to  do  them,  'eiaatn'  mistaken  for  'eaitou.'  10, 
works,  for  the  bishops  indeed]  the  works.  We  have 
indeed.  16,  in  a  sacred  manner]  earnestly.  18,  to 
give  the  Eulogia,  etc]  20,  transfer]  overturn.  21, 
those  of  inferior  order]  boh.  23,  the  things  which 
belong,  etc.]  boh.  26,  than  this]  boh.  For  such  men 
oppose,  etc.]  boh. 

Page  362,  line  i,  twelve]  thirteen.  3,  Klemes]  boL 
6,  The  first  then  now  is]  But  the  first  now,  om.  '  is,'  here 


COLLATION   OF  THE  SAIDIC   TEXT  457 


and  after.  23,  love]  truth  (or  righteousness).  24, 
his  godliness]  boh. 

Page  363,  line  4,  he  was  keeping]  he  kept  8,  find 
fault]  boh.  16,  Wherefore]  boh.  19,  the  true 
Chief  Priest]  boh.  21,  Finished,  etc.]  The  fifth  book 
is  finished,  in  peace  of  God.     Amen. 

Then  comes  the  sixth  book,  with  title  as  above,  page 

454. 


•  •  • 


SAIDIC  FRAGMENTS. 

Paris  BibL  Nat  Copte  I2g^^t.g3 
Apostolic  Church  Order.  Canon  i6 

FqtfCD  NHMAC.    FAqMETSXe  FCBCD  NtM  ENANOY(|- 

EOYWiTOM    flHOq    FgEpMHNEYH    WNBrpA^^M    eTOyAAB. 

Ejocone  :iF  NqcooyH  an  HceAt  EOYpHpAjj)  ne.  HApsq- 

pgOyO  e^  TArATTH  FgOYN  epCDME  NIM  MMnOTE  HCBT- 

(TAte  nentcKonoc  e^  oyc^^t  FroYOi>T  Nqg^cofre  eq6Nn 

ETTTHpq. 

(17)  HEXAq  n6tta>eANNHC  2CF  TTemcKonoc  CTOyNA- 
TAeoY    FpAxq    sqji^ANeiHF    ETMNTpeqpe'roq    wh 

ThUITMAlNOYTe   WNETNHMAq   HApFqKAetCTA   FTCNAY 

RnpFCByTspoc  nai  FroYNAiiOKiMAj^e  Hmooy* 

(18)  AYOY<«>J^  TMpOY  XE  FTCNAY  AN  aAAa  {pOHNT. 

xoyTAqTE  PAp  RnpFCBYTFpoc  rrj^oon  hntcnooyc 

gl  OYNAM  AY<0  HNTCNOOYC  Ql  CBO(yP-    HEXAq)  FtfiMD- 

(eANNHC  2ce)  kaAcdc  (atstn)+  npinMF(eY^  ^)  NA- 

CNHY-       NETgl    OYNAM    m(8N     6Yi;9AN)2Ct    FreFN4>tAAN 

FTOOTOY  (hn)  ArreAoc  ftcbxitoy  egoYN  Rnxosic.  nbt- 
ei  gBoyp  2kF  EY^MAgTe  EXH  nHHiij2)e  HNArreAoa 

iQiQ^  lifS  FNEHpFCBYTEpOC  CTpSYJOCDne  SYKCDCMet  2N 
OYCMOT  Rh"NTgAAo.  CYCACMY  CTOA  EfMTpCYtf'a)  HN 
CgtMB.     SYO  HpEqi"  RMAtCON.     VTCEingO    AN   FpOII 


46o 


amm 


SYKOtNCDNFl  MN  TTEniCKOnoCFMMYCTMplON.  Cy+TOOfq 
gN  gCDB  NIH.      FYCCDOYS  HnMHMJ^E  FgOyN  STpEyMCpi 

nEY©CDC.     NFnpECBYTCpOC    FTgl   oyNAM    (MA)poYqt- 

npooYi;^  wNcrgoce  (CTf)eYciAc(THpioN.    kbkac  ry- 

NaT)AtF  (N€TRn)®A  (HTAFIO  NIM).  FCFCTn(TlF4A) 
HNETRn(a)A   HCTITIMA    NAY-)      NFnpSCBYTEpOC    STgl 

geoYp  MApoYqtnpooY^  nnMHHjj^F  2cfkac  EYHg)a)nF 

EYgOpk  HCrfM^TOpfp  SYHF  HTECBO)  gAOH  FfgCDB 
NIM  FTpEYCYT^OTACCe  gN  gYHOTAKM  NIM.  Fa)CDTTE 
OYA  ITF  FY+CBCD  NAq  NqOYC^JS*  gN  OYW©OT  Fpe  NFT- 
glXM  neOYCtACTHptON   NApOYA  FOY<OT  HCFEipF  RHAI 

WT81MINE  vroYS)A2ce  ftoycdt  HncTOY+gAn  Fpoq  FgHTq. 

KFKAC    FpF   nKFCCTne    pgOTF.      MMnOTE  TTCEiTa)   EYXl 

nngo  FTOYA  FTgMTOY  NqMOYN  FBoA  Hee  W0YrAr(r)- 

pAtNA    Fq(Fp)OYAMONF     AY^D    (FrCF)AlXMAAa)(Tl2;B)R- 

MOOY  THpOY- 

(19)  nS^CAq  TTiTuAKCDBOC  2CF  MApOYKAOICTA  RHANA- 
rNCDCTHC  FAY^O>KtMA;^e  RMOq  HjBOpn  gN  OY^CDNT. 
FNOYgAg  H<2)A2CF  AN  HE.  ENOYp^q+gP  AN  TTE.  ENOY" 
pEq2CE);0A2CF   FTjl^Aoq    AN  fTE.     ENOYpEqiCEjl^AlCe  vrccDBE 

AN  ne.  EOYHTAq  Hmay  woycmot  ENANOYq  Eqeni- 

OYMEt  ennSTNANOYq  ENANOY  NEqMEEYE.  Eq<fETTII 
EnCDT    EHMA    ETEpE    NETCOOYg    CTBE    HXOEIC    FgHTq 

Eqo><2)  kaAcdc  EqcooYN  xe  ttma  RnpEqTA$9E0Btjg)  he- 

TEqEipE  RMOq.  HETMOYg  TAp  HRMAA2CE  FTgENKOOYE 
NqNOt  AN  flTOq  FTNETEqCDJi)  RMoq  CENAonoY  Epoq 
EYHOBE  qCMg  HTElgE  gATM  nXOEtC 

(20)  TTEXAq  HAMAOAtOC  XE  FT^tAKONOC  HApOYKA- 
teiCTA  .  .  . 


46i 


Brit  Mus.  Or.  3580  f.  a8  No  165.   The  same  MS  as  Paris  130 

f.  50  and  129  '^  f.  7 
Egyptian  Church  Order.  Canon  3a 

8pF    nemcKo(noc    NA)xipo:i(DNet    MTTFnpscBY- 
repoc  eqNAKA  neqiTtK  egpAt  F2cn  reqiine  sps  nfh- 

pECBYTEpOC    2Ca>g     Fpoq.       &Y<0     MApFq<2)AllA     EgpAl 
F2C0>q.      K&T21  neCHOT  HT2lNS)pTT2COOq  ET6F  HEntCKO- 

noc: 


•    •    • 


(33)  ETBC  HMAKONOC:. — 

6pe  nemcKonoc  . . . 

.  .  •o)Y^ecA2(NF  Hmoo)y  HAq  FBO(A  FcM)fq. 
NFY^tpo(2kONEt^  RMoq  (an  rrpeq)  j90)n(e  hoy- 
cynboy)Aoc  R(nEKAMpoc  TH)pq  (aAAa  eTpFq)qi . . . 


•  • 


npFc)BYTF(poc    Rma)te   S)Aq(Kt    MAYAA)q. 

FT  ... .  eMNxq  (fjoycia)  hmay-  (HTsenAi)  m|- 
NA);0(KAetCTA  a)n  NK(ANptKOc)  F$!)Aq(c4>pArt2;e)  Ntft- 
(ne  npECBYTFpoc  Rma)tf  (spe  nsntcKonoc  na)  xi- 
(po:iONEi  RMoq). 

(ETBE  RgOMOAori)THC 

. .  .  Q)n  oykoAacic  nw,    cAqeoMoAorEt  2kE . 

KAliptKOC  2ke  HtM  ETFqNARlT^A  RMOOY  *  ^Y^&KA 

Six  €xo>q  HceAAq. 

GpF  nentCKOnoC  2ke  NASYXApiCTA  KATA  NeNTAH- 

^prreooY  •  hantoc  tanapkn  Fpoq  te  BTpEqT(AOYO  n) 

NEt$9Al^  WTAN(©pn)  ICOOY-      SCDC  EqMEA  .  .  . 
(37)   ETBE  w)E  XHPA 
OYXHpA   M   EYSD&NKAetCTA   EpOC  HNEYXEtl^aT^I- 


46s 


NEt   RHOC.      aAAa.   eYHACOTTTC    EBOA    SH    HpAN.      F- 

j!)o>ne  2kE  Fa.  ttfcsai  hoy  C^^^  t^qxho<F  iroYOFig. 

Etc    MApOYKAOtCTA    RMOC      EJpCDnE    2kE.       RlTECCDCK 
nNTA    TTECgAt    MOy    RlTpniCTEY^    ^AC    AYCD     ej!)CDnF 

AcpeAAcD  MApoY^oKFtHAj^E  Rmoc  g^  OYXpoNoc  noA- 

AaKIC  PAp    RHAOOC  e<»OY  S)AYpe^A0    HN   nETNAKA 
MA  NAY  WeHfq. 

MApOYKAOlCTA  fITEXMpA  CM  n$9AXE  RMATE  H- 
CEMOpC  EgOYH  ETTKECEEITE.  flHEYKA  (TtX  :iE  EICCDC 
EBOA  2CE  NCTaAe  npOC4>OpA  AN  EgpAU  OYTE  HcAei- 
TOYprEl  AN  ETE<2)AC$!)a>nE  QM  HEKAHpOC  ETBE  FAi- 
TOYprElA.  TEXHpA  EJ^AYKAeiCTA  RMOC  ETBE  (HE)- 
<2)AhA  HAt  AE  HAOYON  NtM  HE 

(35)  ETBE  nANAPNCDCTHC 

TTANAPNOXmiC    E(Y)2)(ANKA)eiCTA  RMOq    EpE  ITE- 

mcKonoc  NA^f  hiccdcdme  (NAq)  FT^yopn  FTNeqxA  Cxx 
AE  Eiccoq. 

(38)    ETBE  RnApOENOC 

Nne(y)ka  Six  exm  HApeENOc  aAAa  TEcnpoeAi- 

pECtC  HAYAAC  TETElpE  RHOC  RHApOENOC* 
(36)"eTBE  HgYTTO  AIAKONOC 

Nneyka  S\k  E2CN  gx^^^^^^^^^^  aAAa  eynaono- 

MA2;E  RHOOY  ETpEY(OYACOY  NCA  flAlAKONOC  .  .  . 

Paris  129"  f.  9  Paper  fragment. 
(49)  MnEpxpE  KATIXOYHENOC  pOTBEq  MN  NEmC- 

Toc  SN  nrmNON  mrbc  MApE  hetoycdm  ae  ephmeye 

TmFNTAqMOYTE    KATA   COH    NIM    EY^®^-     ^^BE  HAl 
PAp   At\CET\C<ftn0X  ET^OyEl  EgOYN  C^  TEqOY^CCOl. 


463 


(so)  rrBE  XE  EC®e  eoy<»h  gw  oyhictemi 
Etethoyodm  ^e.    Ayo)  STFrewccD  gn  oyfoicth- 

HEY.  RnepCCD  ETrt-eF  2CeKAC  RNFpCDHE  CCDTO  RMOrfN 
AY<»  NEqAYHH  WffllTNTAqTEgEM  THYTN  E2CN  nETNBoA 
EBOA  aAAA  2CEKAC  EqEpA$!)E  HTOq  ETpETNnCDT  jl^ApOq. 
TTEKAq  PAp  ICE  FTTOyfN  nE  HEgMOY  WTKAg  E2)(DnE 
:iE  AYNE+  NETN  HgNMEpiC  fpTEN  EYCOH  N  EKNAqt 
HTEKTO  HMATE.  Ejl^CDHE  l^B  EYNAqtTEYTN  EOYCDM. 
H  EKNAOYCDM  RHEKpCO^E.  2CEKAC  NETNECHHnE  Ep- 
(DTN  EpE  nETEAq[TEAq]TEgEM  THYTN  THNOOY  EBoA 
FgHTOY  ©A  NH  EfqOYAjOOY  gCDC  EeNCMMnE  NE  HTE 
NHTOYAAB.       AYCD     NqpA$!)E    XB    ATETNBCDK    ©ApOq. 

EyOYCDM  :iE  FrffiTmTAqTAgHOY-  HApOYOY®^  2^^  ^YC- 
(TpEgT  FCE+TCDN  AN.  aAAa  p$!)AN  nEntCKOnOC  M 
HEnpECBHTHpOC  OYCD©  E2n  0YJi)A2^  N  j2)tNE  FTCOq. 
MApE  OYON  NIH  KApCOq  gN  OYHNTgEK  J^ANTEqTOY- 
Go^CDHE  MN  EHlCKOnOC  HMAY  aAAa  gMmCTOC  NETgN 
n:itnNON.     MApOY  ^^  EyAoPIA  RTOOTq  HNEnpECBYTH- 

poc.    6a)a>nE  2kE  mn  npECBYTHpoc  Hmay  MApOY^i 

NtOOfq  FNEAIAKONOC  gCDHAlOC  ON  FTTE  HKATIXOY" 
MENOC  2Ct  mrOElK  RTTE^OpPtCMOC.    NEAaIKOC  2kE  ON  . ,  • 

Paris  131 3  f.  26 
(62).  .  .  .  TE  NPMEEYH  EpOOY  AN  NPa)4)EAEl  gM  H- 
TpE  HEHNA  TAAY  NAK  EBoA  glTM  ITETKAeHPEI.  AyOD 
HTElgE  TEKniCTlC  NA^^OHE  ECTAXpHY  ^*N  NENTAK- 
COTMOY  THpOY-  CeNAXO)  NAK  on  gM  HMA  ETHMAY 
nNETj2));0E    EpOK    EAAY    C^    HEKHU      EtBE   HAt   HApE 

noYA  noYA  Rhcdtn  Setw  NqBcoK  etekkAhcia  Hitnoy* 

TE  RKE  IC  JlWitC     RMA  ETEpE  nOTNA  tcSOD 


464 


eHTq  FpF  noYA  noYA  en  iTFqHt  MApeqn  NAqMt 
xaxDMB  eqoYAAB  HqFg)  npcDjoe  eboA  ice  c&ok^hk 
rrpFqpjOAY-    Eshdhf  men  fk^m  nEKNt  j^hA  Rithv 

FimjBOMTF.  NTCMOY  EITtlOYTE-  B5i)a>nE  ^£  CTT! 
KFHA  NTXCDNq  EITNAY  ETMMAY-  sAhA  gM  rTFK2lir^, 
ZpAl    PAp    CN     TFfNOY    BTRMAY    HTAYNAY   CT^* 

ncNNOYTF  FyaK|T  RMoq  EnF{9E  MnECjidc.    (0AhXie1 
ON  HiTwAY  wxnco  RnFgOYO  xs  fTTEpOYrar  mxc' 

PAp    FnFji)F    RnFCpOC    A    TTFeOOY    HCDg).       AqlSXAH-' 

gcucTF  OYN  HApFNjj)AiiA  Rhnay  btTImay  CN  ©Y^i 

FJJ^AhA  FqifMiTOM  FYTONTFN  RMooy  EITFNTAqsAlA 
eU  TFqCHH  AqrpF  TFKTHCIC  pKAKE  EflBaA  RNUT- 
NAgTF.  MApOYJB^HA  ^F  ON  RHNAY  WXtlXj/lTE  gN  OYC- 
HOY  2CFKAC  FKNAFtMF  FOF  FTFpF  TF^)rYXN  flTIAtKAtOC 
CMOY  FHNOYTF  RMOC  RMHNF.  HAl  fTTAqpirMFFfC 
HNFTOYAAB  AqKOOX  RTTFqAorOC  FTOYAAB  ETpEqpOYO- 

FIN  FpooY-  Zw  TFYNOY  ftRmay  wtaykenc  TOXC 
FnFqcntp  ftoyaab  hoyAopxn  AqFt  fboA  fT6tOYCNoq 

MN  OYMOOY  MNWCCDC  AqfOYOFlN  RnCFETFE  RflEgOOY 
ji)A  pOYeF.  GtBF  HAl  TITOK  ^(DiDK  ON  EKJ^ANNOY 
FCDBO)  FKNAApXF  HCDBj;^  HKFgOOY  AYCD  NKEtpE  RH- 
TYnOC  WTANACTACIC.  J^AhA  RnATFKANAflEYE  RfTFK- 
CCDHA  gN  0Y<rA0(r.  GKji)ANTCDOYN  :&F  HTnAj^E  TlTEYfi)B 
FIAAK  FBOA  gN  OYMOOY  NTJ^AhA.  Gj^TTE  &E  OY" 
WTk  CglMF  RMAY  FIF  MApFCTCDOYN  NMMAK  WTFTH- 

ji)AhA  RnecNAY  mnnftfphy-    Ej^cuttf  :^f  RnATEcp- 

ntCTH  FtF  ANAXOpFl  NAK  FgOYN  FYHA  NTSdAnA 
HAYAAK  NTKOTk   ON    NPFNKOfk  RTTFKMA.     RtOK  ^F 


f 


405 


0)  nsTHMp  egOYN  enrAMOC  RnpxNAAY  H(i)AHA^    hts- 

TNXASM  rAp  AN.  NSNTAY2C<A)KM  TAp  glTM  HBAH- 
TtCMA  HCEpXptA  AN  HXCDKM  flKeCOn  FBOA  2^  CFTBBHY- 
BKJpANNtBF  PAp  FNEKtftX  AYCO  Nrc4)pAri2;F  RMOK  gN 
xnAtfce    BTEKNAHfC    FBOA  WgOYN    ETEKTAnpO    JSAK- 

jOcone  THpk  fktbbh y  19 ahecht  ftnekoyfphtf.  flAcopoN 

PAp  HE  HAl  HneTTRA.  AYCO  TTeAxiAe  Rmooy  HnBAH- 
TICMA    TB    FCNHY    FgpAl    gN    OYHYPH    FCOYAAB    FT8 

HAi   ne  ngHT  WRnicroc  fttbbhy-     Oyanapkaion 

nF    nAl    QH    nFTpFTFfNJsAHA   eN    TEYNOY    FTMMAY- 

Kc  •  •  •  • 

Paris  xag"  f.  7.    The  same  MS  as  130  ^  f.  50 
Apostolic  Constitutions  VIIL  Canon  72 


FTBF  NAHApXN.     HN   NFpFHNT 


AnApXH  AF  NiM  FYNAxiTOY  FgOYN  RnFniCKonoc. 

HN   NFnpFCBYTFpOC.     MN  TO^IAKONOC  FYTOYOMOY- 

NpFMHT  AF  gCUOY  FY^MTOY  €TpF  HFRAHpOC  OYO- 
HOY*  1^  RnApeFNOC.  HN  NFXHpA.  NAHApXH.  NA- 
NOYHNB  HAYAAY  NF.      hiU  NFTgY^^^^^  NAY  •  •  • 

(73)  FTBF  NFTNApeOYC>  FHFnpOC4)OpA.  EHHOYTA- 
AOOY  FgpAl  RHNAY  HRHYCTWptON  FTOYAAB 

NfyAoPIA  FTNApgOYO  RTTNAY  HRMYCTMpiON  FH- 
nOYTAAoOY  FgpAl.  HApF  OY^IAKONOC  nOJj)OY  F2fH 
nFuAlipOC.     glTN  TFPNCDHH  RnFRlCKOnoC     M  nPHpFC- 

BYTFpoc.    FCFi"  qrooY  hoy<*)n  RfiFntCKonoc  FCFi* 

J!)OHNT  HOYCDN   RfTFnpFCBYTFpOC.     HCF+   CNAY  WH- 
AtAKONOC.    HKOOY^  AF    6tF  FTSYnOMAKONOC  KB. 
NANAPNa>CTHC.     HN    NF\|/aAthC.     MN 


466 

CglMB.      HC€+    OYOyCDN    NAY    CnoyA.      HAl    PAp   TTE 

nnFTNANOYq-  AycD  ftjohh  nnHTo  eeoA  Hhnoytf. 
FTpcY^niTiiHA  RnoYA.  noyA  kata  nsqA^icDMA.  tck- 

kAhCIA  PAp  OYMA  H+CBO)  TB  gN  OYgyropTp  AN. 
aAAA  CH   OY^Y^A^tA  FNANOYC. 

(74)  ETBB  NBTNA+  HlTFYOYOI  EMSTCXE  EMMyCTH- 
ptON   CTOYAAB 

NFrNA+  RnFY^YO*  Hg)Op!T  EMMYCTWpiON  RTMN- 

TpFqjBMjsENOYTF.    MApoYBNTOY    HncniCKonoc.      M 

TfEnpFCBYTEpOC  glTM  HAtAKONOC  AYO)  MApOyiCflOYOY- 
FTBF  TFTIA.  XF  FTBF  AjO  HgCDB  AY+HFYOYOl  FgOYN 
FNji)A2CF  RmCOFtC.  MApOYpHNTpF  AF  eApOOy  f^6X' 
WFNTAYWrOY  FgOYW.  FAYgCT'gCUT  NFYgBMY^  6N  OY" 
CDpX  FTBF  NFTFXNH. 

(75)  FTBF  NFTFXNH  MN   NFIOHF 

MApOYJBlNF  AF  FCA  HFYCMOT.  HH  nFYBtOC  gN 
0YCI>p2C.  AY®  XF  gNgMgAA  NF.  H  XF  eNBAFY^^POC 
NF.  BjSCUnF  OYA  HF  FYSMgAA  nF.  MApOYXNF  TIFq- 
XOFtC.     XF  FNFqNApMNTpF  gApOq.     FqjOANTHpMNTpF 

gApoq  MApoYNOxq  fboA.     6<i)CDnF  af  neHgAA  tt- 

OY^eNtKOC  HF  HApOYl'CBCD  NAq  FTpFqpANAq  RTTFq- 
XOFtC.  XFKAC  RNFY^IOYA  SUfS^TSB.  6g)a)1TF  OYgOOYT 
TTF  FOYHfq  CglMF  RMAy.  H  OYCglMF  FOy'^TC  O- 
gOOYT.  MApOY+CBO)  NAY  BTpFYpCDUJF  FpOOY-  FJIJCOnF 
AF    MnOYTCDg   MN  PAMOC  HApOYgApFg  FpOOy   FTM- 

nopNFYB.  aAAa  FTpFyxirAMOc  kata  hnomoc. 
GipcDHF  AF  nFqxoFtc  oynicTOC  nF.    FqcooyN  icf  q- 

nopNFYH.  NCjTM+CglMF  NAq.  H  HTOq  NqTMi-gAl 
HTFCglHF.    HApoyKA  nXOFtC  FTMMAY  glBoA.    Fj;|)0>nF 


467 


Oya  ne  Fpe  oy^aimonion  NHHAq.  MApoy^t'CBCD  NAq 

HTTpTpeY^TCj     AE    SgOYN     EKOINONFI    PMMYCTHpiON 

jOANirqfBBO  Ha)opTT.  spo^ANnMOY  ^^  sntre  SKcoq 
HApoY^iTq  Fe^Y^*  so^cDne  oya  ne  fy^op^^backoc  he. 
H  HApeqAo.  H  HApOYNOxq  eboA.  OYnopNw  ECjyAKf- 

HFCOYOl  FgOYN  N  HApEcAo.   H  HA  . . .  Leipoldt  continues 


BriL  Mas.  3580  ff.29,  30 

Collated  with    ^gyptiaca 

pp.  25X9  252. 

Egyptian  Church  Order. 

Canon  39 
p.  251 

!•  13  AE]  om. 

14  FfgEN2MOT]HOY2MOT. 

15  NAOYONgq]  NAOYONg. 
17  ETinCTlC]  om. 

19  nAAoc]  +  THpq. 

HCE<i)tNE    HCA]    HCE- 
a)NTOY  E. 
20  RngCDB]  om. 

AY+]  ATEfN+. 

HnoYOYOi]  HnETNOY. 
21  i^TicTic]  rmcTic. 

22  AY^WTOY]  +  NAN. 
ENE]  om. 

23  EnjOAXE]  HCA  njOAXE. 

YBioc]  lost 

24  ITEl^  om. 

nE2T   +   ESKDHE   MEN 
OYgMgA^  HE. 


HTE  HEqXOElC]  E  A  REq- 
2C0EIC. 

25  EnEiTpEnE]  EniTpEni. 

26  EpS)ANfM]  Eji)CDnE  AE 
EpETM. 

HApOY]  pref.  EtE. 

27  EjDCOnE]  +  AE. 

28  2CEKAC  RNE  AaAY]  ^^' 
MTpE  AaAY- 
N4)AAC4>YHt  A]  HbA  AC- 
4)YM1A. 

29  AE]  om. 

30  HTOq]  om. 
OYCglME]  +  TE. 

31  ETEC8lME]ETEqC2lME. 
3a  EfMnopNEY^]    EfMT- 

pEqnoYNEYH. 


p.  252 

I  KATA    HNOMOC] 

Efqo  Rmoc 

^E]  cm. 


TieE 


468 


2  TlNFqCO)TH]RnpTpFq- 
CCUTM. 

5  FKAeiCTA]  FKAOHKEt. 

6  oyn.  neoYAjoYAnF 
eoyn.  ire. 

7  MApeqAo]   +   eqFipF 

RntgCDB. 
8  OYpFqTAMlSTOYCDT] 

OYA    ne   FoypHqTA- 

MEIOT. 

9  nay]  NAq. 

FTHTpeYTAMlF]  FTM- 
TpeqTAMFlF. 

10  H      HApOY^O]      Fji)2CF 

NqoYCDO)  :^B  an  eAo. 

H  HApOYNOXOY]     SIF 
MApOYN02COY 
OYOFATpiKOC  TTF  OYA] 
OYA  HF  FYOFATpiKOC 
HF. 

11  OYnY^M£tC]     OYFTTFl- 
:&Ft^FtC. 

12  OYA^pON]  OFATpON. 

13  TCABO]  +  AF* 
NANOYC]  N  ANOY  HgCDB 
FjDCDHF]  +  AF. 
MFNTAq]   MNTqKF. 

14  gODMAtOC]  eOHOlOC 


i6  FTToq  FqrcAf 
CABO  fiToq. 

17   KYNMKOC]    KY 

i8  AYH(DC10C]^H 

19  MApOYNOXOYJ 
N02Cq. 

FNFt^oAoN] 

Aon. 
22  fyS)An]    Foja 

FYJ[!)AN. 
23  0Y2iF]  onu 

FqfMOYcojS)  ^1 

OF  AF  FqTMO" 
HApOYNOXq]    I 

p0YN02cq. 
30  oy^f]  oytf. 

FTFKpiCIC]   FK| 
33  HNFa)TMN]   FTOJ' 

vJ/fAAicthc] 

THC. 

H     nFTTAMlO] 

TAMFIO. 

Bodl.  Woide  fragn 

Collated   with   J&gy 

pp.  269 — 274. 

Ap.  Const  VIIL 

p.  269 

1.  x8  begins  NgOOY  • 

23  oytf]  0Y2kF. 


469 


24  on]  om. 

25  MnSXAptCMA]    TTFXA- 
ptCHA. 

netCDT]  om. 

26  gAipECtC]  e^pAtCtC. 

HntXAptCHA]      Hn€t- 
XAptCMA. 
29  Cej2)00B€]  CFjgOBF. 

32  HAqxi]  Aq2ci. 

33  ^^lippn]  erpeqjypn. 

p.  270 

1.    I  qFt]  qt|  thus  again 
OYFPKpATlA]  +   FNA- 

Noyc. 
2  FAyFipF]  eqetpe. 

3  OY^F]OYTE,  thus  again. 

4  MneqxiCE   NgMT]  H- 

nFqp2CACtgHT. 

nEqnpo4mTHc]    iifh- 

pO^HTHC. 

5  imcoy]  tyc. 

6  exM]  eicN. 

8  noAyMoc]  noAeHoc 

NEtFBOYCCAlOCj    WlF- 
B0YCA10C. 
10  NFtHAetN]  NFMAFtN. 

zz  Tupoy]  om. 


ryAAAY  xf  oy  hf] 

XF  OY^AAY  HF. 
12  NF    MHFCNAY]    HnFC- 
nAY  NF. 

ApXtFpFYC]     ApXFlF- 
pFYC  thus  again. 

13  OYPpo]  FYppo. 

14  NTAYgApFg      FpOOY] 
om. 

15  FTMnOYKFAx]    FTFH- 

hoykAx. 

NTBAeAA]    HTTBAgAA. 
OY^F  N<rF  nAaAY]  om. 
z6  gHAtAC]  e^AFIAC. 

18  NCA]  H. 

19  HN  2FNji)niipF]  om. 

20  OqS)B]  OBj^. 

23  HF]  nnF. 

24  FTOYAAB]  om. 
jOBHp]  $9BFFp. 

25  FBOA  gM]  FBOA  gN. 
FTMOYS]  om. 
NTAYNOYSM]  fPTAYp- 
BOA  AN. 

26  THpOY]  om. 
an]  om. 

27  NMHAFtN]    TfNtHAFIN. 
MFT  HS)mipF]  om. 


470 


29  OYnpo4>HTiic]  FYTlpO- 

4)HTHC. 

^FNHAFtN   Hn]  om. 

32  SNFpriA]  ENEpPFtA. 

33  nF  HTNANOYq]  FTNA- 

Noyq  nF 

p.  271 

1.    I  MH  gFNj^TTHpF]  OOL 

2  FTFNFpriA]  FTFNFp- 
PFl. 

3  HFTFNFpPFl]  HF  FTFN- 
FpPFl. 

5  CTpATOirOC]  crpATH- 

roc. 
7  fyemmay]  fyhmay- 

FgpAt]  om. 
8  MNTFpo]MNTpporAp. 

NAFO^AgF]  IIA2)AeF. 
10  AtAKOHOC]       FIMAKO- 

NOC 

npFCBY^FpOC]      NFH- 

pFCBYTFpOC. 

npFCBYTFpOC]       IIFn- 

pFCBYTFpOC. 
X2  NFHFpHOYlNFYFpHOY- 

Aafikoc]  Aaoikoc. 

Z3  PAp]  :&F. 


x4  npecBYTFpoc]    t 

pFCBYTFpoa 

16  MHFINAY]   HFINAY 

17  NNFlgMOT]  .HNFgr 
FlC]  onu 

20  npo4)HTEOYT]  ITpC 

TFY^9  thus  again. 

NOYTTFTO  YA  AB]  OW 

HFTOYAAB. 
22  HBAlCDp]    fTBFODp, 

sure    after  fT  and 

24  FOYpAN]  FYpAN. 
AF]  onu 

25  AAtMCDHtON]  AAtH 
g)OOTT]  om. 
TAY^]  TAYO. 

26  OYHApA]      AYCD 
HApA 

TOY^O]  TOYTO. 

27  fyhfiof]  FYHieF. 

28  FTOY<DJ!)]  FTOYOY< 

29  ngCDB]  +  tfF. 
NCFNAFji)]       TICFN. 
thus  again 

30  TFYnpo4)HTlA       et 
TFYHNTACFBMC . .  1 

npo4)HTtA 

31  HAAtMCDHtON]       Ul 
MCDR 


471 


32  eY"ox®P^]  SY^oxo- 
p.  272 

1.    I   EYCCDpM]     AY®     ^- 
COpH. 

5  AYCD]  om. 

6  glTOOTOY      NNp<DMF] 
glTN  HpCDHF. 

7  on]  om. 

8  N2;HAFKIAC   etc.]   FTA- 
XeiAC  MN  ^S&FKFIAC 

10  AtHU)pFl]AtM(DpF,thu8 

again. 

THpq]  om. 
XI  ON]  om. 

13  hAy'^]  hAhpf. 

14  TWpOY]  0™* 

15  AlMCDplA]     MMCOpFtA. 

18  HMF]  om. 

on]  om. 

FpOOY]  +  TFNOY- 

19  NOYHHB  gCUCDTTMY^N] 
eCDTTMYTN  HOYHNB. 
FTOYAAB]  om. 

20  FYKCDNC]     FYKOKDNB. 
2;FAFKI  AC]  ^F2kFKFlAC. 

21  babyAu)n  ]babyAon. 

tFpHMlAC]    VFpFHIAC. 


22  MMOC]  +   NAt  :&F  FN- 

XCD  Rmooy- 

PAp]  om. 

24  MnNOYTF]    tr8«    after 
TTNA  FTOYAAB. 

26  NJi)0YS)0]    Tm{90YS)0. 
FNTAMO]  FNTAHO). 

27  MnFgMOT]    nFgMOT. 
NTFl]  Wt 

28  eBBtHY]  OBBFIHYT. 

29  HPABOC]  APABOC. 

31  e^NMFpiT]      FeFNMF- 
piT. 

32  MN]  HFN. 

33  AFBBOOpA]     TFqBO>pA* 
AYCD]  om. 


p.  273 
L    X  MNNCCDOOY]  MNHCU)C. 

oAAa]  oyoAaa. 
tkftf]  tkft  :^f. 
2  kainh]  kfnh. 

^CDOC]  om. 
6  ^Fj  TF. 

TTF]  om. 
8  eBBtHY]  6BBFII1Y>  thus 

again. 
12  FTOYAAB]  om. 


47a 


13  eg) Aq^mto]  e$!)Aqrme. 

MnccMOT]  necHOT. 
x5  noAA:&Ktc]  noAAArtc. 
z6  MN  geNjormpE]  om. 

ao  FTBTNFp]  FTBTNAp. 
24  FNFg]  +  HSNEe* 

25  FTTemcKonoc]    Emc- 
Konoc. 

XtpOAONEt]    XFtp02kO- 
NFt. 

27  Hjoopn,  Eqcofn,]  Ns)- 
opn  FYCcurn.  ne. 

FyCCDTTI  of]  om. 

28  0HCDHA2;?]  onoma2;f. 

30  FTTAFIHY]  CTAIMY* 
32  TMpij]  om, 

2CF    FNF]    2CFNF,    thus 

again. 

nF  npcDMF]  nF 

p.  274 

1.    X  FHF]  om. 

2  FgF]  XF  FeF. 

HAl  HF  eN  OyMF]  om, 
MApFqXNOYOV]     WA- 

pFq»iOY- 

3  TMpTN]  fpfN. 

4  fttafiwy]   fttawy- 

FTOYAAB]  om. 


^MOR^ 


6  FpCDMF]    eNpCDMF. 
NIM]  om. 

7  AqOIKONOMEt]  qOlKO- 
NOMFU 

MnFqHt]  RffAiiFqHi. 

8  Tupq]  oxn. 

9  NecoB  OY^F  NAnFqHl] 
om. 

10  OY+l  oyTBi. 

Z2  tHCOYC         nFXplCTOC 

nFNXOFtc]  om. 
Z3  MINF]  HFINF. 

on]  om. 
Z4  NTFl]  WTL 
15  NTFliTOT]  om. 
x6  ends  .  •  •  A^pATq. 

Brit.  Mus.  3580  f.  31  Collated 

with  iBgyptiaca  pp.  282,  3. 

Ap.  Const  Vm.  75 

begins  L  xo  TMTTtSF  .  •  • 

p.  28a. 
1.  X3  :^f]  om. 
X5  CgtHF]  +  NAq. 
x6  FS)0>TTF]  +  &F. 
20  HKYHNKtON]      TTKHNM- 
KON. 

gY^TW^KOc]  e^nmKoa 

22  FTJDOMTF]  FjyOHNT. 


473 


23  ITS  1^  om. 

FqpooYT]  sqpOYOYT. 
MApOY^f  trq]  +  EgOYN. 

24  XpCDNOC]  XpONOC. 

nrroYKpiNe]  ne  ht- 

OYKptNF. 

25  rpcDnoc]  Tponoc,  bis. 

30  HApOYFtA]  HApOYtA. 

tootoy]  +  CBOA. 

31  KAeNmCtC]    KAeHKH- 

etc. 

njOAXF]  ji)A2CE. 

32  FTgOYO  FgCDB]  EgOYF- 
gCDB. 

p.  283. 
L    I     HNTH]  om. 

2  nay]  ^<°* 


NFniCToAH]    NFNFntC- 

toAh. 

4  MApOYCpBF]   MApOY- 

cpqF. 

5  FYCFBHC  WTMNT]  om. 

6  RgHflj]  om. 

7  RTKYptAKM]    TKYpFl- 
AKH. 

8  HF]  TF, 

MnFprpFYHp]     MlTp- 

FYp. 

9  FTF  TTjOA  HF]  om. 
X2  exTvi]  QH. 

TFCBCD]  TFtCBO). 
14  OtKONOMtA]     OmOHO- 

MFtA. 
16  ends  •  •  •  FTBF  T. 


Index  of  Quotations  and 
Scriptural  Allusions 


Gen.  L  269 
ii.  2,  3, 
U.8, 
iv.  4, 


Exod.  iil  8, 
iv.  16,  . 
viL  10,  20, 

iX.   2Iy        . 

Mi.  7f      . 
xiL  46,    . 

XX.  II,     . 

XX.  13-15, 17, 
xxii.  29, .       178, 
«dx.  38, 39, 
xxxi.  13, 
xxxiiL  II,  17, 

Lev.  X.  I,  2, 
xxiv.  8,  . 

Num.  iii.  10^ 

xii.  6-8, . 
xvi.  35,  . 
xviii.  24, 
xxiv.  3,  . 
d.  16, 


rAGB 

.    165 

211,284,353 
.  166 

.    228 


Deut  xix.  15,   135, 
xxvi.  10^ 
xxxiii.  I, 
xxxiv.  8, 

Josh.  X.  12, 


I  dam.  11.  17, 
xiL  21,    . 
xiiL  9,    . 


155.256,319 
189,  269,  336 
188,  268,  334 
187,  268,  334 
185,  265,  331 

.  193 
.  .  165 
129,  235,  297 
194,  205,  259,  280 
i83»  263, 329 

.    212 

2i9i  290.  359 

201,  277,  345 
183,  263,  328 

219,  290,  360 
.  231 
219,  290,  359 
218,  289,  359 
205,  280,  348 

191,  271,  338 
i9i»  271,  338 

198,  274,  303.  341 
178,259,323 

.      189,  269,  336 

.     216,  287,  356 

.      189,  269, 336 

.     201,  277,  345 

.     290,359 

.     319,  2901  360 


I  Kings  xiL  28,  31,    . 
xviii.  3,  . 
18,  . 


2  Kings  VL  15,   . 
xxii.  14, 


•        * 


2  Chron.  xxvi.  19,  21, 


rAGB 

220, 291, 361 

189, 270, 336 
189, 270^  336 

189,276,336 

192,  272,  339 

218,  220,  289, 
29i»  359,  360 


Job  xxzviiL  10,  11,     .     218,  289^  358 


Psalm  xi.  (x.)  7, 
xxiiL  (xxii.)  2, 
xxxii.  (xxxi.)  9, 
xxxiii.  (xxxii.)  13, 
U.  (L)  I, 

cv.  (dv.X  40»  • 
adii.  (cxiL)  5,  6, 
cxxL  (cxx.)  8, 
cxlviiL  6, 

Prov.  xxiii.  29,  30, 
xxvi.  9»  • 
xxxL  4,  5, 


Isa.  xiii.  6, 
xl.  10,    . 
xlix.  26  . 
liv.  13, 
Ivi.  3-8, 
IxvL  2,    . 


Jer.  xxix.  22, 
31, 


Dan.  iiL  36, 

TL  23,     . 


216. 287,  356 
229, 418,  419 

.    203 

.    142 

.    223 

156, 256, 310 

.    138 

.    230 

218, 289,  358 

217. 288,  357 
217,  288, 357 
216,287,356 


133.  239.  300 
I33»  239,  300 
140 
210,  283,  352 
.    212 
131,  I93»  237,  299,  340 


192,  272,  339 
191,  273,  33S 


475 


476     INDEX  OF  QUOTATIONS  AND  SCRIPTURAL   ALLUSIONS 


BftaLi.6, 


PACK 

192,  339 


Ecdus.  iv.  31, 

Matt  iii.  16,  17, 
iv.  23,     . 
V.  13,      . 
V.  42, 
vi.  5,  16, 
vi.  20,     . 

vi.  34,  • 
vii.  12,  . 
viL  15,  16, 

\.'h  ■ 

xii.  26,    . 

ML  45,     . 

xviii.  20, 
xxi.  13,  . 

«i>.  37-4o> 
xxiv.  42, 

XXV.  6,  13, 

XXV.  35,  . 

xxvi.  26,  28, 

xxvi.  41, 

xxvii.  I, 

xxvii.  45, 

xxvii.  51, 

xxviii.  19, 

Mark  xii.  42, 
xiii.  II,  . 
XV.  25,   . 
xvi.  15,  . 
xvi.  17,  18, 

Luke  i.  41, 46, 

ii.  381     . 
iiL  14,    . 
X.  16,     197,  2 
X.  20, 
xvL  22,  . 
xxii.  17, . 

John  i.  I,  3, 
i.  14,  . 
iiL  5,  . 
iii.  17,  . 
vi.  50,     . 

X.  II,       . 

X.  28, 

XL49,  • 
xi.  52,    . 

xiv.  26^  . 

xvii.  4.  6,  25, 


132,  238,  300 


140,  213, 
187, 

158, 
132, 

138, 
182, 
128, 

• 

217, 

190, 
130, 

215, 


128, 

184, 

184, 

136, 
140, 

217, 
184, 
183, 

2I4» 


37, 


285,  354 
268,334 

258,  322 

238,  300 
.     194 

244,306 

262,  328 

235,  297 
.     193 

288,357 

27i»  337 

236,  298 

286,  355 
.    231 

234,296 
265,  330 

264,  330 

243»304 

243,  305 
288,  357 

265,  330 

263,  329 

285,  354 
.     167 


.    228 

182,  263,  328 

183,  263,  328 
187,  333 

186,  266,  332,  333 

.      192,  272,  339 
.      192,  272,  339 
208,  282,  351 
17,273,289^340,358 
187,  267,  333 
229 
158,  257,  321 

140 
213,  285,  353 
166 
166 
183,  263,  329 
183,  263,  329 
i85»  265,  331 

191,  271,  338 
169 

.     I75»  198 
186,  266,  332 


John  xviii.  24, 
xix.  14,  . 
xix.34,  . 

XX.  21,     . 

Acts  i.  3,  . 
vi.  5, 
vi.  6, 
vii.  56 

viii.  18,  19, 

viii.  38,  . 

ix.  5,  . 
ix.  18, 

xi.  28,  . 

xiii.  24,  . 

XV.  13,  . 

XV.  29,  . 

xy.  32,  . 

xix.  14,  . 

XX.  28,  . 

XX.  32,  . 

XXI.  9,     . 

Rom.  V.  12, 
ix.  24,    . 
xi.  24, 
xvL  20^  . 

1  Cor.  ii.  9, 
vi.  II,  . 
vi.  19,  . 
viL  20,  . 
vii.  40,  . 
ix.  7,  . 
ix.  13,  134,  I 

x-3,  4,  • 
X.  10, 

X.3I,  • 
xi.29>     . 

xii.  8, 

xii.  9,  10, 

xiv.  21,  . 

xiv.  26,  . 

Mv.  33,  . 

XV.  3,  4, . 

XV.  6, 

xvi.  20,  . 

2  Cor.  i.  3, 
ii.  15,     . 
iii.  13-16, 
V.4, 

vi.  7,  . 
VI.  14,  . 
xiii.  14,  . 


PAGE 

188,  268,  354 

214,285,354 

83,  214,  264,285,354 

139,  221,292,563 

188,  269,  355 

221,  292,  562 
220,  291,  361 

222,  293,  362 

220,  291,  361 
222,  293,  363 

221,  292,  361 

222,  293,  363 

-      192,339 
.    170 

221,  292,  362 

.     193 

192,  272,  339 

•  192, 33^ 

•  139,  177 
.     138 

192,  272,  339 

166 

186,  266^  332 

.     170 

.    232 


184, 
64,185, 
137, 
150, 
132, 
36,  240,  243, 

131, 
131, 
179, 

189, 

147, 

187, 

147, 
220, 

a 
215,287, 


213,  418 
264,330 

265,  33 » 
243,305 
2501  313 
238,  300 

302,305 
238,  299 

237,  299 

260,324 

141 

269,336 
248,  310 

267,334 
248,  310 

292,  361 

269,335 

355, 418 

.     176 


.    138 
.    139 

•    335 
.    167 

.     194 

215,  287,  355 

198,  274, 342 


INDEX   OF  QUOTATIONS  AND  SCRIPTURAL  ALLUSIONS     477 


PAGB 

AGB 

Gal.  vi.  10, 

.          132,  239,  300 

2  Tim.  iii.  8, 

.      188,  268,  334 

iv.  I, 

154,254,318 

Eph.  i.  9,  . 
i.  13,      . 

.        145 
172 

Titus  I  6-9, 

.      133,  240,  301 

i.  18,       . 

163 

i.  14,      . 

•  *• 

.     283, 352 

in.  14,     . 

.       145 

111.  5,       . 

.     154,255 

IV.  5,       . 

•          153,254,317 

T  V       1_          * 

#^#% 

iv.  8,       . 

•          154,254,318 

Hcb.  1.  2,  . 

•  •  • 

.      140,  188,  335 

iv.  13,     . 

.        178 

111.  I, 

•      174,  2i9»  359 

iv.  30,     . 

.      218,  289,  359 

iv.  14,     . 

221,292,361 

vi.  5,       . 

199,  276,  343 

V.  5,       . 

* 

221,  292,  362 

vi.  14,     . 

.     185 

IX.  23,     . 

128,  234,  296 

X.  29,      . 

.     143,  144 

Philippians  i.  27 

,             221,292,302 

X.34,  .     . 

.     217,  288,  358 

iv.  3, 

.    362 

XII.  2, 

•  *  • 

•     269, 335 

xiii.  7,    . 

131,  237,  299 

Col.  iv.  I,  . 

.      210,284,353 

James  i.  22, 

w 

#                               ■  '       M^  ^  «^ 

.     133 

2  Thess.  ii.  15,  . 

.           133 

ii.  1-3,   . 
V.  13,      . 

.     195, 196 
•     215,355 

I  Tim.  ii.  3, 

.      205,  281,  349 

I  Peter  i.  18,  19, 

181,  261,  327 

ii.  II,      . 

.     137 

•  • 

n.  9,       . 

.     163 

iii.  1-7,  . 

.      133,  240,  301 

V.  3,       . 

.    244 

ill.  4, 

*  *  *      f% 

197,  274,  341 

V.  5, 

.      192,  272,  339 

111.  8,  10,  12,  . 

135,  241,  303 

iii.  I3»     . 

136,  243,  304 

2  Peter  i.  11, 

.     175 

111.  16,    . 

.      186,  266,  332 

»  ^ 

iv.  7,       . 

.     209 

Jude  22,    . 

.      129,  235,  297 

IV.  8, 

.     210 

V.  5,       .        . 

.    202 

Rev.  ii.  17, 

•      156,256,320 

V.  18,      . 

132,  238,  300 

iv.  4,      . 

134,  240,  302 

V.  8, 

.      134,  240,  302 

2  Tim.  i.  10, 

140 

XXII.  18,  19,    . 

.     133, 138, 239, 

ii.  17,      . 

.    302 

244,  301,  306 

■  * 
1 


General  Index  of  Subjects 

and  Words 


ACHELIS,  Dr,  xiii. 

Agape,  157,  158,  159,257,  321. 
Alms,  132,  216,  239,  287,  300,  356. 
Ambon  (b€ma),  199,  275,  342. 
Amusement,  places  of  (circus,  theatre, 

etcX  148,  207,  249,  282,  283, 

312,  351,  352. 
Angels  (archangels),    134,  I37>  I43i 

184,  240,  243,  264,  302,  305, 

330' 
Apostles,  names  of  the,  127,  233,  295. 

teaching  of  the,  185,  266. 
tradition  of  the,  331. 
book  of  the  AposUe,  309. 
Astrologer  (star-gazer,  astrolabe^  130, 
149,  208,  235,  250,  282,  313, 

351- 


^^^irial. 


Baptism,  preparation  for,  151,  251, 

.      315- 
time  of,  152,  167,  253,  316. 

water  for,  152,  25^,  316. 

the  second  directions  for,  162  folL 

robe  of,  167. 

by  eflfusion,  167. 

in  blood,  151,  251,  314. 

of  children,  152,  253,  316. 

Bishop,  127,  233,  295. 

qusuifications  of,  133,  240,  301. 

ordination  of,   133,  138,  139,  197, 

2391  245>  273,  301.  306,  340. 
the  fast  of,  157,  257,  320. 
how  many  to  ordain,  203,  279,  347. 
Blessing  (Eulogia),  1 57, 204, 205, 257, 
279,  280,  321,  347,  348,  349. 
by  whom,  203,  204,  279,  347. 
Brightman,  the  Rev.  F.  £.,  xiii.,  xxix 
Budge,  Dr  Wallis,xx. 
181,  262,  327. 

478 


Canons,  266. 

number  of,  293,  363. 
Catechumen,  150,  151,  158,  i5( 
250,  251,  257,   236,  31; 

321,  352,  355- 
prayer  for,  228. 
Charles,  Professor,  xiii. 
Church,  133,  181,  239,  261,  301 
as  ship,  186,  266,  332. 
prevented    from    going     to 
profanation  of,  215,  286, 
Church  Order,  Apostolic,  viiL 
begins,  127,  233,  295. 
Egyptian,  xxiv.,  xxvii. 

begins,  138,  244,  306. 
the  lost,  viiL 
Circus.    See  Amusement. 
Clement  (Klementos,   Kl€mes) 
xi.,  xiv.,  xxiv.,  xxxiv.,  xa 
221,  233,  292,  362. 
Concubine,  149^  209,  250,  283 

352. 
Confessor,   145,  202,  246,  277, 

.   345. 
Confirmation,  154,  255.  318. 

Congregation,  prayer  ror,  23CX 

Constitutions,  Apostolicad,  the  c 

book,  vii.,  xxiv. 

begins,  186^  266,  332. 

Creed,  1^3,  254,  317. 

Crum,  Mr,  xxxviii. 

Dkacon,  127,  234,  295. 
qualifications  and   duties  o^ 
136,181,241,242,262,303 
ordination  o(  144,  201,  245, 

2P7y  345.       ^ 
ordination    by   the  bishop  a 
I44»  246,  308. 


GENERAL  INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS  AND  WORDS 


479 


Deacon,  at  baptism,  153,  253,  317. 
in  emergency,  139,  142,  159,  161, 

258,  322. 
at  the  oblation,  176,  198,  199,  200, 
245,  276,  277,  342-344. 
Deaconess,  201,  277,  345. 
Dead,  prayers  and  alms  for  the,  215, 

287,  355- 

prayer  for  the,  229,  418. 

Demon  (Devil),  129,  130,  148,  207, 
236,  249,  282,  297,  298,  3"i 
350. 

Didache,  xxvi.,  extract  from,  begins, 

193. 
Didaskalia,  xxvi.,  xxvn. 

extract  from,  begins,  194. 

Diviner,  etc.,  149,  207,  208,  282,  297, 

351. 
Drunkenness,  158,  216,  217, 258,  287, 

288,  321,  356,  357. 

Excommunication  (deposition,  in- 
hibition), 204,  279,  347. 

Exorcism  (mystic),  151,  161,  252, 
258»3i5,  316,  317,322. 

Exorcist,  347. 

Fast,  157,  179,  257,  260,  320,  ^24. 
Feasts,  etc  (non-working  days),  210- 

214,  284,  285,  353,  354. 
Friday  ^umah,  paraskeue),  151,  252, 

315. 
Fruits,  the  first,  178,  179,  205,  259, 

280,  323,  348. 

prayer  for,  225. 

Funk;  Dr,  xxv. 

Gifts  (grace)  of  healing,  147,  248, 
310. 

treatise  on,  186,  266,  332. 
Gladiator.    See  Amusements. 
Gospel,  iqi,  252,315. 

book  of  the,  198,  274,  341. 
Guidi,  Professor  Ignazio,  ix.,  xxxix. 

Hallelujah,  psalm  of,  160. 
Hauler,  Dr,  xii.,  xiii.,  xxvi.,  xxvii. 
Husbands  and  wives,  148,  206,  248, 

281,311,350. 
Heretic,  heresy,  1 85, 1 86,  199, 207,2 1 5, 

266,  275,  331,  332,  343,  355. 

Idols  (image),  idolatrous,  idolatry, 
130,  148,  207,  237,  249,  282, 
298,  312,  351. 


Instruction,  giving  of,  180,  181,  210^ 

261,  262,  284,  325,  327,  353. 
Invocation,  169,  171. 

Journey,  prayer  for,  224. 

King,  prayer  for,  226. 
Kiss,  150,  176,251,314. 

Lagarde,  Paul  de,  ix.,  xxv.,  295, 

433. 
Lamps,  at  Agapa,  159. 
Lay  people,  136,  151,  161,  210,  243, 

251,  258,  283,  304,  314,  322, 

352. 
Leipoldt,  Dr,  ix.,  xxxviii. 
Luaolf,  Job,  X.,  xiii.,  xxxvii.,  145, 364. 

Magician,  etc.,  129,  130,  149,  237, 

282,  313,  351. 
Manuscripts,    description   of,  xxxvi. 

foil. 
Margoliouth,  Professor,  xxxix. 
Martha  and  Mary,  137,  243,  305. 
Milk  and  honey,  152,  155,  156,  177, 

.  253»  255»  256,  319,  32a 
Mommg  prayer,  222. 

Mystery  (MysteriesX   134.    I35,  '37, 
205,  240,  241,  280,  302,  349. 
newcomers  to,  206,  281,  349. 
probation  for,  209,  283,  352. 

Name,  the  new,  157,  257,  32a 

the  giving  of,  162,  163. 
New  persons  (neophytes^  147,  248, 
3". 

Oblation  (Eucharist,  Kiddas,  Kuer- 
ban,  Synaxis),   137,  139,  152, 
199-201,  243,  245,  252,  275- 
277,  286  (Kiddas),  305,  307, 
316,  342-345»  355  (Synaxis). 
at  Baptism,  155,2515,319. 
fasting  reception,  180,  261,  326. 
Occupations,  various  forbidden,  148, 
149,  207,  249,  282,  311,  312, 

351. 
Offerers,  prayer  for,  227. 
Oil,  xiii.,  141. 

of  baptism,  1531252,317. 
Orders,  distinction  and  fixity  of,  217- 
222,  289-293,  358-363. 

Pallium  (balalin,  pallinX  150,  251, 
314. 


48o 


GENERAL  INDEX  OF  SUBJECTS  AND   WORDS 


Papils      (Patriarch,      Metropolitan, 

Bishop),  prayer  for,  231. 
Pascha,  179, 185,  260,  265,  325,  331. 
Peace,  prayer  for,  230. 
Pentecost  (fifty  days),  179,  260,  325. 
Persecution,  217,  288,  357. 
Prayer  for  the  bishop,  138. 
of  the  oblation,  140. 
of  the  oblation  of  oil,  141. 
before  communion,  141,  142. 
after  communion,  143. 
for  the  presbyter,  143. 
deacon,  145. 
giving  of  names,  163. 
„      bread,  water,  or  oil,  164. 
over  the  water,  i.,  165. 
„  „        ii.,  165. 

for  the  waters  of  the  Jordan,  166. 
„      chrism,  168,  169,  170,  171. 
„      catechumens,  171. 
for  laying  on  of  hand,  173,  175. 
after  unction,  174. 
for  the  oil  of  the  sick,  176. 
the  three,  176. 
for  the  milk,  1 77. 
after  communion,  178. 
times  of,  180,  182,  210,  214,  260, 
283,  285,  325,  352,  354. 
Presbyter,  127,   134,  233,  240,  295, 
302. 
the  four  and  twenty,  134,  240,  302. 
ordination  of,  143,  201,  245,  277, 

307,  345- 

Rain,  prayer  for,  224. 

Reader,  127,  134,  I47»  234,  241 1  248, 

295,  303,  309*  345- 
female,  201,  277. 

Red,  those    clad   in,   149,   249,  312 

(purple). 
Renunciation,  153,  253,  317. 
Resurrection  of  the  body,  156,  256, 

320  (flesh). 
Riedel,  Dr,  xxxvii. 

Sabbath  (week,  day),  xxviiL,  xxxii., 
138,  i5i»  157,  211,  212,  252, 
315. 


Satan  (Eblis,  Devil),  153,  185,  19:. 

253,265,271,317,331,33*^ 
Scnptures  (the  Book),  teaching,  13] 

239,  301. 
expound,  133,  240. 

interpret,  301. 

ddivered  to  the  Reader,  147, 24S 
Sick,  the,  159,  176,  180,  260,  325. 

prayer  for,  223. 
Signet-ring  (sealX  131,  237,  299. 
Signing  the  forehead,  185,  265,  331. 
Slave  (servant),  148,  206,  248,  2S 
3",  350. 

treatment  of,  210,  284,  353. 
Soldiers  (army),    149,  208,  249,  28 

312,351. 
Soothsayer,  etc^  129,  149,  235,  250. 
Spirit  (unclean,  alien),  130,  152,  15 

181,  236,  252,  261,    298,  31 

326. 
Sponsors,  152,  162, 165,  173,  253,  31 
Steindorfi^  Professor,  ix. 
Stoles  (phakiarion),  xxix.,  343. 
Subdeacon,  147, 180,  199, 201, 248,26 
^  ^^    275,  309,  325,  342,  343,  345. 
Subdeaconesses,  201,  277. 
Sunday  (First  day,  the  Lord's  day 

212,  245,  306. 

Tattam,  Rev.  H.,  ix.,  xvii. 

Testamentum  (edited  by  Pix^essc 
Cooper  and  Mr  Maclean 
viii.,  xi.,  xiii.,  xiv.,  xviii.,  xix 

XXXVL 

Theatre.    See  Amusement. 
Trinity,  153,156,254,317. 

Virgin,  147,  157,  202,  248,  257,  278 
310,  320,  346. 

Water  of  the  oblation,  155. 

prayer  for,  226. 
Ways   (placesX  the   two,    128,  234 

296. 
Widows,  127,  136,  146^  161,  234,  242 

247,  259,  296,  304  (for  revela 

tions),  310,  323. 
Women,  ministry  of,  137,  244,  305. 


PRINTBD  BY 

NEILL  AND  COMPANY,  LIMITED, 

SDINBURGH. 


3   2044  038   400    115 


v.:.^^^ 


-   .!l  I    1900 

AUG      C  20=5 


HORNB),  George  HiUlan 

GSie  statutes  of  tbe 
apoatlee. 


599 

£thlpp. 
19<Ah 


